THE NOVELTY OF POPERY, Opposed to THE ANTIQUITY Of True CHRISTIANITY.

Against the Book of Cardinal Du Perron, Entitled, A Reply to the Answer of
the most Serene JAMES King of Great Britain.

By PETER DU MOULIN D. D. once Minister of the Reformed Church of Paris, and
since Professor in Divinity in the University of SEDAN.

Translated out of French by the Authors eldest Son PETER DU MOULIN D. D. Canon
of Canterbury.

PSALM 109.28. Let them curse, but bless thou.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, and are to be sold by Francis Tyton at the
three Daggers in Fleet Street, near unto the Inner Temple-Gate, Anno Dom. 1662.

engraved modern bookplate MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715

GEORGIUS D.G. MAG BR. FRET HIB. REX. F. D.



TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS The most Illustrious and Magnanimous Prince JAMES Duke
of York and Albany, Lord High Admiral of England and Ireland, Constable of
Dover-Castle, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Governor of Portsmouth, etc.
SIR,
THis work made for the defense and by the express command of your blessed and
glorious Grandfather King JAMES, and after his decease presented by the Author
to your incomparable Father, our great King and holy Martyr, is now humbly
presented to your Royal Highness by the Translator, son and heir of the Authors
Zeal to the vindication of Gods Truth, and the Rights of your sacred Family.
The enemies we had to wrestle with in the late desolation of our beheaded
Church and State, are the same that are impugned in this Book. For although the
Kings enemies and yours were at open defiance with the Court of Rome, yet they
were acted by that Court, and played the Popes game. Their common interest,
which was most earnestly followed, was to force our King and our Princes into
the Romish superstition. And as the one side had made of David's complaint a
Motto for them, They have driven us this day from abiding in the inheritance of
the Lord, saying, Go serve other Gods: So the other party left no way untryed
to work upon the distresses of your sacred persons, and enrich their party with
so great a prize. But God endowed your pious and magnanimous hearts with so
much heroic strength, that the great Tempter offered in vain unto you, as unto
Christ, the greatness and glory of the world to make you fall down to him and
worship him: And your valor in the field, which has got an immortal fame to
your name, was yet inferior to your valor in the temptation. By thus fighting
the good fight and keeping the faith, you are become Conquerers of three
Kingdoms, besides that of Heaven, and have engaged God in the defense of your
Cause by sticking to his; with so much glorious success that all ages shall
adore the excellency of his love in the miracles of your restitution. Go on,
Generous Prince, in the strength of God, and in conjunction with our gracious
King, to be the Protector of true Religion, the maintainer of Justice, the
comfort of good men, the terror of the evil, and the pattern of all virtues,
the true way to be the example of all blessings. That all the blessings which
heaven can shower down, and make the earth bring forth, may ever flow upon your
Princely head, is the daily prayer of

Your Royal Highnesses most dutiful and most humble Servant, P. Du Moulin.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR.
FOR the Glory of GOD, the reduction of strayed Sheep into Christ's Fold, and
the confirmation of good souls in Gods truth, against the attempts of the
vigilant and unwearied adversary, this long desired Translation now comes
forth, and is recommended to all the Lovers of sound Doctrine in England, that
understand not the Authors Language. And truly the English Protestants have an
especial Interest in this Work, since it was made for the defense both of their
Religion and their King; That Great and Learned Defender of the Faith, King
James of glorious memory, who had consecrated his Scepter and his Pen to
maintain the true Catholic and Orthodox Doctrine, was extraordinarily maligned
for it, and opposed by the Enemies of the same, who sought glory to themselves
by the Greatness of their Adversary. Cardinal du Perron the chiefest of them,
both in Wit and Learning, having written against the King, drew a solid
confutation of his Book from his Majesty, who made use for it of the Learned
Pen of the Great Isaac Casaubon. And when a voluminous reply of the Cardinal
came forth, the strongest piece that ever came from any Romanist against the
Reformed Religion, it pleased his Majesty to make choice of my Reverend Father
of blessed memory to answer that book, having twice before made use of his Pen
for the like service. Not for want of able men in his Kingdom to defend Gods
cause and his, but partly because his adversary having written in French, there
was need also of a French Pen to confute him. And partly to manifest unto the
world that the Religion of England is not singular, as the Papists clamor, but
the common cause of the Protestant Churches: And that our exceptions against
Rome are the same that are made by the greatest searchers of holy Antiquity
abroad. It is a great comfort to all lovers of Truth and Unity in the Church,
to have their hands strengthened in this holy warfare by the concurrence of so
many Auxiliaries and Fellow Soldiers that live in another air, and under
another Government.

Among those Auxiliaries this Writer may very well be set in the Front, as a
known Friend, not only to the Doctrine, but also to the Discipline of the
Church of England, which he has commended in many places of his published
works, and even in his private Annotations to his Bible, which I keep by me.

But we ought not to strike them out of the List of our Friends, who either out
of the necessity of their condition, or by the fortune of their education
differ from us in Discipline, though fully consenting with us in all the
essentials of Doctrine: For I put not among the essential differences that
about the points agitated in the Synod of Dort, upon which the most rational
Divines cannot fully satisfy themselves, much less others; and about which our
Divines at home differ, without breach of concord. Let not, I say, that
difference be added to the score of our exceptions, against the different
Discipline of our neighbors, to make dislike grow to hatred, and set us at a
further distance.

In Austins and Prospers time, there was the same difference between them and
the Gallican Churches about the point of Predestination, as is now between the
Jansenians and the Molinists; yet Prosper calls those Churches the Servants of
Christ in an Epistle inserted in the seventh Tome of St. Austin. And Hilarious
Arelatensis, in another Epistle next to it alleges their Authority to St.
Austin for the excepting of the Book of Wisdom out of the Canon of Scripture.
Whereby it is evident, that the difference about that point did not break
Christian communion among them.

In the late Insurrection, when I took upon me that honor to be a Champion
both of the King and the Church of England in three Languages, I labored to
justify the English Discipline to the French, and to excuse the French
Discipline unto the English. But since by the iniquity of the times, and the
difference of the Languages that which I got Printed in French was not seen
enough in England, to give that satisfaction to our Church which I intended: It
will be neither improper for this place, nor unseasonable for this time to put
something here tending to that blessed work of peace and mutual good opinion of
Churches living under different Disciplines.

Were I now speaking to the French, I would endeavor to let them see that we
have more of the Primitive and Apostolic Church Government in England then any
other Church in the rest of the world. But speaking now to the English, and
presenting to them the work of a French Divine, my proper work is to represent
unto them, First, that the nature of that difference in Discipline is such as
ought to move their compassion, not anger. And next, that if the good opinion
of the English may be won by the good opinion that the French express of them,
and by their desire to enjoy the same Government, if they might be so happy,
certainly they have deserved it.

For the first, no equitable person will except against them, for not doing
what they cannot do. If you look to the beginning of their Reformation, and to
the persons that begun it, and the oppositions which they wrestled with in
their work, it was not to be expected of Priests that rejected the errors of
Popery, and preached the truth of the Gospel, according to their oath and
calling, that if they could not convert their Bishops, they should set up new
Bishops. And if they had done so, we that find fault with their Discipline, as
it is now, would have liked it no better. For if we object to their Ministers
their want of Episcopal succession, because they were not ordained by Bishops,
we might with more reason have laid that want upon their Bishops not created by
Bishops but by Priests. In an interregnum, when the lawful power is eclipsed
in a Kingdom by disorder and violence, Officers may be sooner allowed to create
other Officers, then to create a King. The condition of the French Protestant
Church living under the Cross ever since the Reformation, is an interregnum, as
for the Eccelesiastical power: Whereof if they have neither the right order,
nor the full exercise, all that defect is the vice of the times, not of the
persons, which ought no more to be blamed for it, then a workman that is
manacled for doing a piece of necessary work as well as he can, not as well as
it should be.

That it is not in their power to bring an Ecclesiastical subordination into
their Church, it was justified not long since; for when some of their prime men
that perceived and felt the inconveniences that follow the want of that
subordination, moved Cardinal Richelieu to place it among them by his
authority, pretending that it would bring them nearer to the Roman Church, he
flatly denied to give way to it, and told them, If you had that order, you
would look too like a Church.

Wherefore the more inconveniences are found in the Order of the French
Protestants by those that are too angry with them, the more reason there is to
pity them, since these inconveniences are productions of the Cross, which they
lie under. And among those productions of the sadness of their condition which
deserves pity, we must reckon the dislike that some of them have expressed of
the Episcopal Order. For it is a weakness incident to all vulgar natures to
turn long use into necessity, and necessity into doctrine, and to think nothing
better then that custom which they were bred in. No wonder that the common
people that see no Bishops, but such as are foul Heretics, and their
Persecutors, can hardly conceive of a Bishop under another Notion. But the
generous and illuminate souls which in that brave Nation are in great numbers
erected above the slavery of custom, and looking beyond the narrow limits of
their necessitous condition, make no difficulty to acknowledge openly the
scantness of their Church Government; and that their bed is shorter then that
they can stretch themselves in it, and the covering narrower then that they can
wrap themselves in it. But as short and narrow as it is, they must keep it by
an invincible necessity. For though they could break the people from their
wonted Discipline to the Episcopal (which though never so ancient, is a new and
uncouth thing to them that never tried it) yet they could never obtain of the
civil power a toleration of two Bishops of Paris or Orleans together, nor the
adunation of many Reformed Diocesans under one Metropolitan, nor the exercise
of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Such a strong knitting of the Protestant
interest would give a great jealousy to the supreme power, and the Council of
State of contrary Religion. And their politic Statesmen will never give way to
it.

Neither would the Episcopal Order fit the present posture of the French
Protestant Churches; for it would be more easy for the Agents of the Court of
Rome to corrupt some of their Bishops, and by them infect and disturb whole
Diocesses, then it is now to win thousands of equal and scattered Ministers:
for though those Court Divines have rare Organists among them, they have none
that have fingers enough to serve so many stops.

Besides as long as the French Ministers profess no hatred against Episcopal
Government (as indeed very few, if any of them, either profess it or harbor it
in their breast) it is fitter for them to remain in an order fitted for
obedience, and prepared for submission to their Diocesans, whenever it shall
please God to turn their hearts to assert the truth, and protect them. And how
soon both Pastors and people may be brought to submit to Bishops, it has been
tried by the Bishop of Troyes, and that of Meaux, who as soon as they began to
forsake the errors of Popery, were acknowledged by the Protestant Churches
within the verge of their jurisdiction for their Diocesans. The Archbishop of
Vienna and the Bishops of Orleance were once about to have done as much, and
would have found the like obedience from the protestant party. But the great
stream of the State proved too strong for them to swim against. Nothing has
been more eagerly opposed by the Pope and his creatures, then that the
Protestants should have Bishops. Other Churches have found it in all places
where Reformation has been planted. And the English Church can say much of
that by a late and smarting experience.

And whereas the Reformed Churches in France are so weak that they can hardly
afford stipends to find a poor livelihood to their Ministers; Can it be
expected of them that they maintain the dignity of the Episcopal degree with
their private contributions? They can find Bishops enough, but where are the
Bishoprics?

This then being evident that by the influence which the Pope has upon their
Sovereigns, they are kept low, and altogether disabled from enjoying the
Episcopal degree: I crave leave, with all mildness and humble respect, to make
a question to some of my dear and reverend brethren, and fellow sufferers in
the Cause of the King and the Church who deny these poor Churches to be
Churches, because they have no Bishops: Will they allow so much power to the
Pope as to be able to hinder millions of true Believers from being members of
Gods Church on earth, if he can but hinder them from Episcopal Ordination and
Episcopal pre-eminence by a prevalent power, and an invincible impossibility?
With this question I have smoothed the edge of the eagerness of some prime men
in our Church who were most positive in that assertion, No Bishop, no Church,
their charity getting the upperhand of their most resolved sentence against
these objects of compassion; and I doubt not but it will work the like effect
with others. For I hardly believe that any child of God, and son of peace, who
claims a right to that goodly legacy of Christ, My peace I leave unto you, will
so far put off the bowels of mercy as to eject out of the Church of Christ
those thousands of good Christians that have forsaken the world and denied
themselves to follow Christ, and doomed themselves to poverty, and the public
hatred for his sake, and to un-Church them all, because they live without
Bishops. That would be a great injury offered, not only to our fellow members
in Christ, but more to God, whose mercy will not be limited, nor his wisdom
strait-laced by our positions, as if there were no way for him, but one, to
maintain his Church in the world.

The allegation of the Divine Right of Episcopacy. and of the Apostolical
Institution of the same, will not justify the severity of that Judgment. Let
that stand as an undoubted truth that Episcopacy is of Apostolic institution,
and therefore of Divine Right. It is acknowledged even by them that want it.
But hence it follows not that where any of the Forms and Customs that are of
Divine Right and Apostolic institution, is wanting, there is no Christian
Church. Our great Bishop Andrews, one of the most rigid and rational Assertors
of the Divine Right of Episcopacy, could say (writing to our Author of that
holy Discipline, which many Reformed Churches have not) Coecus est qui non
videat sine ea stantes Ecclesias. Ferreus est qui neget -- Nos non sumus illi
ferrei. He is blind that sees not Churches standing without that Discipline.
He has an iron breast that denies it. I am none of those iron-breasted men.

To him I join the most Reverend and most learned Prelate Doctor Bramhall, now
Lord Primate of Ireland, who in his golden Book, Entitled, The Serpent Salve,
uses these judicious and charitable expressions about that matter. God is a
merciful God, Page 206.
and looks upon his creatures with all prejudices of Education, Habitation,
etc. And gives this wise and pious Cav^at to our Divines; Breach of charity is
more dangerous to the soul then any error in Discipline. And having most
worthily defended the order of the English Church, he adds; I write not this
to prejudge our neighbor Churches. Page 208.
I dare not limit the extraordinary operation of Gods Spirit, where ordinary
means are wanting, without the default of the persons. He gave his people Manna
for food whilst they were in the wilderness. Necessity is a strong plea. Many
Protestant Churches lived under Kings and Bishops of another Communion. Others
had particular reasons why they could not continue or introduce Bishops. But it
is not so with us. It was as wisely as charitably said of St. Cyprian, If any
of my Predecessors through ignorance or simplicity have not holden that which
our Lord has taught, the mercy of the Lord might pardon them, etc. So if any
Churches through necessity, or ignorance, or new-fangledness, or covetousness,
have swerved from the Apostolic Rule, or Primitive Institution, the Lord may
pardon them, and supply the defect of man; but we must not therefore presume.
It is charity to think well of our neighbors, and good Divinity to look well
to our selves. But the chief reason is, because I do not make this way simply
necessary, but only show what is safest where so many Christians are of another
mind. I know what some choice Divines do write of the case of necessity; and
there is a great difference between a valid and a regular ordination. And for
my part I am apt to believe that God looks upon his people in mercy with all
their prejudices; and that there is a great latitude left to particular
Churches in the constitution of their Ecclesiastical regiment, according to the
exigence of time and place, so as order and his own institution be observed.
This is spoken like a right Father of the Church and a true Son of peace. And
it is dubious, whether this sentence be more judicious or more charitable.
Truly who so will consider with an equitable eye what sore combats the
Protestant Churches continually sustain about the main doctrines of Religion,
which to keep, neither goods nor life are precious unto them, shall not wonder
that they are less careful and skilful in the matters of Discipline,
succession, Episcopacy, and the like; and shall not look upon their defects
with pity, not anger. Non jam de imperio, sed de vita sunt solliciti.

This will help to answer an ordinary question, Why the French Divines do not
come over into England to receive Episcopal Ordination? The Reformed Divines of
France, busy to keep the vital parts of Religion against a vigilant and
prevalent power, are less employed and less skilled in the points of
Discipline, and are not yet persuaded of the absolute necessity of an immediate
Episcopal Ordination: Which yet they will take when they may conveniently. Both
the Prince of Turenne and the Duke de la Foize had their Chaplains ordained by
a Bishop. Monsieur Primerose late Minister of Roven was ordained by a Bishop.
And lately a Learned French Divine before he returned out of England into his
Country, was presented by me to the Right Reverend and famous Bishop of
Lincoln, who conferred the Holy Orders upon him.

To require all the French Reformed Divines to come over into England to
receive Orders, is a fancy that cannot come into the brains of one that knows
the world. Would their Sovereign allow it? Or would the Popish Clergy behold it
with patience? The Protestant Students in Divinity are not so much as allowed
by their King to take degrees in Divinity in our Universities, nor their
Churches suffered to send Deputies to outlandish Synods, because his subjects
shall not have foreign dependences; and to please the Court of Rome, which
will not have the Protestant Churches to knit together, the chief work of our
Adversaries being to disunite us, and break all our correspondences.

And although there were not such a bar in that design, the shortness of their
means, and the remoteness of the places would be another unremovable bar.
Sholars of Bearn and Languedock (where Protestants are most numerous) kept in
their Academies with a poor allowance out of charitable contributions, that
they may once serve their Churches for a stipend much like that of our meanest
Curats, could not find means to travel three or four hundred leagues by sea
and land to fetch their Orders: That would cost their Patrons more then all
their breeding: Or if they traveled at their own charges, all their stipends
to come would not quit that cost.

Such difficulties or rather impossibilities lying in that way, any wise
Christian that is a little acquainted with the ways of God, will judge that
(as things are now with them) our way, though the most ancient holy and
Apostolic, is not the only way allowed them to come to the Ministry. For God
never yet made the salvation of men to hang upon impossibilities: But
wheresoever he invites them to it, he gives them also the means to attain to
the same; supplying by his grace the want of the ordinary ways, and the defect
of the extraordinary. So it was in all conversions of the several Nations to
the Gospel; for in none of them could all things be regulated in the beginning.
And I count the Reformation of the Protestant Churches living under the Cross
to be still in its beginning, as being kept in the bud by contrary weather and
not suffered to shoot up to a grown order.

I must not forget here, that the indulgence of our charity to those poor
Churches which could not set up the Episcopal Apostolic government with their
reformation, cannot be claimed upon the same account by those that reject
Episcopacy among us, and make bold to confer Orders without Bishops, since they
have not the plea of necessity on their side, as the others have. The French
Protestant Divines never kicked out their Bishops that they might rule
themselves, nor cried down Episcopacy as Antichristian. They ordain Ministers
without Bishops, because they have no Bishops. But these having Bishops to whom
they have sworn Canonical obedience, have given Ordination without and against
their authority, invaded their power, and persecuted their persons.

But I see an objection at hand. That the French Discipline is grown out of the
ejection of Bishops; and that Calvin and the Reformers of Geneva expelled their
Bishop, whereupon the Discipline of parity began at Geneva for their own civil
interest, and thence was propagated over all France.

This objection is false in all its parts. For the Reformation was in France
ten or twelve years before it began at Geneva. And they had the same Discipline
in substance as now, which was to shift as well as they could for an order
without a Bishop, having their Bishops contrary. Neither had the expulsion of
the Bishop of Geneva any reflection upon them.

As for the business of Geneva, I know it is a received tradition in England,
that the Reformers of Geneva, Calvin especially, expelled their Bishop. And
upon the faith of the first reporter, our Divines have taken it successively
for a current and undoubted truth, and built upon it diverse fine and judicious
inferences. But it is like the stories of the Phoenix and the singing of Swans
before their death, never the truer for the number of ancient writers that
affirm them, or for the curious similes and ingenious moralities that have been
spun out of that stuff. What credit can we give to histories of things happened
three thousand years ago, if in things done so lately, and so near us, gross
mistakes will generally pass for undoubted truths? I say it is utterly false,
first that Calvin was one of the Planters of Reformed Religion at Geneva. It is
false likewise, that the Reformers of Geneva turned their Bishop out of doors.
And false also, that the Bishop went away upon the quarrel of Religion. Farel
and Viret were they that wrought under God the conversion of the City by their
Sermons, and by a public conference with the Friars and the Clergy of Geneva,
there being then no Bishop in that Town. Two years before the names of Farel
and Viret were known at Geneva (for Calvin came long after) and before there
was any stir about Religion, the Bishop was either turned out, or fled away for
his safety, upon an insurrection of the people against him for his tyranny, and
many adulteries with Citizens wives. And they that made him flee, and after his
flight altered the civil Government into an Aristodemocracy, were strong
Papists, and most of them mainly opposed the Reformation which followed two
years after. They excuse that alteration of the State, by alleging that the
City had jura imperii as much as (if not more then) the Bishop. With their then
Bishop they could not agree, nor choose another. And when their Bishop dyed,
they were used to live without one. This business is set forth in the book
entitled Le Citadin Genevois. But I must thankfully acknowledge, that I owe
the best part of this information to that great assertor of the truth of God by
his learned writings, and long sufferings, and undanted opposition of the
adversaries, to the great danger of his life, my Lord Bishop of Durham my most
noble and constant friend, who has searched into that business of Geneva with
great diligence. But howsoever matters were carried at Geneva, either in the
change of Government, or in that of Religion, the Protestants of France are not
answerable for their actions.

By the way, since we are upon mistakes about Geneva, the ordinary declaiming
against the Geneva Bible is another. The translation so called, was made by the
English exiles sojourning at Geneva in Queen Mary's days, and set forth with
marginal notes; some of which have a rank savor of rebellion and fanatic
spirit; as saying that Asa should not only have removed his idolatrous mother
from the managing of public affairs, but killed her; And that the locusts of
the bottomless pit are Archbishops, Bishops, Batchelours, Masters of Arts, etc.
But whosoever had a hand in that Translation and those notes, it ought no more
to be fathered upon Geneva, then a conspiracy plotted at London by German
exiles against their Prince or Country ought to be fathered upon the Londoners.
The Genevians could have no hand in an English translation, and those notes are
not to be found in the French Bibles printed at Geneva.

As for the objection, that by an express Article of their Confession parity of
Ministers is asserted; If that Article be taken in the sense most contrary to
the Discipline of England, yet it ought to move rather compassion then hatred.
If after they had strugled many years against the tyranny of their Bishops,
they have laid the fault of the persons upon the degree, that mistake was the
product of a sore persecution.

But take it in the right sense and according to the letter of the Article,
there is nothing in it contrary to the Episcopal pre-eminence. It is the
thirtieth Article of their Confession, and it runs thus.

We believe that all true Pastors in what place so ever they be, have the same
authority and equal power under one only head, the only Sovereign and only
Universal Bishop Jesus Christ. And therefore that no Church ought to pretend
any domination or Lordship over another.

It is manifest that this Article was purposely framed and intended against the
Pope who styles himself the Universal Bishop, and against the Church of Rome
which usurpeth domination and Lordship over the other Churches. Neither has it
any reflection upon England, where no Church exercises domination or Lordship
over other Churches. It speaks of Churches not of Bishops; who yet ought not to
exercise domination over the Clergy or the people. The power of the English
Bishops is not a domination or Lordship, but a fatherly government and
Superintendency.

What is understood in the Article by that equal power of all true Pastors,
our Author tells us in his Buckler of the faith, a book written for the
vindication of the Confession of the Protestant Churches of France. In the
exposition of that Article he says, that the equality of Pastors in the
authority of announcing the Gospel, and administering the Sacraments, is held
necessary in the French Churches; Sect. 1^9.
for (says he) the announcing of the remission of sins is of equal dignity in
the mouth of all Pastors, whether they be of great or small authority. But that
in matter of Ecclesiastical policy the French Churches should believe a
necessity of equality between Pastors, that he denies, and professes a
brotherly concord with the neighboring Churches (meaning the English) where
Bishops have a Superiority.

In the second edition of that Book which is translated into English, he is far
more positive for Episcopacy, and sets forth the inconveniences of equality in
degree: But all that I intend here is to show what the French mean by the
equality of Pastors in that Article of their Confession. The Author having made
that book at the request of the Churches of France, to clear their Confession
of a heavy charge laid against it before King Lewis the XIII. had the Churches
of France disliked this plea and this exposition of the thirtieth Article of
their Confession, they would have publicly disavowed it since three and forty
years that it was published; as the Anglican Church would have publicly
disavowed any particular writer, though set on to write by authority, if he had
expounded the thirty sixth Article of the Church of England to the derogation
of Episcopal pre-eminence. Wherefore our Authors exposition of that Article,
not being contradicted by so many Synods that were held since, may with good
reason be taken for a full declaration of the National Church of France; he
especially being of that credit, that what he writ or said in the public
defense was approved with a general consent and applause. Besides no book of
that nature is published by the French Protestant Divines, but with the
approbation of the Synod of the Province.

But suppose that he gave to the Article another sense then they that made it;
Is it not enough for him and us, that he expressed the sense of the French
Churches of his time? and have we any reason to find fault with them for coming
nearer us then their predecessors did?

And were they not come very near us, when in a solemn act in the University
this Thesis was set forth and defended by the Doctor, Petrus Molinaeus Thesib.
de Notis Ecclesiae Part 2. These. 33. Episcopos Angliae post conversionem ad
fidem and ejuratum Papismum asserimus fuisse fideles servos Dei nec debuisse
deserere munus vel titulum Episcopi.
of the Chair, our Author, We affirm that the Bishops of England after their
conversion and abjuration of Popery were Gods faithful servants, and that they
ought not to forsake the Office or title of Bishop. This Thesis was since
printed among his Disputations.

This is the second thing that I would show that they have deserved our good
opinion by the good opinion which they have expressed of us, and of late. For
what they said before, and how lovingly they agreed with the English Reformers
both in embracing the same doctrine, and approving (though not practicing) our
Discipline, is a beaten subject, of which I have said much, and am loath to say
the same over again. But the authority of the learned Nobleman Plessis Mornay
was never yet (for any thing I know) used in England to this purpose. In a
letter of his (now in the keeping of the famous Daille Minister of Paris) about
Church government, he compares the several forms thereof to the several
governments of all the States of the earth; and finds that as the Presbyterian
Discipline agrees very well with the popular States (as at Geneva and in
Switzerland, where a Bishop should stand too high above the Magistrate, which
is chosen among Merchants only and plain Citizens) So in Kingdoms and
Monarchies Episcopal government is necessary, because Presbytery should lie too
far under the dignity of great Lords and crowned heads. So that as a Bishop
should tread over the head of a popular Magistrate; on the other side Kings and
great Lords should have the poor Presbyters too far under their feet. That
therefore in Monarchical States Prelates were requisite for to sustain the
dignity of the Church and shelter it from oppression. That there are some
conjunctures in which the Presbyteries themselves ought to be very glad to have
Bishops over them, as when it is question of making remonstrances, exhortations
or censures to persons of quality. For whereas a poor Minister living in a low
way, and conversing only with his petty Parishioners, might be put back with
contempt if he took so much upon him, the admonitions of Bishops would be
received with respect.

The above named Mr. Daille who was domestic of that Lord and much esteemed by
him, relates that he would often say, that the gifts of God were different.
That according to that diversity some Ministers were fit to preach, some to
write, who had not the gift of governing and moderating an Assembly. Whereas
others were endowed by God with eminent qualities fit to conduct and march at
the head of others, who yet had not the faculty to make books, or to teach. And
that this distinction which Gods providence and the grace of his Spirit has
made among his servants, shows that some are called to preside and to
conduct, and others are called to be conducted by those to whom God has given
meet talents for that work.

The sentence of that wise Statesman cannot but be acceptable and seasonable in
the present posture of our Church and State, who are obliged for this
intelligence to that deserving Gentleman Mr. le Conteur the Reverend Dean of
Jarsey. And though this and other testimonies from Protestants, living in
another air, square not exactly with the rigidest positions of our Schools, all
moderate wise men will think that this is much from them, and much for our
purpose.

But all that I can say of their concurrence with us, seems to be dashed by the
complaint of our Divines, who in their late exile beyond the seas found the
French Protestants full of prejudices against the just cause of the King and
the Church of England. Wherefore I must desire the equitable Readers to
distinguish the times, and to make use of the Act of Oblivion toward them, as
they are commanded to do with their Countrymen. For which they have given us
more reason then our Parliamenteers, having professed such a free
self-condemnation of their former misapprehensions about the right or wrong of
that great quarrel, as would have become those that were so high offenders
against their King and their Church, and which has been hitherto vainly
expected from most of them.

It is no wonder that they that owed nothing to us but Christian love, and whom
we took no pains at all to satisfy or to inform of the wrong done to us, were
won by our Adversaries, who made it their great business to court them, and to
make of the concurrence of the Foreign Churches one of their chief pretenses
to make the insurrection at home general, and make of their quarrel a war of
Religion. And it was not hard for them to prepossess the outlandish Churches
with foul charges against us, they being but ill satisfied of us before, as
having found of late years some abatement of that regard from England which
they had in former times. It had been a wonder if the continual and earnest
applications of our busy enemies backed with success, the most persuasive
Rhetoric to common-spirited men, had not gotten some wel-willers in that
Protestant party.

What disadvantage that was to our cause, it was acknowledged, but not soon
enough; by our late gracious King and glorious Martyr, who made a Declaration
to satisfy them, and invited all that could write to justify his cause to the
world abroad, to the Protestants especially. And this, as a Summon from God,
was the reason that made me write once in French, and twice in Latin for the
defense of the King and the Church.

Let us remember also, that our party did contribute to set them further from
us, by forbearing to communicate with them, and to be present in their holy
meetings; and by disgracing their Churches as no Churches, and their Ministers
as no Ministers; not considering how unseasonable (that I say no worse) that
contempt of their Brethren was, and how hurtful to the Kings interest.

Well, notwithstanding all these endeavors of Satan to break the bond of love,
and of faith too, between them and us; yet the palpable injustice of our
enemies did so work upon their judgments and consciences, that even when the
Kings businesses were at the lowest ebb, they did openly detest the long
Parliaments Cause in their Sermons, and Books, and ordinary Discourses; and
that with so much vigor and godly vehemence that more could not have come from
the greatest Royalists of England. Salmatius and Bochartus the greatest
Scholars of France, and of Vincent Herault, Pettiville, Breux, Porrey, men of
note, and before them all the Epistle of the famous Diodati to the Parliament
in the first year of the war, to exhort them to obey the King, and restore
Episcopacy, show sufficiently how the whole Protestant party was affected. And
that their affection was not biased by self interest, any reasonable man may
answer for them; for what advantage could accrue unto them by declaring
themselves for the King of England in those days?

But their affection was then chiefly seen when it pleased God by his
miraculous mercy to make the stone which the builders had rejected, to become
the head of the corner. The real joy which they manifested of his Majesty's
return, swelled to a height hard to be believed but by them that were
eyewitnesses of their behavior. More could not be expected from his Majesty's
natural and most loyal Subjects. That blessed conversion of businesses wrought
so deep upon the renowned Amirault (howsoever he had been prejudiced before
against us) that being sore troubled with the gout, suddenly he threw his
Crutches away, and was cured merely by his joy, that quickened his spirits, and
diffused a fresh vigor into all his faculties.

At the same time a great cloud of French witnesses came over in favor of
Episcopacie. So I call many Letters from the prime Divines of France, most of
them written to that Gentleman of great worth, Doctor Brevint, one of his
Majesty's Chaplains, who committed them unto me, and I leaving London
transmitted them to that deserving Divine Master Durel, as one better able then
I to make good use of them, among many other intelligences of the like nature.
His excellent Book about this matter, the substance whereof he was pleased to
impart unto me, will ease me of that labor, and shorten my task; For I must
sincerely acknowledge, that all that we, or others, have written hitherto about
the concurrence of other Churches with ours, comes short of the industry of
this worthy Gentleman; so pregnant he is in his reasons, so diligent in his
searches, and so ingenious in his Charity, that no more remains for me to
attain to the end I aim at in this Discourse, but to recommend his to the
careful perusing of all lovers of truth and peace.

But because in point of charity, examples are more persuasive then reasons, I
will back this reasoning about our condescension unto those Churches that are
inferior to us in point of Government, with the virtuous practice of that
eminent Prelate in goodness and Learning, My Lord Bishop of Durham. In a Letter
of his dated from Paris, April the sixth, 1658. (the place and time of his
exile) he vindicates himself against Mr. Fuller, who in his Church History of
Britain refers to his praise and commendation, that he joined not with the
French Protestants at Charenton since he got into France. But the worthy man
(then styled Dean of Peterborough) gives him no thanks for that commendation.
I would (says he) that he and all the world should know it, I never refused to
join with the Protestants either there, or any where else, in all things
wherein they join with the Church of England. Many of them have been here at
our Churches, and we have been at theirs. I have buried diverse of our people at
Charenton, and they permit us to make use of their peculiar and decent cemetery
here in Paris for that purpose. Which if they did not, we should be forced to
bury our dead in a ditch. I have baptized many of their children at the request
of their own Ministers, with whom I have good acquaintance, and find them to be
very deserving and learned men, great lovers and honourers of our Church,
notwithstanding the loss which she has lately received in external matters,
wherein we are agreed that the essence of Religion does not consist. Many of
their people (and of the best sort and quality among them) have frequented our
Common Prayers with great reverence, and I have delivered the Holy Communion to
them according to our own Order, which they observed religiously. I have
married diverse persons of good condition among them: And I have presented some
of their Scholars to be ordained Deacons and Priests here by our own Bishops
(whereof Monsieur de Turenne's Chaplain is one, and the Duke de la Force's
Chaplain another) and the Church of Charenton approved of it. And I preached
here publicly at their Ordination. Besides I have been (as often as I had
spare time, from attending our own Congregation) to pray and sing Psalms with
them, and to hear both the weekly and the Sunday Sermons at Charenton; whither
two of my children also (pensioned here in a Protestant family at Paris) have
daily repaired for that purpose with the Gentlewoman that Governed them.

After all this, if any be curious to pick out of their Authors all that is not
consonant to the constitution of our Church and State, and register all the
prejudicate opinions of particular men of those Churches, instilled into them
by our Adversaries at home; I will spend no more labor to make evident unto
them that their late and best Divines have amended what may be found amiss in
the old, and that the late demonstrations of their concurrence with us have
made amends, for their former misapprehensions. I will but ask those curious
searchers of matters of discontent, and occasions of falling out with them, Cui
bono? What benefit arises to this Church or State by searching out iniquities
among our neighbors, and accomplishing a diligent search of that which were
far better buried in oblivion, or smoothed over with Charity, helped with a
little winking at that which we cannot mend? Since they make a considerable
part of Christendom, and are not subject unto, or to be disposed by our Civil
or Ecclesiastical Government; is it not better for us to have them friends then
enemies? Is it not a wiser course to confound our dissentors at home with the
testimonies of Calvin and Beza, as most averse from their principles and
practice, th en to make weapons ready to their hand out of those Authors, and
give it to them for granted, that they have the famousest men abroad for
Patrons of Faction, disobedience, and unconformity? For these diligent
searchers know how to pick out of the same Authors passages enough to make them
unsay what they have said against us.

It could never yet enter into my apprehension what advantage it is to us to
cast contempt upon all the Protestants of the world but our selves, and despise
all the respects that we may have from them. They will all vail to us, and
defer unto us (as they ought) the Primacy, if we will but open them the arms of
our charity and brotherly communion. And it is not our insulting over their
weakness and wants, or requiring of them impossibilities, that will win them.

Truly, because our disturbers at home lean much upon the authority of a few
Outlandish Writers, it is wisely done to invalid their authority. But that work
is ready done, and I shall think it overdone if it end in uncharitableness, and
if the generality of the party be made guilty of the fault of some few men to
whom they never swore obedience. Whereas the ready way to invalid the authority
of those Authors, is to show that they are contradicted by their own party, and
even by themselves.

Certainly when we have made them no Churches, our Church shall be never the
more a Church for that. Rather by unchurching so many Churches, and despising
Communion with them, we shall confine our Communion within a very narrow
scantling. With the Roman Church we dare not join till the Court of Rome
forsake and renounce her usurped right over our Church and State, and other
errors of greater importance. With the Separatists of England we will not join
till they yield to a holy Conformity with us. And if with so many Protestant
Churches abroad we refuse to join till they do what they are not able to do,
truly we scant our selves to a very slender communion in this West of the
world. Whereas the holy Catholic Church, which with good reason we call our
Mother, embraces multitudes of dissenting children in her compassionate arms:
And the Communion of Saints allyeth us with God and his Christ, and all his
members in heaven and earth by charity, Ephesians. 6.24.
which is the bond of perfectness. Grace be with all that love the Lord Jesus
Christ with sincerity.

We that are strong (says St. Paul) ought to bear the infirmities of the weak,
Romans 15.1.
and not to please our selves. We ought not to please and exalt our selves with
comparing our strength with the infirmities of our brethren. When we have made
the worst of the defects of those poor Churches, they are infirmities, which
should make us compassionate, not overweening. And we shall make ill use of our
strength, if we employ it to triumph over the weak, instead of remembering them
that suffer adversity as being our selves also in the hody. Heb. 13.3.
Let us not turn our fellow members out of the body because they suffer
adversity; for when all is said, the things that we find amiss among them, are
the sad effects of their adversity. The Anglican Church had Kings for her
nursing Fathers, and Queens for her nursing mothers: Whereas the French
Churches were crushed from the Cradle with all the strength and indignation of
their Kings and Queens: And the Dutch Clergy are kept low by their Superiors
who have converted the whole Patrimony of the Church to the defense of their
State. The same hand that has exalted us above them may bring us as low as
them: And we have learned of late how soon God can pull down that which he has
built up, Let us not be high-minded, but fear.

Could it once sink into our minds what hand the Papists have in this distaste
of ours against our Brethren: what advantage they get by the disunion of the
Reformed Churches: and what stain and hinderance, both before God and men, we
bring upon us by giving the least suspicion that we have got some fermentation
of their leaven, we would be as careful to avoid offense with the Protestant
Churches abroad, as wary and stout against the opposers of our Discipline at
home.

For it is an evident truth, and not to be winked at, that the great Agent here
in the confusion of Religions, in the ruin of the Church, in the insurrection
of the people, and in the murder of our King, was the Court of Rome. That is
indeed fundi nostri calamitas, that spring of all mischief and misery among us,
that powerful and working enemy, against whom all that have shaken off the
yoke of Rome, ought to join unanimously, opening no gap of division for that
Beast to creep in, and work our destruction by our separation. God forbid that
any of us join with that grand enemy of our Church and State to unchurch so
many Churches that are enrolled with us in the same good warfare against his
tyranny, and to deny them that communinn with us which they have with Christ,
and which they crave at our hands, and have had a long time with the Anglican
Church.

But if notwithstanding all the considerations here represented, some will
believe that it is Christianly and Charitably done to un-Church all the
Protestant Churches that have no Bishops, let them enjoy their fancy. But I
will maintain to them (and so will all wise men with me) that it is most
unpolitickly done. Let them consult the Politic heads, that understand the
composure of the States of Christendom, and the posture of ours; and are
acquainted with our Gracious Soveraings high concernments, and Royal
inclinations. And they will confirm this; wherewith I confidently shut up this
discourse, not fearing to be called in question for it; It is neither his
Majesty's Pleasure nor Interest that the Protestant Churches abroad be
disgraced among us as no Churches.

THE AUTHORS LIFE.
THere is no great need to register those men's lives who have made them
memorable by their works; for they bear up their fame with their own strength;
Prove. 31.31.
Let their own works praise them in the gates. And yet no men deserve more to
have their actions recorded then they that need it less. Very few persons
deserve it more and need it less then this Author so known to the world by his
great services to the Church of God. And truly he has showed sufficiently by
the memoires of his life which he left to his family, how little ambitious he
was that the History of his life should be set forth: For he passes by those
actions and passages which have got him most credit, recording only the great
mercies of God to him, and the signal experiences of his assistance and
providence; as also all his conversation has manifested unto the world that he
sought Gods glory, not his own. Never did I see a man more impatient of praise;
none that sought more to glorify God, less to magnify himself. Then for Gods
glory, not his, I intend in this plain relation to make his light to shine
before men, and together to pay a filial duty to the precious memory of my dear
and reverend Father.

The rumor which the Papists have confidently spread, both in Books and
Pulpits, that he was an Apostat Friars Son, obliges me to say something of his
Parents and descent. His Grandfather Joakim Du Moulin dying at Orleans in the
Roman Profession about the year 1540. left two children Infants, a Son of his
name, and a Daughter, and made his wife executrix of a plentiful estate. She
took an especial care of the education of her Son, and sent him to Paris to a
famous Schoolmaster of singular piety and learning: Who having a secret
affection to the Reformed Religion, of which there was no free Profession in
Paris, bred his Scholars in it; and so well grounded my Grandfather in Orthodox
Principles, that when he returned home, neither the proffer of worldly
advancement, nor his Mothers severity threatening to forsake and disinherit him,
could turn him from his holy purpose, in which he persevered all his days. His
mother kept her word with him; for she used him most hardly all her lifetime,
and disinherited him at her death, leaving the whole estate to his sister; from
whom he never attempted to recover it by Law; and it had been a vain attempt,
the times being so contrary to persons of his Religion and Calling, for he was
honored with the Ministry of the Gospel. Yet did he by the gracious assistance
of God lead an honorable life, bearing in his presence and conversation the
character of a man well born and of gentile breeding. Besides his singular
ability in his holy calling, he had the virtues of conversation in an eminent
degree. Sir Henry Wotton gave him this commendation, that he had not met with a
wiser and better-spoken man in his Travels. Had my Grandfather been a Monk, and
then converted and married, I should think it no stain to our blood. But it is
known at Orleans (the place of his Origin) that he never led a monastical
life. Book 7. Contro. 8. chapter 10.
And to speak in my Fathers words in the seventh Book of this work, where he
answers that objection. His honorable conversation, his brave mind in his
continual afflictions for the Gospel which he bore cheerfully, his fervent
zeal, his vigilance in his calling, his pleasing and affable behavior which he
seasoned with a meek gravity; These, I say, were as far from the air of the
Cloister as the Heaven is from the Earth, and the Mass from the Gospel.

In the year 1564. he married Frances the Daughter of an eminent Gentleman both
in place and virtue, Innocent Gabet Royal Judge at Vienna in Daulfine, who dyed
a Martyr for the Profession of the Gospel in the year 1572. (the famous
Massacre of St. Bartholomew having spread from Paris over all France) leaving
to his Posterity the honor to be the seed of a Martyr, which is no small
nobility. By her he had four children; 1. Esther married to a Noble and
Religious Gentleman Rene Bochart Minister of the Gospel at Roven, by whom she
was Mother of the famous Samuel Bochart, now Minister at Caen, a miracle for
learning, and a great Ornament of our age. 2. Joakim who dyed young. 3. Peter
the Author of this Book. 4. Eleazar who inherited his Grandfathers Martyrdom;
for being taken prisoner of war by the Leaguers, after a long and valorous
resistance in a Fort which he commanded for his King, he was known to be a
Ministers Son, whereupon the barbarous enemy cut off his fingers and toes and
buried him alive.

By a second Wife a Gentlewoman of the house of Anserville, my Grandfather
among other children had Mary the Wife of that great Champion of the truth,
Doctor Andrew Rivet.

Our Author was born in the year 1568. the eighteenth day of October at Buhi in
the Country of Vexin in Normandy, where his Father and Mother flying from a
sharp persecution, were received by Monsieur de Buhi Mornay, elder Brother to
the renowned Monsieur du Plessis Mornay. The said M. du Plessis and our Author
were born in the same room.

At Buhi he was left at nurse till the peace of the year 1570. when his Father
being called to be Minister at Coenures near Soissons gathered there his
Family. The Protector of that Church was Monsieur d' Estree, called since
Marquis de Coenures, who then professed the Protestant Religion. But when he
heard of the great Massacre of Paris, August. 24 1572. and that the like was to
be speedily executed over all France, he forsook presently the Protestant
Profession, and to approve himself a true convert, expelled my Grandfather out
of Coenures.

Then was the good man in great extremity. In all the Towns about there was a
general slaughter of Protestants, and the Murderers were seeking for him; and
how to dispose of his Wife and his four little children he knew not. To take
them along with him, or to leave them behind, was alike dangerous. This he
did; he left his children with a woman of contrary Religion half a mile from
Coenures; himself with his Wife fled to Muret a Town belonging to the Prince of
Conde, then a Protestant, and so to Sedan with the Duke of Bovillon of the
house de la March, who past that way flying from the Court. The Murderers that
were sent to kill my Grandfather and his Family (for they spared neitheir age
nor sex) found the woman's house where the children were left. Ruffina (it is
the woman's name worthy to be thankfully recorded) hid the children in the straw
of a bed, the ordinary bottom of beds of the lower sort in France, and laid a
featherbed and a blanket over them; scarce had she laid the blanket when the
murderers came into the room and searched it, but looked not in the bed; Peter
the Author of this Book, then under four years of age, not liking to be thus
laid up would cry; but his Sister Esther then seven years old who had been made
apprehensive of their danger, stopped his mouth with her hand, whereby she made
him struggle and make some noise: which to drown with another, Ruffina
pretending to reach something upon a shelfe made the Pewter fall, and then took
it up again with much rustling till the Murderers were gone: as soon as they
were out o^ doors she ran to help the child, whom she found well nigh smothered
with the stopping of his wind: but he soon recovered, and the children were
kept safe in her house till their Parents sent for them. The gentle Reader will
bear with this familiar relation, and adore in these small particulars the
great and never sufficiently admired care of the Almighty to preserve the
infancy of his servants from the rage of Satan and the world.

Peter Du Moulin had his first rudiments of learning in the College and
Academy of Sedan, founded in the year 1577. where he had for his Schoolfellow
that great Scholar Jacobus Capellus. Both made in that College a great
Proficiency, and came out together from the first Classis; Du Moulin being
publicly honored with the first prize (after the custom of the French
Schools) and Capellus with the second.

In the year 1588. Du Moulin being twenty years old was sent by his Father to
the Universities of England. After some stay at London he went to Cambridge,
and was received in Bennet College, being a diligent hearer of the Lectures of
Doctor Whitaker; but passing the long vacation at London, where he made his
first trials of Preaching before the Consistory of the French Church, A French
Gentleman Monsieur de la Faye after he had heard him, being much taken with the
excellency of his parts, (for his gifts and learning were beyond his years)
asked him whether he would serve the Church of Paris; Du Moulin answered that
he could not think of serving a Church that was not. The Gentleman told him,
that there was hope of a speedy reestablishment of that Church, and that he was
charged to look out a fit person to serve it, and therefore according to his
best judgment made choice of him as the fittest person he knew. Du Moulin
thanked him, and the Gentleman made his word good; for the Church of Paris
demanded him since, and had him; but it was many years after.

I will relate here a passage which shows the integrity and generosity of his
soul, his contempt of the world, and his trust in Gods assistance. Being once
at the end of his money in London, as he was pensively looking up to the
feeling of his Chamber, he perceived in a dark corner between two rafters a
little white rag: he made means to get up and reach to it, and found that it
was the end of an handkerchief, which having pulled out of a hole, he found in
it a considerable quantity of gold: he presently enquired in the house whether
any would claim the handkerchief: and when the people of this house disowned
it, he enquired who lived in his Chamber before; they told him, that an Italian
dyed in it a little before he came: he asked again whether he had any of his
blood in London, and being told that he had a kinsman whom he had made his
heir, he never left till he had found him and given him all that gold; though
he was not sure that the money belonged to the deceased. But God in whom he
trusted, did not forsake him. Soon after this, relief came to him out of his
Country, and ever since he had money constantly sent to him, both to England
and to Holland, till he writ that he would have no more.

Having lived four years in England, hearing that Franciscus Junius was newly
come to Leyden to be Professor in Divinity, he would go thither; and embarked
himself with the Duke of Wittenberg to go to Zeland in September 1592. being
recommended to that Duke by Monsieur de Beaunais la Nocle Ambassador of France
in England. They were tossed with a most furious tempest which constrained the
Seamen to throw the Canon and the burden of the Ship into the Sea, among other
things Du Moulins books and clothes. They were wracked by Ramekin in Zealand.

Being come to Leyden, he set forth a Latin Poem, entitled Votiva Tabella,
where he described the storm and the shipwreck, and offered his thanksgiving to
God. A piece of Poetry of the highest strain, which got him great esteem, and
many friends. It is certain, that for Latin Elegancy, height of conceit, and
neatness of expression, whether in prose or in verse, few in his age went
beyond him.

At his first coming into Holland, he got the acquaintance of the French
Ambassador Monsieur de Buzanual; for King Henry the Fourth in those days sent
Protestant Ambassadors to the Protestant Princes and States. That Ambassador
was ever since his most real and intimate friend. By him he was presented to
the Princess of Orange, a Frenchwoman, daughter to the Admiral Gaspar de
Coligny, and mother to Henry Prince of Orange, then seven years old. That
Princess was since very favorable to him.

Two months after his coming to Leyden, he was desired to accept the place of
Corrector of the College of the States, where he taught Logic, and Greek, and
Horace. These things he performed with so much Learning, and such a pleasing
facility, that he got the special love of the Students, but together the bitter
hatred of the Principal, who envied his praise, and never left vexing him as
long as he was in the place. But his Ingenuity and Uprightness so pleaded for
him, that always the Moderators and Magistrates maintained him against the the
injustice of the Principal, till once being brought to a Tertian Ague through
vexation, he asked some days of respite from his ordinary exercise, to look to
his health, and went to the Ambassadors House at the Hague, where he was so
well used, that in a seveninght he was well again. In his absence the Principal
went to the Magistrates and Moderators, and with many tears besought ^^em to
remove from the College that new Frenchman, who made his life bitter. They
hearkened to him, and sending for Du Moulin, told him, that not for any
misdemeanour of his, but for the peace of the College they discharged him: And
to show that they were well pleased with him, they gave him the double of that
was due to him for his Salary. He continued eight months in that place.

This cross fell to his greater advantage; for two months after the place of
Professor of Philosophy being vacant, Du Moulin was admitted to be tried among
others that offered themselves for the place. In the Trial he was preferred
before his Competitors, and established Professor of Philosophy. A young Doctor
of the Chair, of four and twenty years of age. At the news of his reception,
the Principal of the College, who had so persecuted him, was seized with such
a deep grief, that he died immediately by a sudden suffocation.

Du Moulin read in public the Organ of Aristotle in Greek, Libros Physicorum,
De Coelo, De generatione and corruptione, De Anima, De Meteoris; kept frequent
disputations, and had always a very full Auditory. Most of those that have
been since Professors at Leyden, or famous men in the Low Countries, were his
Scholars. Hugo Grotius was one of them. This exercise for five or six years was
his Fencing-School, whereby he was enabled for the many Encounters and
Conferences which he had afterward upon the greatest Stage of Europe. As
indeed of all his intellectual abilities, the most eminent was his skill in
Dispute, having, besides the art of disputing, confirmed by long use, a rare
vigor and readiness of wit, matched with a stayed, cool, and judicious temper,
never confounded with passion, the ordinary dissolver of Conferences.

At Leyden he dieted at Scaligers table, who had him in great esteem, and being
pleasant with him, called him often Domine Professor. When he saw his Logic
which he published at Leyden in the year 1596. he commended especially the
Preface Ad studiosam juventutem, and said of it, Haec Epistola non est hujus
aevi. That Logic was printed thirteen times in few years in several Countries,
and had the credit to be read in many Universities and Colleges, as one that
enricheth the stock of Philosophy, especially in the Topics.

At Scaligers table many persons of quality, both Papists and Protestants, were
boarded, whereby Du Moulin had occasion to get many acquaintances of the best
rank; among others these French Noblemen, The one Monsieur de la Rochepose or
Rupipozaeus, afterward Bishop of Poitiers, a man known by his Writings;
Monsieur de Gourges, since President at Bourdeaux, and another whose name I
have forgot, who since became a great Abbot. These renewed their acquaintaince
with him in France, and were instruments of the Court of Rome and the Popish
Clergy, to tempt him from time to time with great preferments to forsake the
Protestant cause.

Besides his Philosophical Profession, he read Greek Lectures in the
Divinity-Colledge, a Tongue in which he was extraordinarily learned. I have
seen elegant Orations of his in Greek, made since he was fifty years old, and
Greek Letters. This work against Du Perron, where he discovers in so many
places the Cardinals small skill in Greek, shows sufficiently his great skill
in that Language.

That skill, and his facility in speaking Italian, made him to be invited to
the Journey of Constantinople, with an Ambassador whom King Henry the Fourth
prepared to send to the Grand Signiors Porta, as one fit to commune with the
Grecians, and to be employed in the businesses of the Levant. A condition which
Mr. de Buzanual his great friend exhorted him by all means to embrace rather
then the Ministry, representing to him the poverty annexed to that Profession,
the continual toil, the dangers, the hatred of the Roman Clergy, in Paris
especially, where he should have a sore labor and great oppositions. The truth
is, that the comeliness of his Person, the dexterity of his Wit, and his
pleasant and charming Conversation, seemed to invite him rather to the
businesses of the world, then to those of the Church. But the King having
altered his mind, and chosen another Ambassador, Du Moulin took it as a Divine
declaration that God would not have him to think of another employment then
that holy Office to which he had invited him before.

Every year in the long vacation Mr. de Buzanual, who loved him most dearly,
would have him near him, and sometimes would bring him to the Army, where he
beheld the conduct of a Siege, and learned to sleep without a bed. In his Diary
he describes the delight he took in the taking of Groninghen, where he saw the
Friars packing up their trinkets, and a bonfire made of wooden Images in the
Marketplace.

He lived with great credit and comfort in Holland, which he used to call his
second Country: Yet being continually solicited by the Church of Paris, and
more by an especial invitation of God to take upon him the holy Calling of the
Ministry, he took his leave of the Curators of the University, who put the
Learned Everardus Vorstius in his place. For a Farewell to the University he
dedicated to the Curators a Poem called Batavia, an Elegant piece, printed
among his Philosophical works.

He left Leyden in August 1598. and went to the Hague to his great Friend the
Ambassador Monsieur de Buzanual, to whom he declared his desire to go into
France through the Archdukes Country, to see Antwerp and Bruxels: But a great
obstacle to that desire, was, the sharp war between Holland and the Archduke,
and the great cost, and the long time required to get a pass from him. The
Ambassador told him he could help him to go to Antwerp without a Pass, and
innocently gave him a most pernicious counsel, though in this respect most
useful, that it made him feel one of the rarest experiences of Gods Fatherly
Love and watchful Providence that ever befell to any of Gods children.

The Counsel was this. The Ambassador knew a Merchant of Rotterdam named
Vanderweck, an intimate friend of the Governor of Antwerp, Alfonso Mexia: For
that Governors Brother being taken prisoner in a Combat by Prince Maurice,
this Vanderweck paid his Ransom, and sent him to his Brother, who ever since
that great kindness admitted Vanderwecks Letters to him as a Pass for any that
carried them, and his Letters the Ambassador undertook to procure for Du
Moulin. This being confirmed by many others that Vanderwecks Letters were a
sure Pass, Du Moulin went to him with the Ambassadors Letters, and got other
Letters from him to recommend him to the Governor of Antwerp. Trusting on that
pass, he imbarqued himself at Rotterdam in a Barque bound for Antwerp. The
Barque cast Anchor before Ordham, a place garrisoned by the Spaniard, not
daring to go further, because there the Passes of the passengers were to be
examined. They of the garrison seeing the Barque anchored, sent another Barque
with soldiers to examine the Passes; and the Master of the Holland Barque
called upon all the passengers to have their passes ready. Du Moulin answered
that he had none but Vanderwecks Letters to the Governor Alphonso Mexia. You
are undone (said the Master) for a little before we cast anchor, a ship coming
from Antwerp passd by us, and the Sailers told us that the soldiers of the
Citadel of Antwerp had mutined against the Governor, and made him prisoner;
and now these Spaniards that are coming to us will carry you prisoner to
Ordham, and miserably torment you, especially when they know who you are. In
the mean while the Spanish Barque drew nigh, when by the admirable providence
of God, another ship coming from Zealand came near, in which Du Moulin knew a
friend of his, brother to Mr. Aurelius, Minister of the French Church of
London, and told him his distress. He having related this to his
fellow-passengers, called to Du Moulin, and told him, Sir, pass to our ship in
all haste, for here we have a German Gentleman that has a Pass for himself and
his servant, who being fallen sick, his Master has left him in Zealand: If you
come to us, you may pass for his man. So then Du Moulin did, and put on that
servants Livery-coat, which the Gentleman had with him in the ship, and thus
escaped that horrible imminent danger, for which he praised God all the days of
his life.

Being come safe into France, and to Paris, the place where he was expected, he
would not make himself known unto the Church there, till he had made himself
fit for their service, but went to his Father at Jargean, near Orleans, and
there stayed three months, disposing himself with prayers and study for that
great work. Neither would he then go to Paris, saying that he would begin his
Prenticeship somewhere else then in the Church of Paris. The Church of Blois
happening at the same time to be without a Pastor, desired his help till they
were otherwise provided, which he accepted, and preached there two months. In
the mean while the Church of Paris was sending him many summons, which finally
he obeyed, and came to Paris the last day of February, 1599.

A few days before, Henry the Fourths Sister, Katharine de Bourbon, who after
her Brothers revolt, presevered in the Protestant Religion until death, was
married to the Duke of Bar, Son to the Duke of Lorraine. She used to be
attended in her house by the Ministers of Paris, who served her by turns every
one a quarter of a year. Being then to go into Lorraine with her Husband, the
Church appointed Monsieur de Montigni, an ancient Minister, to attend her in
that Journey: But Du Moulin then coming to Paris, the old Gentleman desired to
be excused, and that the new Minister, as fitter to travel by reason of his
age, might be chosen for that service. To which motion the Princess presently
inclined, having an especial liking to Du Moulin. He took then thar journey;
and because the Princess was entertained in Bishops Palaces and Abbeys, he did
officiate in the Palace of the Bishop of Meaux, in that of the Bishop of
Challons, and in the Abbey of Joverre.

The Harbingers of the Princess being come to Vitris le Francois, a Town of
Champagne, addressed themselves to the chief Magistrate of the Town to prepare
quarters for the Princess and her Court. A fair Cousin of the Magistrates, a
young Widow, hearing of the coming of that Court, and fearing lest some
disorderly person should be quarered in her house, came to desire him that she
might have the Minister for her guest; for she had heard from Paris that an old
Minister was chosen to attend the Princess. Her name was Marie de Colignon, one
of the two coheirs of the House of Chalette.
Since then she would have the Minister, she had him, and was won to be his
wife. She brought to him a fair Estate, and the best portion of all, a rare
piety and exemplary virtue; God having appointed it so by a sweet providence,
that the consort that was to make him happy, should demand him.

Since his establishment at Paris, till the death of the Kings Sister, which
was five years after, he made a journey into Lorraine every Spring, either with
her or to her, and having served his quarter at her Court, returned to Paris.
There the Princess was most part of the year, and would have Du Moulin daily
with her, though out of his quarter, and sent often for his son, a little
child, to play with him. Du Moulin made use of that favor to confirm her
Highness in the true Religion, of which there was great need: For the Pope
pressed the King to make his Sister turn Catholic; and the King to please the
Pope, did what he could for it, employing the most learned and subtle of his
Clergy to seduce her, especially Du Perron, then Bishop of Eureux, and Father
Cotton. These two had several bickerings with him, but yet had soon done; for
being worsted, and not used to deal with such an Adversary, they did avoid to
meet with him, leaving others of the Court-Clergy to try their fortune with
him. By them he was baited and provoked continually, but always with such ill
success for them, that he became generally feared and esteemed together, and
none but bold new comers, and such as knew him not, durst grapple with him. The
Author in the 7th. Book of this work, in the 3d. Controversy, 2 Chapter gives
account of an occasional encounter of his with M. Du Perron. But they had
another which was a pitched field. It was at the Court before a few, but grave
and select Assistants. After some Dispute, when Du Perron gave back to the
force of an argument; and was at a loss, some body hid behind the hanging cried
up One. And when the like happened to him the second time, the same voice cried
up two, and so till five. Upon which Du Perron complaining of interruption,
broke the Conference. But before they parted, the company obliged the two
Disputants never to publish any thing about that meeting, which Du Moulin
promised and kept; but I never promised it, and am not bound to keep all my
Fathers promises. Since that meeting these two Adversaries bore a mutual
respect the one to the other. The Baron of Mountataire told me, that being at
Cardinal Du Perrons table, and some discourse of Religion and Ministers being
moved, one President Chevalier said that Du Moulin was an Ass; Upon which the
Cardinal answered the President, You do him wrong Sir; He is such an Ass, that
no man ever rubbed against him, but returned with a kick. And I have often
heard my Father commending Du Perron as the nimblest adversary that ever he met
with. In his Preface to this work, he gives him his due commendation.

One Beaulieu Bouju, a young Clergyman, having got some Manuscripts of Du
Perron about the Eucharist, made use of them to write against Du Moulin, who
thereby was provoked to answer him, and confute him. There are letters extant
and printed among Du Perron's works, wherein he chides that Beaulieu Bouju,
both for stealing, and more for ill using his Meditations, and tells him in
substance, that though he could get his weapon, yet he could not wield it. But
when Du Perron would wield his own weapon, he had no better success, as it is
justified by this work.

King Henry the 4th. to satisfy the Court of Rome and the French Clergy of the
care he took of his Sisters Conversion, would often desire her to hear the
Sermons of his Chaplains, which she would not yield unto, till once being made
sensible how the Kings credit was interessed that she should once at the least
hear one Court Sermon, she condiscended so far to the request of a King and a
Brother, as to promise to hear Father Cotton; Who therefore was appointed to
preach before the King and her, immediately after Du Moulins Sermon, and in the
same room: For those two contrary services were performed in that room every
Lords day morning, as long as the Princess lived, and was at the Court.

The Princess, to strengthen her self against that assault, gave notire of it
to Du Moulin, and after his Sermon brought him into a private room, whence he
might hear the Jesuits Oratory. It will not be unpleasant to the Reader to
have a taste of it. His subject was of the dwelling of the Holy Ghost in the
soul, and he made his entry into that matter after this manner. I went once to
visit the Hospital of fools, where a grave old man received me kindly at the
door, and went about with me to show me the distracted persons, and inform me
about their several kinds of folly. Here is one (said he) that thinks himself
made of snow, and will not come near the fire for fear of melting. This thinks
himself metamorphosed into an earthen pitcher, and will not come near a wall,
nor suffer any to come near him, for fear of being broken with a knock. These
four have a more refined kind of folly; for they think themselves top-full with
the spirit of Prophecy. One will be Elias, another Jeremiah, another Daniel,
another S. Paul. But I that am the Holy Ghost, can assure you Sir, that they
are all either fools or impostors, for I never sent them. Thus the reverend
Senior, after he had given me the character of other fools, gave me his own;
and I could not find any grain of folly in him, so wisely and rationally he
spoke, till he took upon him to be the Holy Ghost. The like folly is to be seen
among those of the pretended Reformed Religion: There you shall find wise and
Religious Princesses [intimating the Kings Sister] wise and faithful Treasurers
[intimating the Duke of Sully] wise and valiant Generals of Armies [intimating
the Duke of Bovillon] wise and learned Councillors of State [intimating Mr. du
Plessis Mornay] all wise in all things, but that they think they have the Holy
Ghost, and have it not. The Sermon was suitable to the Preface, and wrought a
suitable effect in the hearers, making them all merry, but no Converts.

In the end of the year 1601. time and place being appointed for a Conference
between Du Moulin and Cayer, sometimes a Minister, and then a Doctor of Serbon,
Cayer put off the meeting several times, till the Kings Sister going to
Lorrain, took Du Moulin along with her. In his absenc Cayer put forth a Book
with this Inscription, A Conference by Ministers granted, and by themselves
refused. In which Book he accused Du Moulin of deserting his cause, and running
away. But Du Moulin being returned in May to Paris, the challenge was renewed
on both sides: So they met May 28. 1602. in a house next to the Kings Sisters
house. The Conference held a fortnight. They had Scribes on both sides; a world
of hearers, and good order kept. The questions agitated, propounded by Cayer
himself, were, Of the Sacrifice of the Mass; Of the Adoration of the Pope; and
of the veneration of holy Images. Cayer was assisted with two Doctors,
Carmelites. Du Moulin had no Assistant. Toward the midst of the Conference the
Faculty of Sorbon grievously censured Cayer for ill defending the Catholic
Cause, and suffering the Adversary to wade too deep into questions: And the
Bishop of Paris forbad him to sign that which he had indicted to the Scribes.
Since that time the Popish party sought occasions to break. The Carmelites
feigned to be afraid, because there were so many swords in the company.
Gentlemen of their own party bade them to fear nothing, representing to them
that Gentlemen will seldom appear abroad without their swords: That they were
more in number then the Protestants, and that Paris wanted neither Laws nor
Justices. The Protestants said for their part, that they were of old in
possession of suffering, and that violence was as remote from their thoughts,
as it would be disadvantagious for them, considering their small number, and
the place and condition they lived in. So the Conference continued; but Cayer
remembering that he had been chid, would make frequent protestations that he was
not authorized to confer, and that he did it merely out of his own zeal. But
the Doctors of Sorbon perceiving that the more the Conference continued, the
more their cause was discredited, came in a body to the Kings Advocate in the
Court of Parliament, to complain of that Conference, saying, that it was a
pernicious thing, tending to sedition; that they had contrived how to break it,
and that the effects of it would shortly appear. This hindered not Du Moulin
from coming to the ordinary place where he was before Cayer. He found the door
shut and a great crowd of people at the door. The Master of the house came to
him, and showed him Letters without subscription from a person of quality, who
advised him to lend his house no more for that Conference, showing him the
inconvenience that might follow, and threatening him of imprisonment: Wherefore
the Gentleman desired Du Moulin to seek another house for the Conference. Du
Moulin answered, that it was a trick to break off, which he had been warned of
before, and desired him not to be moved with groundless fears, and that he
would but let him come into his yard. This was denied. But Cayer coming soon
after, the door was opened to him, and the people pressing in after him, Du
Moulin got in with the crowd. There they considered how to get another place
for their meeting. But the Conference being, though not forbidden, yet
discountenanced by authority, no body durst offer his house for it. So the
parties agreed to continue the Conference in writing, and to publish nothing
but by mutual consent. But Du Moulin asked two conditions, upon which Cayer
brake. The one that the Conference should be limited, and that it should not be
permitted to make replies in infinitum, but Cayer would have no limitation. The
other, that Cayer should sign the Acts of that Conference till that day, which
Cayer utterly refused, saying, It was enough that it was subscribed by the
Scribes. When Du Moulin represented to him what disgrace he put upon himself
and his cause, and challenged and dared him, saying, That he durst not stand to
that he had spoken, and indicted himself: Cayer answered, that he cared neither
for the talk of people, nor for darings and challenges. And to get out of that
mire he moved a question to Du Moulin, Whether he could tell after what manner
of Creation the Angels were Created: Du Moulin, knowing that this was their
last meeting, answered, that the question in hand was only of subscribing the
Acts. But Cayer refused it again, turned his back, and said, You shall hear of
me: And so went away to the great scandal of the Romanists there present, who
could not conceal their indignation. A Protestant made the company laugh,
saying, That Cayer was not yet of age to sign.

Cayer being gone forth, and Du Moulin yet in the Hall of the house, Cayers
friends flockt about him in the street, and represented to him the great wrong
he did to himself, and the cause, by denying to sign; not knowing that he had
done more harm to himself and the Roman Church if he had signed. They pressed him
then to return, and to sign. But not being able to persuade him to it, they
returned to Du Moulin, and desired him not to press Cayer to sign presently,
and to limit only the time of every reply, not the number of the replies. Du
Moulin answered, that he persevered in that he had said publicly, That it was
too late to contend after that Cayer was fled. And that he had to do with
Cayer, not with them.

Thus was the Conference broken to the great satisfaction of many faithful
souls, and the instruction of many ignorant Papists, who since gave glory to
God by an open profession of the Truth.

This was a famous Conference, done with great order and fair dealing, in a
very full audience, and in the greatest light of France. The Acts of the
Conference are extant published by Archibald Adaire a Reverend Bishop of
Scotland, What was the end of that Doctor Cayer, I choose rather to let the
Reader know it by others then by me.

The Doctors of the faculty of Sorbon, stung with the ill success of this
Conference, provoked him to another, in which the body of the University took
interest. They were to oppose three days upon what points they thought best:
And Du Moulin was to oppose three days also, and choose what points he pleased.
He was then Respondent for three days, and found in the Dispute that blessing
of God which never was wanting to him in the defense of his Truth. After the
dispute of the third day, he being returned home, and retired to his Study, a
man in a Priests habit came in the dark evening up the stairs, and knocked at
his study door: when Du Moulin had half opened it, the man thrust the door with
all his strength to have rusht in; and Du Moulin with all his strength, in
which he was inferior to few men of his size, kept him out, and called for
help. They were a while thrusting one against the other, till the man hearing
some stirring below at Du Moulins call, ran down the stairs in great haste, and
so into the street. We suppose, upon probable ground, that the man was come to
kill him before he presented himself to be Opponent, according to the Covenants
of the Conferenre; which the Adversaries would by no means suffer him to be, as
it appeared the next morrow; for when he went to the appointed place, he met
with a prohibition from the King to continue that Conference any longer.

These passages raised his reputation very high, whereby God was glorified, his
Truth confirmed, and his Church edified, and increased with many Converts.

About that time a passage of another nature contributed to advance his esteem
in the world. His wife being grievously sick, he desired the Kings Physicians,
with whom, by reason of his ordinary waiting at the Court, he was well
acquainted, to visit her, and make a consultation about her. He had then at
once five or six of the most renowned Physicians of the time; among others,
Duretus, Quercetanus, Laurentius, Gorrhaeus, men that have left a great fame
behind them. And as the manner of Physicians is in France, in their
consultations, they made learned and elegant Latin discourses about the
business which they were called for. Du Moulin craved leave, though no
Physician, yet as husband to the patient, acquainted with the disposition of
her body, to speak among them. Which he did, and with his Latin elegancy and
facility, made them a deep discourse of Anatomy, and of the indications and
cure of the disease, which brought these Physicians to a great admiration, and
they both praised, and followed his advice. Doctor James Primrose, the Learned
Physician of Hull, has told me diverse times, that when our two Fathers had
made an exchange of their eldest Sons for a year or two, my Father made him
private Lectures upon the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, with geeat judgment and
learning. These two passages I relate together, because of the likeness of the
subject, though the last was twelve years posteriour.

But to return to his proper sphere. The last sickness of the Kings sister gave
a great exercise to his zeal and industry, whereby he did faithfully and
constantly assist her in that extremity. And there was need of constancy and
courage in that service; for the Court-Clergy, Du Perron especially, did their
utmost to pervert her, and to fright him away. When she drew near to her end,
Du Moulin standing by her Bedside, Du Perron came and said he was sent by the
King, and would remove him by plain force. But Du Moulin held fast the Bed
post; and when Du Perron told him, that he was to take place uf him in all
companies, Du Moulin answered that his place was before Du Perrons at the
Princesses Bedside, and in that service. The threatenings made to him in the
Kings name he valued not, and said, he believed not that the King would offer
violence to his Sisters conscience, appealing to her self, and beseeching her
Highness to declare her pleasure. She declared that she would die in the
Reformed Religion, and that she would have Du Moulin to stay by her. Whereupon
Du Perron withdrew, and the good Princess persevered in Gods holy Truth to her
last breath. The King wished she had died in the Roman profession, and did all
he could, without violence, to pleasure the Court of Rome in that point. And Du
Moulin had an opinion ever since that the King bore him ill will for thus
crossing his intentions. The Princess left to Du Moulin a great Rose of
Diamonds for a Legacy; but her Executors sent him one of false stones.

Besides verbal Conferences which he had very frequently, he had many
conferences in writing, and answered many Books written against him, whence he
had occasion to treat of all the controversies between us and the Church of
Rome, and to publish diverse Books, which were blessed instruments in Gods hand
for the conversion of many. The pureness of his French, and the ingenious
simplicity of his style generally esteemed, was a great introduction for his
Books into all Companies. Many of the Romanists would read his Books and hear
his Sermons, only for the Language, and many times were happily deceived,
finding in his Language that which they sought not, and were converted by the
evidence of Spirit and power that was in his words.

In one of his Books dedicated to his Father, a friend of his did write, and
ingeniously apply to him these verses of Virgil.

Et nos tela, Pater, ferrumque haud debile dextra
Spargimus, and nostro sequitur de vulnere sanguis.
King James of blessed and glorious memory before his coming to the Crown of
England, sent expressions of Royal favor to the Consistory of Paris, who chose
Du Moulin to address their humble thanks by Letters to his Majesty. And when
his Majesty published his Confession of Faith, against which Coeffeteau (since
Bishop of Marseille) writ an eloquent Book, Du Moulin undertook the Defense of
the Kings Confession, and writ a French Book with that Title, which was most
welcome to the King, and to the English Clergy; and his Majesty, made Royal and
bountiful expressions of his acceptance. Since that time the King honored Du
Moulin with his Letters, and required many Letters from him, having an especial
liking for all that came from his Pen.

And because other Adversaries besides Coeffeteau had writ against the King, Du
Moulin writ another Book in his defense in Latin, entitled, De Monarchia
Pontificis Romani.

Although Henry the fourth was displeased with Du Moulin for crossing his
intentions about his sister, yet he esteemed him. A little before he was
stabbed in the midst of his preparations for an Expedition into Flanders, he
called an old Protestant, his trusty Servant, called La Chesnaye, and spoke
thus to him; La Chesnaye, I am preparing for a great journey, and have used my
best care that all may be quiet in my Kingdom in my absence. Two sorts of
stirring wits I consider as apt to cause disturbance, Jesuits and young
Ministers. For Jesuits, I have employed fit Agents to deal with them. For
Ministers, you must be one of my Agents. When I am gone, go to Du Moulin, Tell
him that I remember his good services to my sister, That I desire him to pray
for the prosperity of my person and journey, and to be quiet in my absence,
sending no challenges and receiving none; And give him this purse from me:
After the Kings death, which was very few days after, La Chesnaye delivered the
message from the King to Du Moulin, and presented him with the purse. Du Moulin
never inquired what was in it, but refused it. Most men would have made no
scruple to take it; and it is like that the Gentleman made no scruple to keep
it for himself.

Upon the murder of that great King, Du Moulin put forth that famous Book
called Anticoton, in which he proved, that the Jesuits were Authors of that
horrible parricide. Though he put not his name to it, the Jesuits soon knew
that it was his Work, and made an answer to it directed unto him; because there
was in the Anticoton an Anagram of Father Cotton, which fathered the Kings
death upon him thus, PIERRE COTON PERCE TON ROI


They also made this Anagram upon Du Moulins name, PETRVS DV MOVLIN ERIT MVNDO
LVPVS


With these Verses: Petri hostis Petrus Christi insidiatur ovili,
Quo deglubere, quo dilaniare queat,
More lupi: and vere lupus est cui nomen and omen
Et mores insunt ingeniumque lupi.


Which Verses Du Moulin answered thus.

Quisquis es insulso qui fundis acumine versus,
Hellespontiaco victima digna Deo;
Quam frustra vacuum scalpsisti sinciput? O quos
Rifus Hybrida vox semilatrina movet!
Dum tua men's vary turbata elementa pererrat,
Et spargis virus nomen in innocuum:
Quin and in hoc casu quaedam est industria, dum tu
In laudem imprudens nomina nostra trahis.
Namque lupo cohibemus equos; agitator eqourum
Improbioris equi comprimit ora lupo;
Qui in gyrum cogit, facilique peritus habena
Compositos gressus agglomerare docet.
Ergo lupus mundo est, qui fraenans ora lupato
Dura, per erorrum devia monstrat iter.
Nec mirum si nos, Papalis verna culinae,
Si ciniflo Satanae, dixerit esse lupos:
Cum Christum Satanam Pharisaeus dicat appella,
Nemo bonus secum mitius optet agi.
Ergo Dei servum vanis latratibus urgens,
Meque lupum appellans de sinat esse canis.
King James's love to Du Moulin increasing, he would see him, and by Sir
Theodore Mayerne who took a journey to Paris in February, 1615. he invited him
very earnestly to come over to him. The Consistory of Paris opposed that
motion, being persuaded that if he went once over into England, he would never
return. But Du Moulin removed that jealousy by his solemn promise with an oath
made in public to the Church of Paris, that he would return shortly. So he
obtained his leave, and in March following went over into England with Sir
Theodore Mayerne, taking along with him Captain John Du Moulin his half brother.

The King received him with extraordinary favor, and would have him near his
person very often. Almost every day while the King was at dinner, Du Moulin
stood behind his Chair; and several times the King shut up himself with Sir
Theodore Mayerne and Du Moulin, for no other business but to enjoy their
company, which his Majesty was extraordinarily pleased with. And the truth is,
that he could hardly have picked in all the world two persons of a more
ingenious and pleasant conversation.

Two months before Du Moulins coming into England, Du Perron had made an
Oration in the States of Blois, where he had maintained that the Pope had the
power to depose Kings, and had used King James very ill; and having published it
in Print, he sent it to his Majesty: To answer that Oration his Majesty made
use of Du Moulins service for the French Language, and it was Printed the first
time in French while Du Moulin was in England, in that year 1615. before it was
Printed in English.

The King going to Cambridge carried Du Moulin along with him, and made him
take the degree of Doctor: Then was Ignoramus acted the second time before the
King. Doctor Du Moulin would have excused himself from seeing that Play, but
the King would needs have him to see it: Yet the King could not make him
conceal the offense he took, when he was told that sundry of the Actors were
men in Orders; and that some that had acted it the first time, were sent for
from the Churches to which they had been promoted, to act it the second time.

Of this he expressed his dislike, even in the pulpit, and before the King; for
his Majesty having commanded him to preach in French before him in Greenwich
Chapel, he took for his Text, Romans 1.15. and was so ill a Courtier in his
Sermon, as to say that the Ministers of the Gospel in the ancient Church would
not be spectators, and much less would have been Actors of Stage Plays. Yet the
Sermon was so well accepted at the Court, that the most illustrious Prince of
Wales (since King Charles the first) was pleased to require a copy of it, and
gave a fair Diamond Ring to the Doctor.

After three months stay the King going to his Progress, he took his leave of
his Majesty, who would have staid him in England, and highly advanced him. And
when nothing would persuade him to stay, the King said to him, not without some
anger, that he was unworthy to have the love of a King, and gave him a Prebend
at Canterbury, and to his brother a chain of gold.

In that time of his stay in England he contracted friendship with many worthy
Divines, especially with Doctor Andrews the Reverend and Learned Bishop of Ely,
and since of Winchester, who was very favorable to him, and renewed many of
his old acquaintances of Cambridge.

In his return he was installed in his Canons place at Canterbury: In his
admission the Dean and Chapter offered him the Oath of Allegiance, and the Oath
of Canonical obedience which he took, but with this exception, which was
allowed him; As far as it does not prejudice the Allegiance due to my King.

Two or three years after, the King gave him a Rectory sine cura: These two
Benefices were rented for 200. l. per annum.

The Doctor landed at Bullen where Monsieur de Campagnoles was Governor for
the Duke of Espernon. It was the time when the French Princes began to stir
against Mary the Queen Mother of France. And because the Prince of Conde was
courting the Reformed Churches to join with him in that design, the Doctor was
suspected, as having taken that journey to procure help from England for the
Princes. Wherefore Campagnoles was charged to arrest him at his landing, which
he did, and committed him to the guard of two Soldiers, seized upon his Trunks
and Papers, and searched them. But after two days he released him, and desired
him to tell no body of the wrong he had done him.

How ill grounded that suspicion was, his following actions did justify: For
the Doctor finding at his return, that the Protestants began to engage with the
Princes against the Queen Mother, and in effect against the King, who was then
declared Major by the Parliament, he dissuaded them from it as much as he
could, both by Sermons and Letters. And to him the Court was obliged, that all
the Protestant Towns on this side of Loire kept in the Kings obedience. He
showed, that he did it not to serve the times, but God. For the Queen having
sent the same Monsieur de la Chesnaye (who had been sent to him before from
Henry the fourth) to thank him for his good service to the King, and to give
him a present in money, and exhort him to continue his good affection; The
Doctor answered, that he needed no money to be loyal to his King, and refused
to take it. When la Chesnaye urged him to it, saying, That it was a disrespect
to refuse a Royal Liberality: The Doctor answered, that if he would give it him
in presence of the Consistory of Paris he would take it; but it was more then
la Chesnaye had Commission to do. The declaring of the Politic Assembly of the
Protestants for the Prince of Conde in the year 1616. was the greatest error
that ever they committed. And they smarted for it (as Du Moulin had foretold
them) when once the young King had got more age and vigor.

Doctor Du Moulin after his return out of England was persecuted more then ever
with disputes. The Jesuit Arnoux, a Court Preacher, sent a Challenge to the
Ministers of Paris, to appear before the Queen Mother to give account of their
Religion, preached fire and sword against them before their Majesty's, and sent
them a Pamphlet full of heavy accusations. The Doctor was charged by his
Colleagues to make an answer to it. Which he did, and addressed it to the King.
In that answer by way of just recrimination, he affirmed, that he had seen in
the College of the Jesuits at la Flesche, a picture of the Martyrs of their
Order, and in that rank some Traitors who had been executed for conspiring
against the life of their Kings. That the maxims of the Jesuits were
pernicious to Kings, whereas the doctrine of the Protestants maintained their
life, their authority, and their States: And the Pastors of the Reformed
Churches taught their people fidelity and obedience to the King. Then he
represented the many perils and combats which the Protestants had sustained for
the defense of King Henry the Fourth, till they had brought him to the Crown.
Of which services, they that had been the Kings Enemy received the reward.
This Answer of the Ministers was presented to the King by the Duke of Rohan.

Such a bold address to the Sovereign power, did irritate the great Officers of
the Crown, of whom not a few, or their Fathers, had been of the party of the
League. The Jesuits therefore letting their challenge fall, indicted the
Ministers of Treason, although all the ground they could find for it, was, that
the Ministers called the reformed Churches their people, as if they had
pretended some sovereignty over them.

The Chamber of the Edict (a Court consisting half of Papists, half of
Protestant Judges) would take knowledge of that business. But the Great Chamber
would not let them, pretending that to the Great Chamber belonged the
cognizance of crimes of Treason. Three weeks they were contending about that.
At the end of which the Council of State took the cognizance of it from them
both, and by that time the heat of the Statesmens wrath was allayed. The
Ministers being summoned before the Council, the indictment of Treason was not
much urged, as being but a cavil. And it was wittily eluded; for whereas it was
objected to them that they called their Churches nos peuples, it was answered,
that the N was a u turned upside down, and should be read vos peuples, so that
the Ministers speaking to the King, called their Churches your not our people.
The Lords of the Council smiled, and were contented to have one cavil wiped off
with another. Only after grave admonitions and high threatenings by Chancellor
Bruslart, they dismissed them.

That challenge of Arnoux, and a Pamphlet of his against the Confession of
Faith of the Reformed Churches of France, occasioned the Doctor to write his
Buckler of the Faith.

The Jesuits, who compass sea and land to make a Proselyte, had devised this
feat of Legerdemain, that when they saw a person of quality (for those
especially they hunt after) little grounded in the Protestant Religion, ill
stored with piety, and gaping after preferments (which are all confined to the
Popish party) they tempted him to change his profession; and after they had
partly by arguments, partly by promises, won him to their side, they made him
promise not to declare his resolution to change till after a Conference between
two Divines of the two Religions, that his declaration might assign the victory
of the Conference to their side. But when they would give fire to that mine,
commonly it turned upon them that had sprung it: For thereby the perverted
persons were either reclaimed in good earnest, or by the evident ill success of
the Jesuits compelled for shame to remain in their former profession. Diverse
times these Jesuit have tried to serve Doctor Du Moulin with that trick, but
unfortunately. A Gentleman called Liembrune, corrupted by the Jesuit Gontier,
had promised him to declare himself a Roman Catholck after a Conference of the
said Jesuit with Doctor Du Moulin. And having taken his lodging at the same
street as the Doctor, with whom he had got some familiarity, he drew him once
into his chamber, where the Doctor found a great company of persons of quality,
most of them Ladies, who, as they had been instructed by Gontier, began to
question the Doctor about his calling. And upon that Gontier came to the door
in a coach full of books, and being come up to the company, he asked what they
were speaking of? A Lady said, I was desiring Monsieur Du Moulin to satisfy my
curiosity about his calling. The Doctor, to put the Jesuit upon the defensive
part, said, I answered the Lady, that a man of your sort, that will question
another about his calling, obliges himself to prove his own. And since the
calling of Priest in the Roman Church is to be a sacrificer of the body of
Christ, I desire you, Sir, to show me the institution of that Priesthood, and
in what place of Scripture God commanded that the body of his Son should be
sacrified. The Jesuit answered, that it might easily be proved; called for
Bibles and Concordances, and was seeking and turning leaves a great while. But
being unable to find a thing that is not, he retired silent, full of anguish
and confusion into a corner of the room. Upon which Liembrune grew angry, and
told Gontier, Father, you told me, that if I brought a Minister before you, you
would confound him; Here is one, and you stand dumb before him. After that
Conference Liembrune defamed Gontier everywhere, and was confirmed in the true
Religion.

Another Jesuit came to the Doctors study to dispute with him. Monsieur de
Monginot, a famous Physician, was present at the Conference, whereby he was
converted, and set out an excellent Book of the reasons why he abjured Popery.

An Eminent Protestant Lady, widow to the Marshal of Fernaques, Governor of
Normandy, being sick to death, was very much solicited by the Prince of
Joinville, called since Duke of Chereuse, whom she intended to marry, to change
Religion on her deathbed; and he used the interest he had in her, to make her
a Roman Catholic. The Doctor going to visit her, could not be admitted till
Monsieur de Roissy, a person of high quality, went in with a great attendance,
and with him the Doctor came to her bedside. As he began to speak to the sick
Lady, Monsieur de Salles, the titular Bishop of Geneva, came in, sent by the
Princess of Piemont, the Kings Sister, to exhort her to die in the Roman
profession. Whereupon, when some contestation arose between the Bishop and
Doctor Du Moulin, Monsieur de Roissy spoke thus to the sick Lady; Madam, it is
no more time to dissemble, speak openly, Will you have my Lord Bishop of Geneva
to comfort you, and pray by you, or will you have Monsieur Du Moulin to do that
office? The Lady answered, I desire Monsieur Du Moulin to take that pains. Then
the Bishop and many Roman Catholics went out of the room. Some remained, who
while the Doctor was praying, made mouths at him, to abuse and interrupt him.
He did his part to dispose and strengthen her in her last combat. After he had
been there half an hour or more, three Lords, one of them Monsieur d' Andelot,
came up to him, and told him, Monsieur du Moulin, there is below a company of
Princesses and great Ladies that desire to see you confer with my Lord Bishop.
The Doctor answered, My Lords, do you not make that motion purposely to take me
off from the last office which I do to this Lady, and to keep me from returning
hither? All three promised upon their honor, that after the Conference ended,
they would let him into the room co continue the Office which he was about. The
Doctor followed them into a large room, where the Duchess Dowager of
Longueville was with many other great persons, and asked them upon what point
they would have the Bishop and him to confer; The Ladies desired that they
should speak of those words of Christ, This is my body.

The Doctor said, that the clear Exposition of those words was given by S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ? The Bishop answered, that the same Apostle affirms that it is
the very body of Christ that we eat, 1 Cor. 11.24. Christ said to his
Disciples, Take, eat, this is my body. I wonder (said the Doctor to the Bishop)
how you have the confidence to allege that Text which your Church has so
foully falsified: For whereas St. Paul relates how Christ said, Take, eat, this
is my body which is broken for you, The Roman Church has put in her version,
which shall be delivered for you, lest that it should be known that Christ
speaks of a body which may be broken in the Sacrament, which cannot be said of
the true body of Christ. The Bishop then taxed the Doctor with calumny,
maintaining that in the vulgar Roman version it was set down, which is broken.
Bibles were brought forth, and it was found that the Doctor said true. This
silenced the Bishop, and broke the Conference. The Duchess of Longueville took
the Doctor aside, and told him that she had heard much of him; but now that she
had both seen and heard him, it would be an excess of joy to her if he would
turn Catholic. The Doctor answed, that he would willingly do it, and in her
sense, if it might be showed him in the word of God, that God has commanded
the Priest to sacrifice the body of Christ. Then taking leave of the company,
he went up to the sick Lady, who soon after gave up the ghost.

These are few of his many encounters. If I would relate all his Conferences,
they might fill a great volume. Scarce was he a week without one, while he
lived in Paris, and some of them were very long. He was the object of the
public hatred of the Romanists. His name was the general Theme of libels cried
up in the street, of railing Sermons in all pulpits, and of the curses of
ignorant zealots. They that durst not come near that Lion, barked at him afar
off. And because the Adversaries could not overcome him in conference, they
tried two other ways.

The one was to win him by preferments from the Reformed party. I will not make
this Relation so Romance-like, as to say all that he might have had from the
Court of France, and that of Rome. I will relate but one passage of my
particular remembrance; That one of the prime men of Paris came to him; how
haughtily he looked upon us all, I remember still. His errand to the Doctor was
to this purpose. Sir, my name is N. N. You cannot but know that it is the best
name of the civil Corporation of Paris. I come to declare unto you the great
compassion I have, that a man of such eminent parts as your self, should be
employed to defend Heresy, and engaged with the sordid Hugonot party; Among
whom, after all your services, and all the hatred which you sustain for their
sakes, you can leave your Family but meanly provided for: Whereas if you will
embrace the Catholic Cause, I that speak to you, will provide for your Family,
and I undertake for my self and others of my name in Paris to settle eight
thousand livres per annum in good land upon your self and your heirs for ever.
It was at that time full 800 l. a year.
The Doctor imitating his haughty way, answered him; Sir, I perceive that you
value me at a very low rate; for if I could be won to commit that great
wickedness, I might have twenty times more. No other thanks did he give him,
and no more discourse would he have with him. I remember that they parted very
abruptly.

That way succeeding not, they went about to make him away. Diverse Attempts
were made against his life, besides that which I related before. One evening
after Sunset, two men with long black cloaks came to his house; One of them
staid at the door to keep the egress free for his fellow, who went softly into
the parlour, and so to the Doctor, without speaking a word, keeping his hands
under his cloak. The Doctor judging by his countenance that he came with a
mischievous intent, removed further, and put a chair in the man's way. The man
turned about the chair and the table, pursuing him: Then came the Doctors
servant, a proper strong man, who repulsed the fellow with threatenings, and put
him out of the house.

Another came to the same parlour while the Doctor was at dinner, and came near
him with his hands under his cloak. The same servant took up a daggers scabbard
which the man had let fall, and gave it him, saying, Get you gone, you have
mist your blow for this time. The fellow, without answering one word, took his
scabbard and went away.

Another came to his house with the like intent, in all likelihood, at seven a
clock at night in the short days, and asked to speak with the Doctor. But when
he began to speak, he faultered in his speech, and quaked, and changed color;
which Mrs. Du Moulin perceiving, stepped between her husband and the man, and
told him, Friend, you are come with a wicked design. The man made no Apology,
and departed.

One night, about two or three a clock, when the Doctor and his Family were
abed, one knocked at the door with great noise, and being told from within that
the Doctor was asleep, he answered, that he must be awaked, for he must speak
with him, and so continued knocking till the door was opened, and he would be
brought to the Doctors bedside; To whom he said, Sir, You will pardon me this
unmannerly address to you at this undue hour, when you know that my errand is
to save your life. I came this night to this City, in the Boat of Montereau,
where a man acquainted me, that he had a present of Prunella's for you, which
would rid the world of you. The bearer is easy to know, for he is blind of an
eye, and will bring you these Prunella's from such a friend of yours; but taste
them not, for they are poisoned. The next day a man blind of an eye did not
fail to come to him with Boxes of Prunella's, but the Doctor would not speak
with him, and sent him back with his Boxes.

Twice was his house besieged by a rabble of people to destroy him and his
Family, but brought no greater Artillery then Muskets, wherewith they shot
through the gate in several places: they assayed to break the door, but could
not. These many attempts, made his Friends to desire him that he should never
go abroad unattended, nor be at home without defense. He hearkened to their
counsel, and got two stout servants, that had been Soldiers, that attended him
with their swords: Yet that he walked so long among wild beasts, and was not
devoured, it is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

While Doctor Du Moulin lived in Paris, he was invited by many Universities to
accept of the Chair of Divinity; but the Church of Paris would never part with
him. That University which did most constantly and unwearedly woo him, was
that of Leyden, considering him still as a member of their body. They began in
the year, 1611. and offered him the place of Arminius, then newly dead: And not
only the Curators by frequent addresses to the Church of Paris and to him, but
the States by their Ambassadors, and the Prince of Orange by his Letters, did
from time to time demand him.

In the year, 1617. when the States of the United Provinces had desired the
Churches of England, France, Germany, etc. to send some able Divines to the
Synod of Dort, the Churches of France named four, Doctor Du Moulin, Chamier,
Rivet and Chaune. But when the Doctor was making ready for his journey, he was
forbidden by a Messenger of the Council of State of France to go out of the
Kingdom, upon pain of Life: The like prohibition was made to the three other
Divines.

The Lords States accepted of his good will very thankfully, and sent him the
same present which they gave to the Deputies of their Synod, A large golden
Medal with a chain of Gold, and two hundred Crowns of Gold.

A year after, the Lords States and the Curators of the University of Leyden
renewed their former demand of Doctor Du Moulin to be their Divinity Reader.
The Learned Erpenius was sent twice into France on that errand: And when he
could not be obtained from the Church of Paris, they demanded, by the same
Erpenius, the famous Rivet, and had him.

But the Church of Paris could keep no longer their dear Pastor whom they held
so fast; and the ruin then ready to fall upon the generality of the French
Churches did light upon him first. In the year 1620. a National Synod being
called at Alais in Languedok, Doctor Du Moulin was sent Deputy to it, and he
made account in his return to go out of the way to see Rochel. A little before
he took that journey, My Lord Herbert of Cherbury, then Ambassador of England
in the Court of France, urged him very much to write to the King his Master, to
exhort him to undertake vigorously the defense of his Son in Law the King of
Bohemia. The Doctor represented to his Lordship, that it was too high a
business for a man of his sort. My Lord Herbert represented to him again that
his Letters were always very acceptable to his Majesty, and might work very
much upon him. So the Doctor writ to the King, and delivered his Letters to the
Lord Ambassadors Secretary. Then immediately he went to Alais where he was
chosen President of the Synod.

In the mean while his Letters to King James went the wrong way, and were
delivered to the Council of State of France; how, or by whom, the Doctor could
never learn, or whether his Majesty ever received them. Howsoever it was,
scarce was he in Languedok, when it was concluded at Paris in the Counsel of
State, that he should be apprehended, and committed prisoner for exhorting a
Foreign King to take Arms for the defense of the Protestant Churches. And
because the Council was informed that the Doctor would return by Rochel (a
place which then gave great jealousies to the Court) they would not take him
before he had been there, the Informers against him intending to make his going
to Rochel an Article of his Indictment. Doctor Du Moulin knowing nothing of all
this, was sitting in the Synod, where he heard first the ill news of the taking
of Prague, the overthrow of the King of Bohemia, and the ruin of many Churches
in that Country. And at the same time the waste made in the Churches of Bearn
by the Armies of King Lewis, and how the Protestants would keep a Politic
Assembly at Rochel against the Kings will, which proved the cause of so many
ruins that followed. Wherefore the Synod being ended, the Doctor Judged that
it was an ill conjuncture of time for him to go to Rochel, and took the way of
Lions. In that resolution he was guided by a good providence; for if he had
gone to Rochel, he should have been apprehended not far from that town after
his coming out of it. At Lions he received a Letter from Monsieur Drelincourt
Minister of Paris, which gave him notice of his danger. This warning made him
baulk the high way: yet he went to Paris, and entering the City in the night
went directly to my Lord Herbert, who bade him to fly in haste for his life,
which was in danger by the interception of his Letters to the King his Master.
That very night then without so much as going to his house, he went out of
Paris with his brother Capt. John Du Moulin to Lumigni a house of the Count de
la Suze ten leagues from the City: There two Elders of the Church of Paris came
to him from the Consistory, to desire him to remove himself out of the reach of
those that waited for his Life: Which he did, and the next night traveled
toward Sedan, a place then acknowledging the old Duke of Bovillon a Protestant
Prince for Sovereign, where he came safe, by Gods mercy, in the beginning of
the year, 1621. and was kindly received by the Duke to his house and table.

This was his parting with the Church of Paris; for although great means were
made to appease the Court, and although many years after, the Indictment
against him was taken off, and leave was given him to live in France, yet it
was with that exception, that he should not live in Paris.

Being come to that separation, I cannot but cast a parting look upon that best
part of his life, the time he lived in that great light of Paris which was one
and twenty years: A time truly honorable to him, since in it he did much to
the honor of God, whether we consider his public service in the Church, which
he edified with his frequent preaching full of evidence of spirit and power,
seconded with the prime eloquence of the time, and encouraged with the
throngest concourse, and the greatest applause; or the many combats that he
sustained for Gods Truth, which still ended in so many Victories; Or the
godliness and charity of his conversation: Or the fervent mutual love between
him and his Flock; Or the envy and invectives of the adversaries; Or the favor
of great Princes abroad; Or his great esteem in the opinion of his Sovereign,
who courted him, though they hated him.

Paris being the great resort, not only of all France, but of all Europe, his
house also was the resort of all the eminent persons of the Protestant Religion
that came to Paris: seldom was his door in the afternoon without Coaches before
it.

Being visited by Englishmen, Germans, Dutch, Danes, Polanders, etc. he held
himself especially engaged to love and serve the English Travelers, who also
bore to him a singular respect. It was from them that the learned Doctor Heylin
had that saying of his about the scruple of preaching with a Surplice; which I
must confirm, as having heard it from his mouth: That he wished that the Queen
Regent would give him leave to preach before her, though it were in a Friars
coat. Doctor Heylins Friend told him in a Fools Coat: But the difference is not
so great, but that man may take the one for the other without misprision.

Being known abroad by those that had never seen him, he received Letters out
of most parts of Europe from the greatest persons of the Protestant party: The
chief of them King James of glorious and blessed memory, his great and good
Patron, from whom he had many Letters, which his children keep carefully, as
precious monuments of his religious mind, and of his Royal favor. He also
being thus imboldened by his Majesty writ to him many Letters, which I have
seen sowed up into a Book, kept in the Kings Paper Office, where I suppose they
are still. He received also several presents from abroad, which did rather
honor, then enrich him.

I remember when he received from a Merchant of Dantzick, unknown to him, a
present of Sables for a furred Gown, and he put them to that use, saying
pleasantly, That they would have been too dear for him to buy, but that they
were not too good to keep him warm.

Being come to Sedan, he was presently desired to accept of the place of
Minister of that Church, and of the chair of Divinity, then lately le^t by
Tilenus in discontent, and by Andrew Melvin by death. He accepted of these
places, but conditionally, in case that he could not obtain his restitution to
the Church of Paris.

He found at Sedan much respect, and love from the Prince, and the Church, and
the Academy; yet his parting from Paris proved very ruinous to him, and his
Family; For having sold his wives Land in the Duchy of Bar, and laid the money
upon a piece of Land near Paris, which was extended for debts, and bought the
right of the first Creditor, the other Creditours took advantage of his
absence, and disgrace, and got the Land adjudged unto them; for which he never
got any redress.

Of these private losses he was less sensible, because the sad condition of the
Reformed Churches did totally possess his thoughts and cares. And having had
time and occasion while he was President of the Synod of Alais, and in his long
journey to it and from it, ^o know the evil posture of their affairs, he found
himself pressed in spirit to write to the Assembly of Rochel, that which his
knowledge and his zeal prompted to him.

Because that Epistle is a piece that gives much light to the History of that
time, and a wholesome lesson to all that pretend conscience and Religion for
their resistance to their Sovereign by force of Arms, I will insert it here.

Gentlemen,
I Do not write to you to pour my sorrows into your bosom, or to entertain you
with my private crosses: Upon that I need no comforter, accounting it a great
honor that in the public affliction of the Church God would have me to march
in the Front. And I would account it a great happiness, if all the storm should
light on my head, so that I were the only sufferer, and the Church of God
should enjoy peace and prosperity. A more smarting care has moved me to write
to you, and forced me to go beyond my nature, which was always averss from
meddling with public businesses, and from moving out of the sphere of my proper
calling. For seeing the general body of the Church in eminent danger, and upon
the brink of a dismal precipice, it was not possible for me to keep silence:
Nay, I cannot be silent in this urgent necessity without drawing upon me the
guilt of insensibility, and cruelty, toward the Church of God. And I am full
of hope, that while I deliver my mind to you about public businesses, my
domestic affliction will free me from jealousies in your opinion: If it be not
believed, at least I shall be excused. It becomes me not indeed to take upon me
to give counsel to an Assembly of persons chosen out of the whole Kingdom to
bear the burden of the public affairs in a time so full of difficulties. Yet I
think it is useful for you to be truly informed what the sense and what the
disposition is of our Churches, by persons that have a particular knowledge of
it.

The question being then whether you ought to separate your Assembly, to obey
his Majesty, or keep together to give order to the affairs of the Churches; I
am obliged to tell you, that the general desire of our Churches is, that it may
please God to continue our peace, in our obedience to his Majesty. And that
seeing the King resolved to make himself obeyed by the force of his arms, they
trust that you will do your best to avoid that storm, and rather yield unto
necessity then to engage them in a War, which most certainly will ruin great
part of our Churches, and will bring us into a trouble, of which we see the
beginning, but can see no end. By obeying the King you shall take away the
pretense used by those that set on his Majesty to persecute us: And if we must
be persecuted, all that fear God, desire that it may be for the profession of
the Gospel, and that our persecution may truly be the cross of Christ. In one
word, I can assure you, Gentlemen, that the greatest and best part of our
Churches wishes for your separation, if it may be with the safety of your
persons: Yea that many of the Roman Church, desiring the public peace, are
continually about us, beseeching and exhorting us, that we do not by casting
our selves headlong, involve them in the same ruin.

Hereupon we need not represent unto you, how terribly and generally our poor
flocks are frighted and dismayed, casting their eyes upon you, as persons that
may procure their rest, and by yiedling to the present necessity, blow away the
storm hanging over their heads. Many already have forsaken the Land; Many have
forsaken their Religion; whence you may judge what dissipation is like to
follow, if this exasperation go on further.

No more do I need to recommend unto you to have a tender care of the
preservation of our poor Churches, knowing, that you would choose death rather
then to draw that reproach upon you, that you have hastened the persecution of
the Church, and destroyed that which the zeal of our Fathers had planted, and
put this State in confusion.

I am not ignorant, that many reasons are alleged to persuade you to continue
your Assembly. They tell you that the King has granted it; But for that grant
of his Majesty you can show no warrant, nor any written Declaration, without
which all promises are but words lost in the air: For Kings believe they have
power to forbid that which they have permitted, and to revoke that which they
have granted, when they judge it expedient for the good of their affairs.
Neither is there any of you, after he has sent his servant, or given him leave
to go to some place, that thinks not that he has power to call him back:
Sovereign Princes especially are very unwilling to keep their promises when
they have been extorted.

Also great numbers of grievances and contraventions to to the Kings Edicts are
represented unto you, which complaints to our great grief are too true: But
besides that, we have given occasion to many of those evils our own selves; the
difficulty lies not in representing our griefs, but in finding the remedies.
Consider then whether the subsistence of your Assembly can heal all these
sores; whether your sitting can give a shelter to our Churches, provide all
things necessary for a War, where the parties are so unequal, raise forces, and
make a stock of money to pay them; whether all the good that your sitting can
produce, can countervail the dissipation of so many Churches, that lie open to
the wrath of their enemies? whether when they are fallen you can raise them
again? Whether in the evident division that is among us you are able to rallie
the scattered parts of that divided body, which if it were well united, yet
would be too weak to stand upon the defensive part.

Pardon me Gentlemen, if I tell you, that you shall not find all our
Protestants inclined alike to obey your resolutions, and that the fire being
kindled all about, you shall remain helpless beholders, of the ruin you have
provoked. Neither can it be unknown to you, that many of the best quality among
us, and best able to defend us, openly blame your actions, holding and
professing that suffering for this cause, is not suffering for the cause of
God. These making no resistance, and opening the gates of their places, or
joining their arms with the Kings, you may easily judge what loss, and what
weakening of the party that will be: How many of our Nobility will forsake you,
some out of conscience, some out of treachery, some out of weakness! Even they
who in an Assembly are most vehement in their votes, and to show themselves
zealous are altogether for violent ways, are very often they that first revolt
and betray their brethren. They bring our distressed Churches to the hottest
danger, and there leave them, going away after they have set the house on fire.

If there be once fighting, or besieging of our Towns, whatsoever may the issue
be of the Combat or the Siege, all that while it will be hard to keep the
people animated against us from falling upon our Churches, that have neither
retreat nor defense. And what order soever the Magistrates of contrary Religion
take about it, they shall never be able to compass it.

I might also represent unto you many reasons out of the state of our Churches,
both within and without the Kingdom, to show you that this stirring of yours is
altogether unseasonable, and that you set sail against wind and tide. But you
are clear-sighted enough to see it, and to consider in what posture your
neighbors are, and from whence you may look for help; Whether among you the
virtue, and the concord, and the quality of the heads is grown or diminisht.
Certainly this is not the time when the troubling of this pool can heal our
diseases. And certain it is, that if any thing can help so much weakness, it
must be the zeal of Religion, which in the time of our Fathers has upholden
us, when we had less strength and more virtue: But in this cause you shall find
that zeal languishing, because most of our people believe that this evil might
have been avoided without any breach to our Conscience. Be ye sure that there
will be always disunion among us every time that we shall stir for civil
causes, and not directly for the cause of the Gospel.

Against this it is objected that our enemies have determined our ruin; That
they undermine us by little and little; That it it better to begin now then to
stay longer. Truly that man should be void of common sense that should doubt of
their ill will. And yet when I call to mind our several losses, as that of
Lectoure, Privas, and Bearn, I find that we our selves have contributed to
them; and it is no wonder that our enemies take no care to remedy our faults,
and join with us to do us harm. But hence it follows not that we must throw the
helve after the hatchet, and set our house on fire our selves, because others
are resolved to burn it; or take in hand to remedy particular losses by means
weak to redress them, but strong and certain to ruin the general. God who has
so many times diverted the counsels taken for our ruin, has neither lost his
power, nor altered his will. We shall find him the same still, if we have the
the grace to wait for his assistance, not casting our selves headlong by our
impatience, or setting our minds obstinately upon impossibilities. Take this
for certain, that although our enemies seek our ruin, they will never
undertake it openly, without some pretense, other and better then that of
Religion, which we must not give them: For if we keep our selves in the
obedience which subjects owe to their Sovereign, you shall see that while our
enemies hope in vain that we shall make our selves guilty by some disobedience,
God will give them some other work, and afford us occasions to show to his
Majesty that we are a body useful to his State, and put him in mind of the
signal services that our Churches have done to the late King of glorious
memory. But if we are so unfortunate, that while we keep our selves to our
duty, the calumnies of our enemies prevail, at least we shall get so much, that
we shall keep all the right on our side, and make it appear that we love the
peace of the State.

Notwithstanding all this, Gentlemen, you may and ought to take order for the
safety of your persons: For whereas his Majesty and his Council have said
often, that if you separate your selves, he will let our Churches enjoy peace,
and the benefit of his Edicts, it is not reasonable that your separation be
done with the peril of your persons: And whenever you petition for your safe
dissolution, I trust it will be easy to obtain it, if you make possible
requests, and such as the misery of the time and the present necessity can
bear. And in the mean while you may advise before you part what should be done,
if notwithstanding your separation we should be oppressed. That order your
prudence may find, and it is not my part to suggest it unto you.

If by propounding these things unto you, I have exceeded the limits of
discretion, you will be pleased to impute it to my zeal for the good and
preservation of the Church. And if this advice of mine is rejected as unworthy
of your consideration, this comfort I shall have, that I have discharged my
conscience, and retiring my self unto some foreign Country, there I will end
those few days I have yet to live, lamenting the loss of the Church, and the
destruction of the Temple; for the building whereof, I have labored with much
more courage and fidelity then success. The Lord turn away his wrath from us,
direct your Assembly, and preserve your persons. I rest, etc.

From Sedan, Feb. 12. 1621.

These Letters being read in the Assembly, raised much contestation. In the end
the violent party overcoming, it was resolved that Monsieur de la Milletiere
should write to Doctor Du Moulin in the name of the Assembly, to desire him
that he would not impart the said Letters to any, amd to tell him that his
advice was not approved.

Yet his advice was so relished by some of the Assembly, that they arose and
presently left it, and never returned to it again.

One would have thought that this advice of peace and obedience to the Assembly
of Rochel, should have made the Doctors peace with the Council of State; but I
believe that it made the Kings Council more averse from granting his return to
Paris; for the violent men in the Assembly did good service to the Court by
their violence, and were fee'd by the Court to thrust their brethren into a
precipice, and give to the King the long desired occasion to take from the
Protestants the places granted to them by his Fathers Edict. The forenamed
Miltiere was one of those violent men, who afterward forsook his Party and his
Religion; and by his working and unhappy wit, he has created many sorrows unto
the French Churches.

Neither did the Jesuits work Doctor Du Moulins expulsion out of Paris for any
greater reason then because by preaching obedience upon occasions, he crossed
their long-winded design to undo the Reformed Churches of France, by suggesting
violent counsels unto them by their secret instruments. Some of which having
gotten places of Trust by their counterfeit zeal, betrayed them, and got money
for them, doing open service to those whom they had served before in secret.

At Sedan, in the year 1623. Doctor Du Moulin being a Widower, married a
virtuous Gentlewoman, that had with great constancy resisted the severity of
her Father Capt. de Gelhay, who having left the Protestant Religion, would
force her to do the same.

About that time came forth the famous Book of Cardinal Du Perron against the
most excellent King James. That Book was extolled by the Romanists with great
praises and brags; and the truth is, that it is the most learned and subtle
piece of work that ever appeared in French in defense of Popery. His Majesty
being especially interessed and provoked by that book, was pleased to recommend
the confutation of that to his old Champion Doctor Du Moulin, who undertook it
upon his Majesty's command.

That he might attend that work with more leisure and helps, his Majesty
invited him to come into England. And together being moved with compassion by
the adversities the Doctor had suffered for his sake, he offered him a refuge
in England, promising to take care of him, and to employ him in one of his
Universities.

He accepted that Royal favor. And because it was dangerous for him to travel
through France, he got a pass to go from the Spanish Netherlands to Holland.

He set out of Sedan in March 1624. and went to Bruxels and Antwerp, and so to
Holland. Whence after some days stay at the Hague with his worthy
Brother-in-law Doctor Rivet, he took shipping for England.

He was graciously received by his Majesty. And about half a year after his
coming, the Hospital of Savoy falling vacant, he would have bestowed it upon
him, and gave him his word for it. Yet his Majesty was persuaded by the Scots
that waited in his chamber, to give it to Doctor Belcanqual, and to offer to
Doctor Du Moulin a Living of inconsiderable value, representing it to his
Majesty as equivalent to the Savoy; but the Doctor would not accept of it.

He never was a good hunter of preferments; but then worse then ever: God
having visited him with a grievous sickness, by an heavy oppression in his
hypocondries, with an inflammation of black choler, which seldom let him sleep,
and kept him in perpetual agony. Yet being a man of great vigor, he went about
and walked much; yea in that sore affliction he spent much time in this great
work against Cardinal du Perron, and preached often in the French Church. The
great Physician Sir Theodore Mayerne took him into his house to cure him; but
the malignancy of that melancholy stood out against his Remedies. Sir Theodore
taking a journey into France, Mr. Philip Burlamachi received him, and
entertained him in his house half a year together, yea when his wife, and
family, and three of his Nephews, hearing of his sickness, came over to assist
him, that bountiful and magnificent Gentleman entertained them all.

My duty to such a Father having called me from Leyden to London, I had the
happiness to be his daily attendant, and to sit up with him a hundred nights,
which he passd almost all without sleep, in deep anguish, and holy discourses,
employing all the strength of his Faith, and of his pregnant rational brains,
to fight against the pain of his body, and the temptations of the darkest
melancholy with the comforts of Heaven. So that he might say after David, that
in the multitude of his thoughts which he had within him, Gods comforts
refresht his soul. If sometimes I had the happiness to suggest some thought to
him in which he found comfort, he would bestow upon me most hearty blessings,
with fervent prayers to God, of which I find the benefit to this day. Could I
remember all the divine and virtuous discourses which I heard from his mouth in
that time of my attendance, it would conduce very much to make me grow in
grace, and in all good gifts.

In the depth of his pain and anguish, he was beyond measure afflicted with the
persecutions that ruined the Churches of France, and the divisions increasing
in the Church of England. He might say with St. Paul, that he was in weariness
and painfulness, in watchings often. And that besides those things that that
came upon him, the care of all the Churches oppressed him. To that purpose he was
once saying to me, Son, considering the face of the times, I fear very much
that the deadly wound of the Beast will heal up, at least it will skin over.
Yet we have given her the blow that will serve her turn. She must die of it
soon or late. Haeret lateri lethalis arundo.

There was at London at that time the Marquess d' Effiat, extraordinary
Ambassador of France, a zealous Papist, who upon a false information of Fisher
and others Jesuits that were about him, that Doctor Du Moulin, by his long
watchings and melancholy fumes, was decayed in his intellectuals, did
maliciously invite him to his house, to engage him in a Conference, and insult
over his weakness. The good man perceived well enough the trap that was laid
for him; yet he went in the strength of the Lord, praying after David, Let not
those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel. I attended my
Father to the Ambassador, who received us with some face of kindness, and made
us dine with him. After dinner the Ambassador desired him to hear a
Scottishman, who would tell him the reasons that made him leave the Protestant
Religion to embrace the Catholic. The Scottishman then assisted by Fisher and
others of his sort, made an elaborate discourse half an hour long of the
Church, of S. Peter's Primacy, of succession of Chairs, and the like. When he
had done, the Doctor resumed all his points and allegations in the same order,
and answered them with his ordinary vigor and presence of wit. And because the
principal matter in question was about the marks of the true Church, he
maintained that the profession of the true Doctrine was the mark of the true
Church, and thence took occasion to lay open the foulness of the errors of
Popery with so much pregnancie, that the Ambassador, a choleric man, rose
from his seat in great fury, and gave many soul words to the Doctor, who upon
that went out and returned home.

The Ambassador repenting himself of his violence, sent his Coach to him the
next day, and desired his company to dinner. The work and success of that day,
was like that of the day before: For after dinner the Scottishman spoke again
of the same points; and when the Doctor in his answer had turned his Dispute
against the grossest errors of Popery incompatible with the true Church,
Fisher would have taken the Scottishmans part; but the Ambassadors passion gave
him no time to answer, but broke out worse then the day before (yet without
foul words) saying that he could hear no longer that one should revile before
him the Catholic Religion, and maintain to him that he did wilfully damn
himself, his wife, and his children. We left him to his own passion, and went
out of his house. Whatsoever the effect might be of these Conferences upon the
hearers, they showed the gracious and indeed miraculous assistance of God to
his servant: For neither he, nor we that tended him in his sickness, and saw
his perpetual torment, could expect of him the stength, patience, and readiness
requisite in such an important occurence, and before persons of great respect,
and his Adversaries.

The Ambassador was less too blame for giving him ill words, then for
entertaining him at his table. For seeing that there was a criminal process
against the Doctor in the Council of State of France, for his correspondence
with England, it was a great error in an Ambassador of France to show him any
countenance, especially in England. All that can be said for him, is, that his
zeal and hope to get credit to his party by the Doctors discredit, made him run
into that great oversight in point of State, and that greater fault in point of
charity and ordinary humanity, to seek to pick advantages out of a sick man's
weakness. But he came short of that end, and the Doctor might say to God after
this, as after all his other Conferences; By this I know that thou favourest
me, because mine enemy does not triumph over me.

The Doctor continuing sick, the King sent twice his Chaplain Doctor Young to
visit him; and to comfort him, offered him a Living, which he took not. And at
the same time that great and good King fell sick of the sickness of which he
died. That death of his Royal Patron, and the plague raging in London, soon
persuaded the Doctor to return to Sedan, hoping that God would give him
strength for that journey, and that the change of Air would mend his health. To
return the way he came, through the Spanish Dominions of Flanders and Brabant,
he could not for want of a Pass; and to go through France, it was dangerous for
him: Yet he ventured it, and taking me along with him; and giving order to the
rest of his Family to come after him a week after, he went from London secretly
to Dover, where he imbarqued himself in a French bottom full of Frenchmen of
both Religions, who had attended the Queen when her Majesty came over the first
time. Though he was in a gray suit, disguised with a periwig, he was known by
some Lawyers of Roven of contrary Religion, who knowing that he was gone out of
France upon a criminal indictment, plotted together, yet not so secretly, but
that I heard it, to give notice of him to the Governor of Deep to arrest him.

The Duke of Langueville, Governor of Normandy, was then at Deep, and lay in
the Castle; but because the Castle did not open but late, they that had plotted
our ruin, could not give notice of us, neither to the Duke, nor to the
Governor before we were gone; for being landed before Sunrising, we hasted
away to Roven.

The Duke hearing that we had taken horses for Roven, sent three Messengers to
apprehend us, or if they missed us, to give order to the first President of
Roven to secure the Doctor. The messengers overtook us half a mile from the
City, and enquired of our Inn at Roven, and rid before us to the Town, where
they might better examine whether we were the men that they looked for. We knew
them presently for such as they were. To avoid them, the Doctor left his horse,
and gave money to a Peasant to bring him to the City by a by-way, and by
another gate then that of the Road of Deep. Going on foot, in that by-way, he
could see afar off the Sergeants looking about for him, but they perceived him
not. He had left order with me to meet him at Master de l' Angle, the famous
Minister of Roven, who had married his Niece. His horse and mine I committed to
the Post of Deep, who was driving many horses before him to Roven, and I met
him at the appointed place. The next morning a Gentleman of the Reformed Church
of Roven came to give us warning that the Officers of the first President had
been seeking for the Doctor in the Inn, where we were to deliver the Hackneys
we had taken at Deep, and were examining our fellow-Travellers to know where
they had left us. Whereupon we presently shifted to that Gentleman house,
making no doubt but that Monsieur de l' Angel's house should be presently
searched, he and his wife being the only relations that the Doctor had at
Roven; yet none came thither to seek for him. In the evening a Gentlewoman came
to us and carried us in her Coach to a house of hers a League from Roven. The
next day our men, which by that time were come from Deep, brought us horses for
our journey to Sedan, where we arrived safe by the great mercy of God, who had
so the inclined the heart of the first President (who might have apprehended
us) that he winked at us, and would not see where we were; for whereas he knew
well enough where to find the Doctor at Roven, he would not send to his
Kinsmans house, but to an Inn, where he knew that he was not. And that his
kindness might not be interpreted as an oversight, he sent for Monsieur de l'
Angle four or five days after we were gone, and told him, Sir, I should have
been glad to have seen Monsieur Du Moulin when he was at your house, but that
it could not be with his safety. A year or two after the Duke of Longueville
being come to Sedan with the Count of Soissons, whose party he had taken
against the King, would see the Doctor, and told him. Sir, when you came out of
England, I did all my endeavor to apprehend you, but now I am very glad that I
mist you. Let all that love God and his servants help us to praise God for this
miraculous deliverance. Psalm. 66.8.
O bless our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard, which
holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved; Joh. 5.12.
Who disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot
perform their enterprise.

The labor of the Journey, and the intolerable he^t of the season increased
his sickness. Which to heal, the Physicians of Sedan made him drink Spaw
waters, which were brought to him from Spaw to Sedan. Whereby they wrought a
strange kind of cure upon him; for these waters brought him to a most violent
Fever, and the Fever consumed all those humors, and winds that oppressed him,
and left him in health, but it brought him so low before, that we despaired of
his life; and the Physicians proved true, who told us, that the Fever would
consume either the sickness, or the sick man.

So he returned to his former Function in the Church and University, serving
God with cheerfulness and assiduity, and blessed with great success. He lived at
Sedan three and thirty years from his return into England unto his death,
without any notable change in his condition, but one of public concernment by
the miserable change of the Duke of Bovillon.

That Duke being Prince of Sedan, the Protector of a flourishing Protestant
Church, and the refuge of many oppressed Protestants in France, was perverted
by falling in love with a beautiful Lady, a Subject born of the Spaniard, and
a Papist of the deepest Jesuitish dye; which seduced and turned him, both to
the Romish Religion, and to the Spanish party: Marrying that Lady he presently
professed the first, and a few years after embraced the second.

Before he had professed himself a Papist, he and his brother, now Marshal and
Prince of Turenne, being at Luyck, the said Monsieur de Turenne fell grievously
sick. Whereupon his Mother, the old Duchess of Bovillion, desired the Doctor
to go to him with another Gentleman, bringing a Physician and an Apothecary
along with them. The Duke, who was already revolted in his heart, received the
Doctor unkindly, and desired him to withdraw and return to Sedan, but procured
him no Pass for his safe return, exposing him with great inhumanity to eminent
danger in the enemies Country, in a time of fierce War. Whereby he afforded
him new occasions of experimenting the wonders of Gods watchful and fatherly
care for his preservation.

For when he came with his company to Givay, a place under Charlemonts Castle,
where there was a Spanish Garrison; The Soldiers hearing of their coming, and
that they had no Pass, resolved to apprehend them: They might have taken them
in the Inn, but they chose rather to take them the next morning in a Boat which
they had hired to make the rest of their journey by water. But one of the
Doctor's Company advised his fellow-Travellers to walk on foot to a Village a
mile off, to avoid a compass of twelve miles which the River makes, and there
to expect their Boat. They followed his Counsel, and thereby disappointed the
Soldiers, who coming to the Boat and missing them, plundered their Cloak-bags,
and took the Doctors man, but them they followed not, which they might have
done, and overtaken them; but having their plunder; they were less eager to
have their persons; And God preserved them, both then and the rest of the
journey, which they performed with great danger and difficulty.

Soon after this, the Duke of Bovillon declared himself a Papist, to the
incredible loss of the Protestant party. Sedan was grown by the persecutions in
France; The greatest number, and the richest sort, consisted of the posterity
of persons that had transported their Families and their estates to Sedan,
during the Wars of Religion, and that place was a refuge at hand for the
Protestants, when any trouble arose in France: Wherefore this change in the
Prince wrought a great consternation in the people of Sedan, and a great grief
in the generality of all the French Protestants; which the Duke of Bovillon
perceiving, and judging, that as they lived at Sedan upon the account of their
Religion, they might retire from it upon the same account; He called the
Church, and the University, and told them that he would lend them the same
protection as before, and innovate nothing. Only whereas he gathered the Tithes
of his Dominions, and therewith gave wages to the Ministers, Professors, and
Regents, as also stipends to the Priests, now the Priests must have the tithes
as their ancient right, and he would pay to the Ministers, Professors, and
Regents their ordinary stipends out of his own estate.

Sedan enjoyed that rest for a year or two, till the Duke won by his wife to
forsake the Protection which he enjoyed under the King of France who paid his
Garrison, agreed with the Spaniard to put himself under his protection, turn
out the French Garrison, and receive his. Which Plot being discovered by some of
Sedan, was made known to the French Court, and such order was taken that the
Dukes Design was prevented. Himself, his Lady, and all his retinue were turned
out of Sedan, and kept out of it to this day, and the place continues under
the subjection of France. What recompense he had for it, is beyond my knowledge
and the limits of this relation.

In this sad change of Religion at Sedan, the Doctor besides his sufferings
common with others had many particular trials, being especially maligned by the
Capucins and the new Clergy, with whom he had many Conferences, and was
persecuted by them with continual invectives. He suffered much also by the war,
his house in the Country being plundered, and his cattle driven away, which in
all likelihood was done upon especial recommendation.

Of the charge laid against him about his Letters to King James of blessed and
glorious memory, he heard no more when Sedan was brought under the French
Scepter; for it was but a picked quarrel to remove him from Paris.

About the year 1644. Upon a return of the sickness that had troubled him in
England, he was advised to travel into Auvergne to some waters which he went to
drink upon the place, and with good effect. He returned to Paris, where he was
received and entertained by his ancient flock with most singular expressions of
love; but he was settled in Sedan, and his restitution to Paris had been tried
many times, and found an impossible pull. At Sedan then he lived the rest of
his days, serving God in the Church, and in the University, defending the truth
of God by his Sermons, Conferences and Books, confirming Gods people in the
faith, and powerfully convincing the Adversaries.

Thus he held out in his constant course of Sermons, and Divinity-Lectures,
without abating any part of his ordinary duties, till by extremity of old age
his voice being grown too low for a great Congregation, he desired to be
excused of preaching upon the Lords day, but instead of it he preached every
Tuesday: And because his weakness suffered him not to go much abroad, he
obtained leave of the Academical Counsel to make his Divinity Lectures in his
own house in a spacious Parlour, where he had as great audience as the
University could afford.

Three years and a half before his death, as he was taking the air abroad, he
got a great hurt by a fall from his horse; since which time he enjoyed no
health, yet he did not give over the exercise of his charge either in the
Church, or in the School, and very seldom mist preaching once a week and
reading two Divinity-Lectures. And having been all his life time much given to
private devotion, in that last sickly time he was so extraordinarily taken up
with holy private exercises, that he did almost nothing else but pray and
meditate. He kept to the last hour that neatness of language, wherein he was so
eminent, and the readiness of his memory, which afforded him matter of holy
Discourses, upon any subject offered to him in question.

Upon Tuesday Feb. 26. 1658. [stilo novo] he awaked in the morning, so weak and
oppressed in his breast that he thought himself not able to preach that day; yet
taking heart, he was led and helped up to the Church; being got into the pulpit
with much difficulty, he fainted: And some wine being brought to him he would
not taste it, choosing rather to expect Gods help, then to do any thing which
might seem to border upon indecency. And he was not disappointed of his
expectation; for after he had read his Text, which was, Psalm. 16 9. My flesh
shall rest in hope, he spoke with more vigor then he had done of a long time
before, and applied the doctrine to himself, giving an account of his Faith and
hope to his Hearers, taking his leave of them in a manner, and preaching his
own Funeral Sermon, as if he had had a Prophetical knowledge that he spoke the
last time to his people in the Church.

Upon Thursday the last day of February he found his oppression so much
increased in the morning that there was no small fear of a sudden death. Being
then visited by his Colleagues, who prayed by him, he desired them to remember
him that day (which was a Sermon day) in the prayers of the Church. After the
Sermon a great company flocked to him to bid him farewell, and to receive his
blessing: He looked upon them all, and spoke to them with much facility and
presence of mind: To such as he knew to be of an exemplary life he gave
praises and encouragements to virtue and piety. Those in whose life he knew
there was matter of blame, he would not in downright terms rebuke before that
great company; but going about in a discreet way he would (addressing his
speech to them) commend those virtues that were opposite to their vices, and
would say to them that were somewhat given to tricks, that of all crafts the
master-craft was to be an honest man.

Seeing a blind woman in the company he told her; You want the eyes of the
body, but you have the eye of Faith, penetrating as far as heaven: You see not
the light of the Sun, but God will let you see the brightness of his face.

Then turning his eyes upon a Gentleman who was a Roman Catholic, he said,
This is a worthy Gentleman: And speaking to him he said, Sir, I suffer great
pains, but God will have mercy upon me: I have many ways offended him, yet my
conscience bears me witness, that I never preached or writ any thing, but what I
believed to be consonant unto the word of God.

Next he applied himself to his Colleagues, and said, Farewell, my Masters, I
have that satisfaction in my mind, that I leave this Church in the hands of
persons whom God has endowed with great gifts, and above all with an exemplary
piety: I make no doubt but that you will carefully look to the conduct of the
flock committed unto you.

One of them having answered, The Lord grant Sir, that we may imitate you, for
you are that good servant, who not only have not buried your talent, but have
very much improved it: You have done good service in your time, and your
labors will live, and do good when you are gone.

He replied, Ah Sir, you little know how much you grieve me by speaking so; for
I have not done all the good that I should have done; and that little benefit
which the Church has reaped by my labor is not from me, but from the grace of
God in me, as it is usual with him to do a good effect by a weak instrument. I
am conscious to my self that I have neglected my duty in many things, and that
I have offended my God; but I have loved his holy truth, and I hope in his
mercy. He is my Father and my God, and Jesus Christ is my Savior; Whosoever
believes on him shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

His Friends told him that he did himself harm by speaking so much. It is true
(says he) but I will die glorifying God.

He spent the four or five first days of his sickness in expressions of deep
humiliation: his prayers were vehement and fervent, and full of penitent
sorrow: He acknowledged himself the greatest of sinners, and the most unworthy
of the graces which he had received of God: He abhorred his own ungratefulness,
aggravating his faults, and despising all that others commended in him. Lord
(said he) I have done nothing but deserves punishment: Thou have heaped
blessings upon me, Thou have honored me with a holy Calling: But I have not
labored according to the great worth of it: I have mingled mine own glory with
thine; I have often neglected thy service to seek my particular interest. O how
much self love, how many perverse affections have opposed the Kingdom of thy
Son within me! How many times have I grieved thy good Spirit by a thousand idle
thoughts, and carnal affections! But though it had been but justice in thee to
have crushed me in thy wrath, yet thou have always showed thy self a merciful
and gracious Father unto me: In very faithfulness thou have afflicted me:
Indeed thou have sometimes beaten me with thy most terrible rods; Thou have hid
thy face from me for a moment, but thou have remembered me in thy great
compassions.

His devout expressions suffered but little intermission, and his holy
meditations none at all. For, if sometimes he was kept silent by a drousie fit,
one might see by the lifting up of his eyes and hands that his heart was with
God: And every time that he resumed his discourse, it was evident that his
speech was but the attendance of a longer meditation.

As when he began thus, Lord thou will do it, Thou art faithful in thy
promises; I am thy creature; Thou have led me and taught me from my youth. O
forsake me not in this last period of my life: Have mercy upon me, my God, my
my Father, have mercy upon me: O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and
do: Defer not for thine own sake, O my God; even for thy Sons sake, who has
loved me, and given himself for me.

That meditation of Gods mercy he did much stretch himself upon, saying, The
mercy of God is infinite as himself; no sin so great but may be remitted. How
great was Aarons sin that made the golden Calf? How grievous that of David in
the business of Vriah? And that of Solomon whom God so highly honored, whose
heart was seduced by the love of strange women to the abominable worship of
false gods? And yet God said of him, that if he brake Gods Statutes, and kept
not his commandments, he would visit his transgression with the rod, and his
iniquity with stripes, but nevertheless he would not utterly take his loving
kindness from him. Then making application to himself, he cried, Thou will
pardon me, even me also, O my God; Thou will deliver me from every evil work,
and save me unto thy heavenly Kingdom: Let me dye the death of the righteous:
Let me see thy face in righteousness: Let me taste goods of which thou have
given me many foretasts. O how happy a thing it is to live in Gods fear, and to
die in his peace!

His sickness being violent, and his pains sharp, one of the Ministers seeing
how he suffered, bade him to be of good cheer, because the time of his
deliverance drew nigh. How welcome you are to me (said the holy Patient) with
that good news! Welcome kind Death! O how happy shall I be to see my God, to
whom my heart has been of a long time aspiring! He will be merciful to me.
Pray to him that he perfect his work in me. Then feeling his pulse, It is
intermittent (said he) and to another, it would presage a sudden death; but my
soul cleaves so fast to this wretched body, that it shall have much ado to
come out of it.

Sometimes the violence of his pains extorted some complaints from him. 'O Lord
(said he) lay not too heavy a hand upon thy poor servant. Thou have
sufficiently afflicted me to make me sensible of my sin. Then correcting
himself he added; Nay, Lord, I am far from murmuring against thee; I have kept
my self from that in my long trials. Why? I have deserved infinitely more then
I suffer. Bruise this dust and ashes, my body, and save my precious soul: As
miserable as I am, I would not exchange my condition with that of a King, while
I hope in the grace of my God.

He would be entertained with good discourses, and delighted much that his
friends should help him with those Texts of Scripture which were the fittest to
strengthen his faith, and raise his hope: And when they began a Text, he would
end it, and added something to it, or did illustrate it with some
interpretation. As when one told him the words of Jacob, I have waited for thy
salvation, O God; he said, Many of our Doctors by that salvation understand the
temporal deliverances which God did promise his people; but I will apply it to
my self in the same sense as you take it.

When the words of the hymn of Zacharias were used to him of the tender mercy
of our Lord, whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us; he added
presently, Yea it is that Sun of righteousness with healing in his wings.
Likewise when he heard that Text of the 130. Psalm. I wait for the Lord, my
soul does wait, and in his word do I hope, he said, That word is the promise of
the Gospel, that whosoever believes in Jesus Christ has everlasting life.
That is the word which my soul does wait for.

He had very often the 51 Psalm in his mouth, and insisted especially upon this
verse, The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart
O God, thou will not despise. And then he would say, That sacrifice, O my God,
I offer unto thee; Thou know my heart, and how it is bruised and wounded
with sorrow that I have offended thee. Forgive me, my God, graciously forgive
me all my sins; deal with me as thoa did with the poor Publican, as with the
humble Canaanitish woman, as with the converted Thief. O let me be this day
with thee in Paradise. Crucify the old man within me; kill that man of sin
which is too quick and too strong, and raise me unto newness of life, that I
may behold thy face, and be with my Savior Jesus Christ.

He had a particular love for the Holy Tongue. Seeing a Student that was
learned in the same, he desired him to read before him some Psalms in Hebrew.
Then he began to reckon how many names were given to God in the Old Testament,
making learned considerations upon each. Thus passing from one good discourse
to another, he gave occasion to the Student to ask him whether he thought that
Hebrew was the Language used in the Kingdom of Heaven? That is not revealed
(said the Doctor) neither do I think that the language of Heaven is known here
on Earth. But I think that we shall learn it in a moment when God shall be all
in all. And that is that tongue of Angels which St. Paul mentions. This is as
other things which God has prepared for those that love him; things which eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, and which are not come into a man's heart.

The next Lords day-morning, being visited by the Minister that was to preach
that morning, he desired him that for his sake the Congregation should sing the
one and fiftieth Psalm, which he would often repeat with a profound
humiliation. He had also the 130th. in his mouth very often, and the two and
thirtieth. Once having said the first and second verses of verses of that
Psalm, Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile. He added, Thou know, Lord, that in sincerity, and
without guile, I humble my self before thy face. I am a miserable sinner, and
durst not lift up mine eyes toward thee, did I not trust in thy Commandment
and Promise. Such as labor under the sense of their miseries, are those whom
thou call, saying, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and
I will ease you. O then let me come unto thee! Draw me Lord, that I may run
after thee. I am tired, I am weary to be absent from my God; My soul thirsts
for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear before God? Alas! I
am unworthy of it, for I am conceived in sin. My whole life has been a
continued transgression; yet far be it from me to doubt of his power and
faithfulness. Where sin abounds, his grace abounds much more. It is not for
the righteous, but for repenting sinners that he has given his Son, that
whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. Lord
I believe, help thou my unbelief; increase and strengthen my faith. It is now
weak and small; but it is true and unfeigned, and stays upon Jesus Christ
only. There is no salvation in any other: He is the way, the truth, and the
life: None can come to the Father but by him. Away with all other
intercessions. Away with all merits of works; all our righteousnesses are but
pollutions. Ah my God! I have no righteousness but thine; for I am conceived in
sin. I never did any work so good, but it needs pardon. Mercy Lord, Mercy!
Pardon me my sins; pardon me my righteousnesses. Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Purge me with hyssop; but let it be dipped
in the blood of the Lamb without blemish and without spot, which takes away
the sins of the world. Thou know Lord, that I have loved thy holy truth, and
that I have believed thy promises. They are the joy of my heart: They are the
comforts which have kept up my soul from being cast down with sorrow. O God,
perfect thy work within me. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a
right spirit within me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me
with thy free Spirit.

When by too long bending of his spirit and voice he found himself spent, and
constrained to intermit these elevations, he would say, or cause to be read
before him some Psalms, and chose them himself, leaving out those verses which
were not for his present use. As when he said the sixth Psalm, Return, O Lord,
deliver my soul; O save me for thy mercies sake. Then came to the ninth verse:
The Lord has heard my supplication, the Lord will receive my prayer. And then
said, All the rest of the Psalm is not for me: For death is not my fear, but my
joy and deliverance from a languishing life; And I have no enemies.

He that read Psalms to him, would also skip over that which was not for the
Doctors use. And if sometimes he did forget some Text fit for his turn, he
would presently take notice of it; As when the 31. Psalm was read to him, he
said to the Reader, You have omitted the principal and most convenient Text for
me, Into thy hand I commit my spirit. Thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth. And you have omitted something about the 11. verse. I left it out
purposely (said the Reader) because you are not a reproach among your
neighbors, nor a fear to your acquaintance; neither do they that see you, flee
from you. You see that all your sheep are flocking about you: They bless you,
and crave your blessing. I am not sorry (said the Doctor) that my Ministry
leaves a good favor after me. I beseech God with all my heart, that he send
faithful Laborers into his Harvest, which may do that holy work better then I.
O Lord, I have not been diligent as I should have been; but I have obtained
grace to be faithful: For with all the affection of my heart I have studied to
speak, and to defend the truth; and I have been grieved with the affliction of
the Church. O Lord, Purify her from all scandal. Let her be blessed, and let
not the adversaries of thy truth triumph over her for ever.

So humble he was, and such a contemner of himself, that he could not abide
those that expressed before his face the great value which they set upon him, or
said any thing to his commendation: And when they came out with some praises,
he rejected them with a kind of indignation; Away (said he) with that
flatttery; Pray to God that he have mercy upon me.

His sickness was an inflammation of the Lungs, with a burning Fever, which
redoubled every day at the same hour. Once coming out of a strong fit which had
handled him very sore, he said. My God, how weary, how tired am I! When shall I
rest in thy bosom? When shall I be filled with the true goods? When shall I
drink in the River of thy pleasures? I am unworthy of it, O my God! But thou
art glorified by doing good to the unworthy. It is not for them that are whole,
but for them that are sick, that thy Son the great Physician was sent. Whosoever
believes in him, is passed from death to life.

He was compassed about with his Family and his chief friends. Every one
comforted him according to his talent. Being asked by one of them whether he
did Perfectly hope in the grace of God which was presented to him? I hope (said
he) but not perfectly; yet as much as I am able. I suffer now the pains of
death; But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, for he shall
receive me.

When some comfortable place of Scripture was brought to him, whereby he found
himself strengthened, he strived to rise to embrace him that spoke it; and
being too weak to do it, he would take his hand and kiss it, giving him some
blessing, and saying, It was the Spirit of God that spoke by your mouth. The
Lord bless you, and increase his graces in you.

Another time, after an exhortation which had affected him very much, he said,
These are excellent words; The Lord by his grace print them in my heart.

This Text, Ephesians. 1.3. was alleged unto him; Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places in Christ; He added the following verse; According as he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the World.

Sometimes he was in such a rapture, hearing them that spoke to him of the
excellency of that glory which he was going to possess, that he opened his
mouth and his eyes in an exstatical countenance, pronouncing but few words with
great intervals between; as, O what is it to see Geds face in rigteousness! O
when shall I be satisfied with his likeness!

Many times he would say these words of Psalm. 36. How excellent is thy loving
kindness, O God! Therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow
of thy wings. They shall be abunantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house,
and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. And these again:
For with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see light. And
out of the 67. Psalm. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to
approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts. We shall be satisfied with
the goodness of thy house even of thy holy Temple.

Very often he would repeat the 27. the 63. and the 71. Psalm. In the last
staying especially upon these words, O God, thou have taught me from my youth,
and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works: Now also when I am old and
gray headed, O God, forsake me not.

No day passed but he prayed for his children, both present and absent, saying,
The Lord bless them, and give them his peace, his love, and his fear.

Every hour his Family looked that he should expire; but he examining his pulse,
would say, You shall see me very sick, but I shall not so soon die.

The four first days of his sickness he spoke both day and night with little
intermission: So that it is impossible exactly to follow the fluency of his
discourse, and the fervency of his expressions, especially in his prayers. So
much we relate here as his diligent hearers can remember; for all this was
spoken before many and worthy witnesses that resorted to him to hear him, and
to learn to die. But the six last days of his sickness, he was for the most
part of the time in a deep slumber, against which he did earnestly strive.
Prick me (said he) Now I should watch. It is no time new to sleep, but to die.
Watch and and pray (said my Savior) that you enter not into temptation. O
great God, abandon me not to mine infirmities; but so preserve and keep up my
spirit, that I may glorify thee even when I am dying.

And though after such expressions he fell presently into his slumber, one
might see by his gestures, and by the words which he spoke now and then, that
it might have been said of him, as the Spouse said of her self, He was asleep,
but his heart waked. He opened his eyes; He lift up his hands; He said often,
Lord be merciful to me; Be gracious to me. Even when he seemed to be deep
asleep, he would come out with five or six words, which showed what his mind
was set upon. Death (said he) is swallowed up in victory. And a good space
after, It is the gift of God -- It is my hope -- It is my comfort. Sometime the
same thing came often to his mind and mouth. For a whole day he would say every
time that he awaked, The Word was made flesh.

When he was too long without speaking, his friends were careful to awake him,
to know whether he had sense and knowledge still. Being awaked, he was asked
whether he did lift up his soul unto God? He answered, Yes, incessantly. He was
asked again whether he would be glad to go to God? O (said he) when shall I see
him, that good God?

He was not much troubled with his slumber in the morning from seven to nine,
because then his Fever was less, which used to redouble about nine. In that
interval he would speak with facility. That interval was husbanded to comfort
him, and to pray by him. He would then hearken to prayers with great attention,
and to all the good things that were said to him. And it is observable, that in
this last sickness he was less deaf then he had been ten years before.

Many times he would feel his pulse, and then said, O what a grief is this, I
cannot die! Good God have mercy upon me. Set my soul free. I am weary of being
absent from my God. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ. O my God, come
fetch me. Shorten the days of my combat. Let me die, I beseech thee. Into thy
hands I commend my spirit; for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.

His chamber was full of people day and night. Once opening his eyes after a
slumber, he said, Here is a great company. One answered him, Sir, they are your
sheep, that desire you to call for Gods blessing upon them; The Lord bless them
(said he) and give them his fear, and the promised salvation.

The two last days of his sickness added to his burning Fever, and deadly
slumber, contractions of sinews and convulsions. Every hour was thought to be
his last. None looked to hear him speak any more. All his friends thought that
his deep sleep would end in that of death; But about midnight he opened his
eyes, and said to one of them that stood by, I shall soon be eased. I am going
to my Father and my God. He has heard me indeed. And soon after, I go to him
with confidence; for he has arrayed me with his robe. Then being raised into
an unexpressible rapture, he said, I see him. And with an exclamation, O how
beautiful he is! Being thus exalted in spirit far above the world, although he
was always tender-affected toward his Family, he said to them that were there
present, putting them far with his hand, I renounce all earthly affections. I
will no more love any thing in the world but thee, O God, who do alone
possess me. After these words he continued a good while in that holy rapture,
causing more edification in all the standers by with his countenance without
words, then with all the words which he had spoken before. His eyes were clear
and sparkling; his mouth panting after the living God. His arms stretched up to
heaven, and his body striving wonderfully to rise as it were to meet and to
embrace that beautiful object of love and contemplation. All that were present
wished that God would receive him in that happy instant; But his hour was not
yet come.

All the next day, which was Saturday the ninth of March, he struggled with the
agony of death, being tormented with frequent convulsions, and still fighting
the good fight by faith, and humility, and patience. Toward the evening,
tokens of his approaching death made his assistants to double their endeavors
to comfort him. He understood all that was said to him, and showed holy
elevations in his prayer; he gave thanks to those that prayed, saying, The Lord
hear you, and the Lord bless you.

When he heard the glory at hand extolled in some emphatical terms of
Scripture, he returned into his former raptures: And once more he pronounced
these words of Psalm. 17. I shall be satisfied with thy likeness when I awake.
And twice or thrice, Come Lord Jesu, come; Come Lord Jesu, come. And for the
last time that Text which he loved so much, He that believes in Jesus Christ,
shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Then a little after, Lord Jesu,
receive my spirit.

He that comforted him said to him, Sir, you shall see your Redeemer with your
eyes. To which he answered with an effort, laying his hand over his heart, I
believe it.

That was the last intelligible word which he pronounced, though he made yet
great efforts to make himself understood, and was a quarter of an hour speaking
with a fervent affection: But the phlegm that filled his throat and palate,
suffered not the assistants to understand any of his words.

After this he was half an hour without speaking, yet without losing sense and
knowledge. His friends made the last prayer, during which he did perpetually
lift up his eyes and hands to heaven.

And some moments after he quietly gave up the last breath, dying with peace
and joy visible on his face. It was half an hour after midnight the tenth of
March 1658. [stylo novo] in the fourscore and tenth year of his age.

Thus died the good Servant of God, the faithful Pastor of his Church, The
valiant Champion of his Truth, the zealous Promoter of his glory, the great
Master of clear Wit, exquisite Learning, and admired Eloquence, the Pillar of
the Universitie, and the Father of the poor. Such men as he live after their
death: And of him we may say, not only he was, but he is a burning and a
shining Lamp, for to the worlds end the Church of God shall rejoice in his
light.

We have set a Marble Stone upon his Grave, with this Inscription.
Qui sub isto Marmore quiescit,

HOC SAT VIATOR, CAETERA NOSTI, QVISQVIS ES

Obiit Sedani AD VI. NON. MART. MDCLVIII.

So much was enough for him who has erected a lasting Monument to himself. But
I cannot take leave of my precious Father in so few words. Not then to advance
his glory, but to satisfy my love, I must attend his going to Heaven with
these filial breathings.

OPTIMO PARENTI sic Parentabat moerens FILIVS.
QUalis quadrijugis raptum super aethera flammis
Heliam, famulus passis ad sydera palmis
Suspiciebat hians, and demirantia fletu
Ora rigans, divo pascebat lumina visu:
Talis te, Genitor, vastum per inane volante,
Invectum super astra triumphantemque quadriga
Prosequor aspectu sphaeras penetrante polorum,
Laetitiae and luctus medius; oculosque sub axem
Defigens, lachrymis utrinque fluentibus udos.
O Pater, O nostrae currus turmaeque Sionis,
Cujus fida comes lateri Victoria sedit;
O si part sui quadam sacer ille tuusque
Spiritus haereseon victor certissimus, in nos
Defluat, attonitos te discedente, gementesque,
Et tibi delapsam vix dignos tollere vestem!
Tu certe hinc abiens tua nobis arma resignas
Grandia, Romuleas debellatura cohortes.
Haec haret tibi propria laus, antiqua Sionis
Supplevisse novis armamentaria telis.
Sed vires, quique incutiant haec tela lacerti
Heu desunt; moerent gladii rubigine turpes,
Lugent lenti arcus viduam duce conclamato
Militiam, magnamque manum magna arma reposcunt.
Hic meminisse juvat qualis quantusque videri
In Latii turmas coelestia strinxerit arma;
Agmina tota ruens, unus satis omnia contra
Tela Latinorum; quo turbine fulmina Verbi
Torserit, and late Monachorum armenta nefandorum
Impiger incussa Very prostraverit hasta,
Pulveream temere pedibus spargentia nubem,
Horrida mugitu, curtoque minacia cornu.
Quid quod perpetuus ineuntem praelia terror,
Bellorumque regens sortem tuba praevia Famae,
Anteibant; ictum quae lumine nominis hostem
Ei jam seminecem ceu fulgure praestringebant!
Consimiles animos prae se toto ore ferebat
Jovae bella gerens immani robore Samson,
Mirifica instructus mala, qua solus, inermi
Proximus, armatae sternebat millia turbae,
Humana major specie, flamm^sque micantes
Intorquens oculos, sacrum testantibus aestum
Aetheriae mentis, and foetum numine pectus.
Absit enim, Deus alme, tuae miracula dextrae
Ut cuiquam illustri quantumlibet instrumento
Attribuam: quisquamne tuo nisi robore fortis,
Tarpeiae sacra lustra Lupae, rictusque cruentos,
Et late dominam non formidasset Erynnim,
Lethatique ferum fodisset vulnere pectus?
Illa sub ima gerens fixum praecordia telum,
Nec satis ad morsus ex labris vulneris exstans,
Dentibus incassum viro spumantibus ardens
Appetit, and morsu nitens educere, figit
Altius; exacuunt iram dolor, ira dolorem.
Mox demente fuga and terrifico ululatu
Exagitat, augetque suum lymphata furorem.
Tum repetit morsu pungentem insana sagittam,
Si queat incussum lateri depellere lethum:
Hui frustra; licet usque furat, and ovilia vastet
Vindictae indulgens, pastoris saucia dextra;
Ilicet intus habet quo post conamina mill,
Mill strophas patrio tandem reddatur Averno.
Interea puris celsum caput inserit astris
Longum expectatos carpens MOLINAEUS honores,
Luce Dei fulgens, and Christi sanguinis ostro
Purpuream indutus trabeam; laetusque corona
Justitiae, camitem sanctis Heroibus addit,
Queis datur aeternas aeternum implere curules.
Militiam antiquam nondum tamen intermittit
Magna pace fruens: dum Mundus and ista supersunt
Scripta Quirinali fatalia tela Tyra^no,
Militat in terris, quamvis super astra triumphet.
EPIGRAMMA Subjiciendum nostri Authoris imagini aeri incisae.
QVi modo sydeream miranti lampada Mundo
Praebuit, incertum doctior an melior,
Occidit heu! nostri Sol aureus occidit aevi;
Jamque latens metam purpurat Occiduam.
Cernis ut illustrem texant sibi posthuma limbum
Lumina, and elapsi splendeat ignis honos?
Ceu rutilis Titan sua tecta coloribus ornat,
Hesperio faciem conditus Oceano.
Sed modo digressi vanescunt Solis honores;
Perpetuum nostri crescit in orb decus.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES By the grace of God King of Great
Britain and Ireland, etc. Defender of the Faith.
SIR,
HAving undertaken this work by the command of your Royal Father of glorious
memory, I thought my self bound in duty to dedicate it to no other then his
Son, the true heir both of his Crown and virtue. That great Monarch having
honored my pen so much in his life time, as to employ it for his defense, I
should be unthankful to his memory if I forsook his Cause after his death;
seeing especially his Cause to be that of God, and the heavenly truth assaulted
in his person: Seeing also that the Cardinal against whom I write, who has
found out many new shifts, and laid fresh colors over the idol, is the great
Teacher of those Seminaries whose restless labor is to subvert the consciences
of your Subjects. By assisting them in that danger, I thought I should do an
acceptable service to your Majesty, who being filled with the true knowledge of
God, burns also with the Zeal of his house. For a King whom God has endowed
with his knowledge and fear, must be firmly persuaded that God has raised him
to an eminent place, that he may discover afar off the plots and workings of
that grand enemy of our salvation, who has a particular malice against Kings
that are no servants to his Empire. As Ravens will build their nests on the
tops of high trees, Satan likewise endeavors to nestle himself in the top of
Empires, and in the houses of great Kings, and there to hatch his brood, which
are errors and vices, that they may be conspicuous and borrow authority from
the place they stand in. Whence if he be thrown down and defeated of his hopes,
no doubt but he hates such a King more then any man on earth, and will spare no
strength and no devices to disturb his rest and shake his constancy. This came
forth, An. 1626.
In this short time that your Majesty has been sitting upon the throne, you
have found already that the frame of great Kingdoms herein differs from that of
the great building of Nature, that in the supreme part of the Universe there is
a perpetual rest and tranquillity, but the lowest part is the region of trouble
and confusion: whereas Kingdoms and Empires are like trees, whose top is the
most shaken. And it is without question that many Kings would have quitted
their place, if as there are stairs to get up to an Empire, there were some to
come down from it. If this be true in all Kingdoms, much more in those where
the Ruler has subjected his Scepter to the Cross of Christ, and by an holy
magnanimity has set himself to wage war with the Devil. Wherein, Sir, we
acknowledge the work of God, admiring his providence and exalting his goodness,
that while he called your Majesty to these trials, he endowed you also with
strength to overcome them: Having filled you with the Spirit of his fear, and
set you forth in the eyes of the world as a rare example of virtue and holiness
in your conversation, of prudence above your age, and of meekness below your
greatness. In all which your praise is the greater, because you apply your self
to do the will of God, while your dignity gives you more power then to the rest
of men to do your own. This fills us with hope that God will make use of your
Majesty to do great things, and that the ruins of the Church, happened in the
time of the King your Father, will be repaired under your happy reign. We know
Sir, how sensible you are of the wound of the Church. We know that your Majesty
has the lively zeal of Gods glory; As indeed of all the men of the world none
has more reason for it, since of all men in the world you are the most
evidently favored of God. For has God poured his blessings upon any Country
of the world so bountifully as upon your England? A Country which in a
profound peace of many years, in a great plenty, and in a safe posture from all
fears round about, enjoyes the saving light of the Gospel, whilst a black
smoke from the bottomless pit over-spreads well nigh the whole face of the
earth. Certainly for one to reign where Christ reigns, and to have the Church
of God under the shadow of his Empire, it is twice reigning. A Monarch that
employeth his power to establish the Kingdom of God, is a Ruler of men, not
only as they are men, but as they are Gods children. One flower of such a
Crown, is a thousand times better then the three Crowns of the Prelate of Rome.
For which heavenly favors, it is not only convenient but necessary for your
Majesty to raise your heart with a holy glory, whereby God may be glorified. He
will pour down with a liberal hand his graces from above upon your Royal Head,
whence they may flow about upon your whole Kingdom: He will direct your
counsels: He will prosper your arms: He will make you the love of your
Subjects, and the terror of your enemies, and will prolong your days in his
blessing; employing your authority, that in your Kingdoms his pure service be
maintained; and that the Pastors of the Church by their residence with their
flocks, their vigilance in their work, and their simplicity and modesty in
their habit, may edify Gods Church. Our part will be, after the example of
Moses, to help with the lifting up of our hands the sword of Joshua. And the
Lord will take compassion of his people, hearing the prayers for your Majesty's
prosperity and preservation, which are poured by him who is and must be all his
days,

Sir, Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient servant P. Du Moulin.

Errata.
IN the Translators Preface, Page 4. line 43. for lived read live; p. 5. l. 9.
dele not, ib. l. 17. for Duke de la Foize, r. de la Force; ib. l. 33. for
Sholars r. Scholars; p. 9. l. 30. add after England, The writings of. p. 11. l.
9. for ready r. already.

In the Authors life, Page 2. line 41. for cocnvres, read cocuvres; p. 15. l.
13. for Fernaques r. Fervaques. In the Epigram at the end of the Authors life,
the last l^ne but one, for Sed modo digressi vanescunt Solis honores; read Sed
modo digresso vanescunt Sole colores.

Errata in the Book, Page 5. line 23. for soil read style; p. 7. l. 20. for
Hence r. Here; p. 22. l. penult. add be in the end of the line; p. 24. l. 18.
for be r. is; p. 29. l. 10. r. to the Croisada; l. 43. r. every five and
twen^ieth; p. 32. l. 5. r. In the Acts; p. 35. l. 10. r. may not perceive; p.
51. l. 16. r ignorant; p. 62. l. 30. r. has been instructed; p. 65. l. 38. r.
give to your commandl; p. 79. l. 45. r. by our adversaries; p. 86. in the
margent, l. 42, and 43. for commiseratio r. contesseratio; p. 127. l. 23. r.
famous pride; p. 130. l. 37. and 38. r. Mandy Thursday; p. 161. l. 29. r. not
pardonable; p. 224. l. 9. r. I will give thee; p. 246. l. 49. r. It was never;
p. 251. l. 42. for Sabellius r. Dionysius; p. 254. l. 17. r. unto him; p. 311.
l. 4. cap. 15. r. not with; p. 314. l. 25. r. Novarre in Lombardy; p. 329. l.
43. r. provisionally; p. 377. l. 42. and 43. put out these words, before they
hold Baptism necessary to salvation; p. 464. l. 23. r. in their debt; p. 484.
l. 39. r. he said, himself; p. 542. chapter 6. l. 7. r. who lent: p. 561. l. 27. r.
that they have not the souls; p. 563. l. 6. r. acquiesce to their judgment: p.
595. l. 40. r because the fault.

THE PREFACE. Occasion of Cardinal du Perron's Book. Answer to the two
Prefaces, which he premiseth before his Book. Judgment of the Book, Wit, and
Capacity of the said Cardinal.
THE late King James of glorious memory, Occasion of Monsieur du Perron his
Book.
moved with the zeal of Gods house, had by an example beyond all examples,
consecrated his Pen to the defense of Gods Cause. In which good warfare he was
free from the niceness of Alexander the Great, who disdained to enter the Lists
of the Olympic race, unless he had Kings for his Antagonists. This great King
was not ashamed to descend from the height of his dignities to run this race,
holding it not a lessening of his greatness, to take upon him a Labor by which
God is honored: Whereby he has stirred against himself a multitude of
Writers, like a cloud of humble Bees, that either buz without stinging, or
break their sting when they make bold to use it. Cardinal du Perron would have
his part in that glory of measuring his Pen with the Royal, to raise his
reputation by the greatness of his adversary: But the honor of the Combat
remained on his Majesty's side. That Prelate in the Assembly of the States held
at Paris made a long Oration to assert the Popes power over the temporal of
Kings, whom he affirmed to be deposable by the Bishop of Rome; saying, that the
Apostles command, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, was but provisional, and for
a time. And among his assertions, some were offensive to the person of His
Majesty of Great Britain, and prejudicial to his State. Of which Oration he
sent a Copy to the King, as if he had presented him with a nettle to sting him.

Hereupon his Majesty undertook the refutation of that Oration, by a Book, in
which the Cardinals reasons are overthrown, his allegations convinced of
falsehood, and the independency of the Crowns of Kings is maintained with great
solidity.

That Royal Book being short and strong, and concerning the Cardinals credit
very near, the world did look for a short answer from him. But he chose rather
to swallow the affront quietly, and condemned himself to a perpetual silence;
seeking other occasions to show his sufficiency to the King, to whom he writ by
the mediation of M. Casaubon, that he admired the virtues and rare conditions
of his Majesty; and that to express the Character of a perfectly accomplished
Prince, he wanted nothing but the title and name of Catholic.

This Prince not used to be rocked with offensive praises, thought himself
obliged to show to the Cardinal, that the title of Catholic, as well as that
of King, belonged to him by right: And with his Royal Pen writ a Treatise,
wherein to appropriate that title unto him, he gives a touch to the most part
of our Controversies, saying among other things, that he believes all the
doctrines necessary to salvation, which have been universally received in the
Primitive Church, of the five first Ages after Christ. That this Book might
have a larger course, his Majesty would have it in Latin, making use for it of
the Learned pen of Mr. Casaubon.

The Cardinal having received that Book, thought it a fair occasion to publish
several pieces which he had in his Study, supplying what was wanting to them to
answer the Kings Book; which being Latin, and spread among Foreign Nations,
reason and the nature of the Work required that Monsieur du Perron should have
answered in Latin. Wherein finding himself short, not for want of learning, but
of exercise, he contented himself to answer in French. Many years he has spent
in licking that Bear; for the great desire he had to satisfy others, kept him
from satisfying himself. I living then in Paris, was told by those that often
visited the Cardinal, and by those that resorted to his Printer Antony Steven,
that the Author had many times torn his own work, like another Saturnus that
devoured his own children; That Book was like Penelope's web, which she did
only to undo it, so that it was always to begin anew; and so he would have
continued still, entertaining the people with the expectation of that Book, if
he had lived longer: For that he might not be obliged to an answer, he would
not suffer the Book to see the light, till himself could see it no more. Thus
that Book is a child that owes his life to the death of his Father. In the
end, being on his death bed, he delivered into the hands of his friends and
heirs his whole Manuscript to make it public after his death.

Answer to the first Preface.
In the beginning of the Book he put two Prefaces, whereof the one is an Epistle
to Mr. Casaubon. The first perfection of it is, that there is almost no mention
in it of the Word of God: It treats altogether of the word Catholic. A word
which now adays is given as the principal mark of the true Church: They will
have that to be the true Church which is called Catholic, that is universal:
And yet Heretical Churches have always assumed that title. And the Greek
Church, an enemy to the Roman, and more ancient then it, yet at this time takes
that title. It is a great abuse to make names the marks of things. The marks of
a good horse, or of a virtuous man, are not words, but things; the marks also
of the true Church must serve to make her goodness known: But this word
Catholic, or Universal, imports no goodness, and does not signify any virtue
or perfection of the Church, but only notes her extent. As in matter of coyns,
the broadest pieces are many times the most suspected; so for the Church the
breadth and the large extent is no proof of purity. But if you take this word
of Catholic Church for orthodox and pure in the Faith, as the Fathers take it
very often, the Church of the Apostles reduced to one upper room, or fled into
a desert, was nevertheless the Catholic Church.

Herein especially appears, how vain und unreasonable is the dispute about this
term of Catholic, that several particular Churches are contending which of
them must be called Catholic or Universal; for it is as if Asia, Europe and
Africa were contending which of them must be called the universal world. All
the Texts which Monsieur du Perron alleges out of the Fathers to this purpose
are to no purpose; for the Fathers, by the Catholic Church understood all the
Churches of the East, of the West, and of the South; as those of Greece, Asia,
Syria, Egypt, Africa, Italy, Gauls, etc. which at that time were orthodox, and
made up one body, but now are separated, and have lost their former communion.
Wherefore none of those separated parts can be now called Catholic. Neither
has the Roman Church any more right to challenge that title, then the Greek or
the Syrian, from which the Roman is descended. In three of the four first Ages,
if a stranger traveling through Syria or Egypt, had asked where the Catholic
Church was, no body would have showed him the Roman; for every particular
Church called it self Catholic, that is, orthodox, and embracing that faith
which ought to be universal.

In the second place the Cardinal speaks of those things which the Fathers hold
as necessary or useful, saying that they must be received according to the
proportion of the belief which the Fathers have bestowed upon them. A dispute
altogether useless, before he has specified those points controverted among us
which have been believed by the Fathers, as useful or necessary.

In the third place, he enumerates several kinds of necessity. An absolute and
a conditional necessity; A necessity of medium, and another of precept: A
necessity of special, and another of general belief; A necessity of act, and a
necessity of approbation. All these distinctions of necessity he heaps up
without necessity, rather to set out his Learning then to instruct the Reader.
For we give him free leave to specify a hundred several sorts of necessity,
since they do us no harm, and decide no controversy.

He adds a fourth observation, whereby he declares who are those Ancients to
whose judgment we ought to subject our selves: Those are (in his opinion) the
Fathers that have written in the time of the four first Councils, that is, from
the year of our Lord, 325. unto the year 451. the space of 126. years. As for
the three first Ages, he says, That we have but few books of that date, and
that in them the face of the ancient doctrine, and practice of the Church
cannot be seen wholly represented. He holds then that the Fathers of the three
first Ages are not such as can decide our controversies. Thus the Cardinal
uses the Fathers of the first and purest Antiquity, undervaluing them as men
unfit to judge of our differences. Yet have we these Authors of that time,
Justin Martyr, Ignatius, Irenaeus, Athenagoras, Tertullian, Clemens,
Alexandrinus, Cyprian, Origin, Minutius Felix, Arnobius, Lactantius, and
Eusebius: Out of whole writings, better then from those that came since, one
may learn what was the face and the doctrine of the Christian Church near the
Apostles time: Yea, I say, that those that writ since, cannot be understood but
by the help of these first: for the Fathers of the following ages often allege
the ancienter Fathers, and borrow their terms.

But the Cardinal leaves them out, because in some points they are far more
express against Popety then those of the following Ages, as in the Invocation
of the Saints, the veneration of Images, the Popes Primacy over the universal
Church, and the celibat of Ecclesiastical persons. For we shall show in this
Book how Monsieur du Perron M. du Perron, 19. chapter of the 5. Book, p. 1009. And
p. 994. he confesses that even in Austins time the Church had not yet
pronounced any decision upon this, whether the Saints enjoy the sight of God
before the last judgment.
acknowledges that the Fathers of those first ages speak only of the
intercession of Saints, but of their invocation not at all, and that there is
not the least trace among them of that custom of praying to the Saints. For
some of them say, that the Saints pray for us, but never say that we must pray
to them. Likewise he acknowledges, Page 712.
that the Pastors of the Church were married until Constantines time, which
is a space of three hundred years. We shall show also in the right place, that
even our adversaries confess, that in the first Ages the Pope was little
acknowledged, and the Roman Church was not much regarded. And as for Images,
not only they had no veneration, See the 7. Book, 2. Controversy, and 2. chapter
of this work.
but it was even a crime to be a Picture-drawer, or a Statuary, and those
Trades were abominable among the Christians. It is not then without reason that
Monsieur du Perron will not submit himself to the judgment of the Fathers of
the three first Ages: Not that the following ages may be more favorable to
him, but the multitude and unmeasurable length of their writings is fitter for
finding of shifts, and fewer persons are skillful in them.

Yet to make that rejection of the Fathers before the four first Councels more
specious, he says, that to his thinking, his Majesty of Great Britain had
consented to confine himself to the Fathers of the four first Councils. He
should have produced the Kings words. For I maintain that this cannot be found.
True it is (as Monsieur du Perron adds) that the King has extended that
space to the five first Ages. But he that will have his belief examined by the
Fathers of the five first ages, does not exclude the three fitst, but includes
them within that space.

In the fifth place Monsieur du Perron declares, how he would have the consent
of the Fathers to be taken, namely, that a doctrine is held by the universal
consent of the Fathers, when some of the most eminent affirm a thing, and the
others are silent about it. But I hope to show 1 Book chapter 47, 48, and 49.
in this Book that the Roman Church of this time opposes not only every Father
by himself, but also the consent of a great number of Fathers. And though they
make a flourish of the names of Fathers to amuse the people, yet really they
make little reckoning of them. Besides if one Father, yea, if two or three
Fathers of the fourth or fifth age, have said something, of which no trace be
found in the precedent ages, I see nothing that obliges us to believe that all
the precedent ages have believed the same.

All that vexation which this Cardinal gives to himself comes hence, that he
will not stand to the judgment of the Holy Scripture, but looks for other
Judges then the Word of God, to cast the Readers understanding into an
inextricable labyrinth. For the writings of the Fathers are Greek and Latin
Books, endless for length, and infinite for number, of which therefore the
common people can have no knowledge. Also among the Books ascribed to the
Fathers many are supposititious, whose falsity is hard to be known: and of the
sense of the Text of the Fathers there is as much contention as of the sense of
the Holy Scripture, if not more: In which contention, if the Roman Church be
judge of the sense of the Fathers, she will be sure to overcome. Consider also,
that the Fathers dissent among themselves in many things; and in their
differences we are not told which of them we must adhere unto, nor how many
Fathers are requisite to establish an article of Faith. Moreover, succession of
times alters the doctrine, and changes the customs: So that many words used
by the ancients have lost their signification. The words of Sacrifice, of Pope,
of Mass, of Purgatory, of Satisfaction, of prayer for the dead, of indulgence,
and the like, are now turned into another sense, and signify no more what they
signified in old time. And after all, the Fathers are men subject to err, whom
therefore the Roman Church does condemn in a thousand things, and the Fathers
themselves will not be believed but as much as they speak according to
Scripture; upon which, as the only infallible rule, they will have their
writings examined.

And here admire the notorious perverseness of our adversary; for we shall see
how much Monsieur du Perron labors to prove, that conformity with Scripture
cannot be a mark to discern the true Church: and yet the whole scope of his
Book is to prove that the Roman Church is the true Church by her conformity
with the Fathers. This he will have to be the mark, and the right cognizance of
the true Church. So he rejects God, and his word, to put men in their place,
and mis-leadeth men's minds into a way without end, and chooses men for Judges
in Gods cause. What reason can be given, why the conformity with those who are
called Fathers, must rather be the mark of the true Church, then the conformity
with the word of God?

The Cardinal not content with the advantage which he takes, to have judges of
his own choosing to decide our controversies, and leaving the Prophets, the
Evangelists and the Apostles, to pick among the Fathers, such as he likes best,
gives himself again another advantage, which is to choose the matters about
which he will dispute. These matters then he has chosen. Of the real presence
in the Sacrament, of the oblation of the Eucharist, of prayer and offering for
the dead, and of invocation of Saints. Why he does not put Transubstantion in
the same rank? he gives a reason, namely, That it is not of the like necessity.
He adds that the invocation of Saints, is not necessary to every particular
person, that is, that every particular person may forbear praying to the Virgin
Mary and to the Saints, but that it is necessary to the body of the Church. Of
these four points then we treat in this Book, and make it evident, that he is
cast by those very judges which he has picked for himself.

But his Majesty of Great Britain, judging it unreasonable that the Cardinal
should deal such a fair game to himself, put forth to him other questions; as
the Communion under one kind; Private Masses; The Popes power to depose Kings.
To which his Majesty might have added, The veneration of the Images of Saints,
The Images of the Trinity, The Purgatory, The Divine Service and Prayers in an
unknown tongue, The prohibition of reading Scripture, The treasure of
Indulgences, The power of the Pope to Canonize Saints, and fetch souls out of
Purgatory; and many such things, about most of which our adversaries avoid to
dispute, either by the Scripture, or by the Fathers; for they are new
inventions, of which, those among them that have some equity, freely
acknowledge, that the Fathers make no mention.

The Cardinals second Preface, Answer to the second Preface.
is nothing else but his old song said a thousand times over, which is an
exhortation, that we submit our selves to the judgment of the Church, and keep
union with her: A good exhortation, when one has discerned before which of
many dissenting Churches is the good, where the truth and the way to salvation
is taught. Also before one join with the true Church, he must know that the
will of God is, that there be a Church in the world in which men may be saved.
Which two points, none can know but after he has been instructed in the Word
of God. Whence it appears, that the Cardinal abuses the Reader when he
exhorts him to join with the union of the Church; but teaches him not how to
discern the good and orthodox Church from the false and erroneous, and gives
him no instruction by the word of God; without which we should not know that
there must be a Church in the world, nor what that Church must be that one may
be saved in it.

To strengthen that exhortation, and raise the authority of the Church, the
Cardinal labors to debase the authority of holy Scripture, saying, that the
most part of the propositions of Faith are not expressly set down in Scripture,
but are deduced out of it by consequence only; and that those that are found in
it are susceptible of diverse, yea, and contrary, literal expositions. He
bestows a long discourse to show the perplexities wherein that man intangleth
himself, that will get his instruction by the Word of God, contained in the
holy Scriptures. Wherefore he will have us to address our selves unto the
Church, which he calls a judiciary Court between the Princes Law, and the
Subjects, to deliver assuredly the sense of Scripture wholly determined, and
the decisions of Faith altogether done and formed. Now that Church he
presupposes to be the Roman only, which he holds to be infallible in the
decisions of Faith, and in the interpretation of Scripture, and to give
authority to Scripture; although both the Greek and the Syrian Church, from
which the Roman is descended, and where Jesus Christ and the Apostles have
preached and planted Christian Religion, contradict that assumed power of the
Roman Church, and condemn her pride.

Here impiety goes abroad unmasked, and makes open war against God: Yet with so
ill success, that at the very first the Cardinal does evidently enterfere, and
contradict himself; for he will have the people to go to the Church for the
true decision of the doubts in the faith, before they know whether the Church,
to which they address themselves, be good, and whether it teach true doctrine.
And how can the poor people come by that knowledge? Shall it be by the holy
Scripture? but it is a Book which their people is not permitted to read: and
Monsieur du Perron says, that one cannot come out of difficulty that way, or
get a certain instruction. Shall it be by the Fathers? but they are far more
obscure then Scripture, and of an endless length, and they dissent among
themselves, and they are Greek and Latin Books which the people understands
not. Shall it be by the custom and the place of their birth, and the counsel
of their neighbors? But so shall every one follow the Religion of his
Country. Shall it be by the authority of the Church? But there are many
dissenting Churches: And if we must absolutely, and without further inquiry
believe that the Roman Church is the best, because she says so, she shall be
judge in her own cause; and the foundation of Christian faith shall be that the
Pope must be believed, because the Pope will have it; and the Roman Church must
be followed because the Roman Church does command it. And in the questions
about the duty of the Church, the Church her self shall be Judge. In the
question whether the Roman Church be an infallible Judge, the Roman Church
shall be the infallible Judge; and cannot err in judging the controversy
whether her self can err. So Subjects shall be infallible Judges of the Law of
their Prince, and Felons shall infallibly determine of the sense of that Law
which condemns their felony.

Without question, that man that bears himself as an infallible Judge, of the
sense of Gods Word, assumes an authority above that of God. For so he will have
all men obliged to follow, not the Words of Gods Law, but the authority of that
new Interpreter: But then that Interpreter should be without sin, least he
should sin in his Interpretation, or make it serve to spare or to disguise his
sin; By which means he should become his own Judge, if his sins must be judged
by the interpretation which himself will be pleased to give to the Law.

From that abuse are sprung those abominable rules maintained by M. Du Perron,
that the Church can dispense from the Commandments of God, and alter that which
is commanded in his Word. Of which hereafter.

In this especially the imposture and the spirit of error is visible, that the
Cardinal will have the people to address themselves unto the Church to have the
sense and infallible intepretation of Scripture, which is putting the people to
seek for a thing which cannot be found, for hitherto the Roman Church has made
no interpretation of Scripture. Only you shall find great number of Comments
upon Scripture, made by private Doctors that confute one another, and an
extreme diversity among them. The Roman Church never set out any interpretation
of Scripture, approved by public authority, of which one may say, This is the
Ecclesiastical interpretation, This is the sense of Scripture which the Roman
Church commands to be received. And here it would be proper to produce the
ridiculous or impious interpretations given by the Popes in their Canons,
Decrees, and Councils unto Scripture; of which the Learned of this Age among
our Adversaries are ashamed. M. Du Perron was wiser then to make use of them in
his 1. Book chapter 22.
Book. For these we dedicate a Chapter purposely.

To resolve Consciences we shall go another way to work, a short, a straight
and a safe way. Our Adversaries and we are agreed that the holy Scripture of
the Old and New Testament is the Book of Gods Word, and that there is none
else. For although the Popes did endeavor to put their Decretals among the
Canonical Scriptures, as we will show; yet God did not suffer them to compass
that enterprise. Since then that Book is the Word of God, in that Book only we
seek the Doctrine of Salvation. And to the question of our Adversaries, Who
shall be the interpriter of that Scripture? Is every one of you inspired by God
to penetrate into the sense of Scripture? We answer, that it needs no
interpreter for the things necessary to Salvation: For those necessary things
are so clearly set down in Scripture, that there is no need of interpretation
to understand them sufficiently to be saved. Scripture teaches us that God
has created the World, That Jesus Christ is dead for us, and that he is risen
again. Scripture commands us to love God with all our heart, and our Neighbor
like our selves. Scripture forbids us to kill, to commit adultery, to steal,
etc. To understand these things is there any need to find an infallible
Interpreter? Now I say, that the things that are thus clear in Scripture, are
sufficient to Salvation.

Since then in that question about the interpretation of Scripture M. Du Perron
will have us to find out an Interpreter that may judge with an infallible
authority, and a judiciary Court able to give infallible and irrevocable
decisions, I maintain that there is no such Judge to be found among men; but
the Sovereign Prince can interpret his Laws with an interpretation that has
the force of a Law. It is our part to obey God, not to be Judges of his
Ordinances. When some obscurity occurs in Scripture, Gods faithful Ministers
expound Scripture by word or writing, not by a judgment of authority, but by a
judgment of discretion; as when one judges of the taste of meats; not to give
Laws, but to declare his opinion: and always their expositions must be drawn
from Scripture it self, not from the unwritten word as the Roman Church does.
If God by some obscure Text is pleased to exercise or try our humility, we
ought rather to choose to be ignorant of the sense then to make our selves
infallible Judges of the Word of God, contenting our selves with those things
necessary to Salvation, which are clearly set down in Scripture.

What I say here will make a stronger impression in men's minds, when those
Texts shall be examined which the Roman Church alleges, to arrogate unto her
self the authority of Judge and infallible interpreter of the sense of
Scripture. For even in this that she alleges Scripture to ground her
authority, she acknowledges that the authority of Scripture is not grounded
upon the authority of the Church, since the Church seeks to ground her
authority upon Scripture. The Roman Church endeavoring to prove by Texts of
Scripture, that to her belongs the authority of an infallible Interpreter,
thereby divesteth her self from the auhority of Interpreter: For must she be
Interpreter of those texts whereby she pretends that she is acknowledged to
be Interpreter? That audaciousness trespasseth against common sense.

But what texts do they use to confer the title of an infallible Interpreter
upon the Roman Church? They allege these words, Tell it unto the Church,
Matthew. 18.17.
and if he will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen man and
a Publican. Is not that mocking God? Is it spoken there of the Roman Church any
more then of the Greek, or Armenian, or Syrian, or Ethiopian? See the text, and
you shall find that it is not spoken there of the Universal Church, nor of the
decisions of Faith, but of quarrels and offenses between two private persons,
upon which, if he that has wronged his Neighbor will not hear the admonitions
of the Church, the Lord Jesus will have him held for a stranger, and put out of
the communion of the faithful. To take up such a quarrel between two brothers,
does the Universal Church assemble her self? Is it not evident, that in that
text the doubts about Faith are not meant, but Ecclesiastical censures about
manners? Is there any mention in that place of the Roman Church, or of her
authority to expound Scripture? Is not then this interpretation brought by Cap.
Novit. Extra; de Judiciis.
Innocent the III. and approved by Bellar. lib. 2. de Council. c. 16.
Cardinal Bellarmin a gallant one. Tell it unto the Church, that is, unto the
Pope; and let the Pope tell it unto the Church, that is, unto himself.

In vain Mr. Du Perron goes about to daube so many absurdities with some texts
of the Fathers, which exault the authority of the Church, and the succession of
Pastors. In vain does he bring forth Of Vincentius Lirinensis there is a
Chapter in this Book, which is the 30. of the first Book.
Vincentius Lirinensis, who will have Scripture interpreted according to the
rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense; For none of those whom the
Cardinal alleges, speaks of the Roman Church; None of them puts the Church
above Scripture. And all things considered, that which the Ancients write of
the Church of their time, cannot be accommodated to the Church of our time. For
they spoke in a time when the Churches of Europe, Asia, and Africa were joined
in one body, the parts whereof are now separate in Communion, and in a time
when the succession was short and of fresh date, and known of all. But now,
that all those Churches are divided by a Schism of many Ages, and the
successions of chairs have been confounded and interrupted by a thousand
alterations; and in the same chairs, not only in those of Alexandria and
Antioch (which are held to have been founded by St. Peter) but also, in that of
Rome; I say now after so many years and changes, it is offering an abuse both
to God and men, to go about to apply to the Roman Church that which the
Ancients say of the Church of their time. As if Apes coming into a room whence
men are gone out, would attire themselves with their clothes. There was more
need to teach the Roman Church to speak as the Apostles do, and to reform her
by the Word of God.

The exhortation which M. Du Perron adds, whereby he does exhort us to
charity and union, is very specious: And would to God that it were in our power
to practice it. For what profit do we reap from this discord but ruin and
disgrace? And can any thing be more desirable then a peace with God, whereby we
be rejoyned with men, and the Union in the true Faith be made fast by the bond
of charity and concord? Oh that such a great good might be purchased with our
blood! Oh that we migt be more afflicted yet then we are, so that God thereby
were glorified, and our Adversaries brought to Salvation! There was no need
then of the Cardinal's exhortations in the words of our John 13.35.
Savior, and of St. Paul 1 Cor. 1.13. Ephesians. 4.4.
that we love one another, that we avoid divisions, and that we become one body
and one spirit; For to that charity we are wholly and heartily inclined, as
every godly person ought to be. But that Union ought to be in good things. And
we hope that no exhortation shall ever prevail so far with us, as to make us
agree with any to do evil. We owe much unto Concord, but we owe all unto Truth.
As in the breasts of the wicked peace of Conscience is not a true peace but a
lethargy and a profound drowsiness; likewise the agreement of many wicked men
is not a peace but a conspiracy. Therefore the Apostle to the Hebrews says,
Follow peace with all men and holiness. And St. Paul will have us to speak the
truth in love. Heb. 12.14. Ephesians 4.15.
For the Apostle would not have our charity employed to foster untruth. So the
Cardinals exhortations to charity will be welcome to us, when we are satisfied
once of the truth of his doctrine. That being not evident unto us, but rather
the clean contrary, while we keep far from the doctrine of those that hate us,
yet we will love their persons and pray for their conversion.

Toward the end he does triumph though he has got no victory; taking it for
granted, Cant. 4.9. Ephesians. 5.25. Isa. 60.12. Isa. 54.17. Matthew. 16. and 18.
that the Roman Church is that which is meant in Solomon's Song, Thou have
ravished my heart my sister, my spouse. And that for which St. Paul says, that
Jesus Christ has given himself. That of which Isaiah says, The Nation and
Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish. And every tongue that shall
rise against thee in Judgment thou shall condemn. That of which Christ says
that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her; and that who so refuses
to hear her, must be accounted as a Heathen man and a Publican. Of which texts,
some speak of the Church of the Elect; for she is that Church meant in the
Canticles, that Church redeemed with Christ's Blood, That Spouse and that Body
of Christ, without blemish and without spot, against which the gates of Hell
shall not prevail, as we shall show in the right place. The other texts speak
of the Universal and Orthodox Church planted by the Apostles, not of the Roman
Church, of which Isaiah never spoke. Or they speak of every particular Orthodx
Church, of which, whosoever (that has offended God or his Neighbor) does not
receive the admonitions, and opposes the discipline, must be held as a Pagan
and a Publican. For by a great abuse of Scripture the Cardinal confounds all
these texts as speaking of the same thing, and of the same kind of Church, and
supposes without proof, that all that belongs to the Roman Church.

Finally, he concludes his Preface by some texts, which he imployeth to prove
that out of the Church there is no Salvation. He brings in the first place a
text of St. Paul, Ephesians. 1.22, and 23.
that God gave him to be the head over all things unto the Church, which is his
body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. A text nothing to his
purpose; for the Apostle speaks not of the Roman Church, nor of the visible
Church neither, but of the Church of the Elect, which only (to speak properly)
is the mystical body of Christ; unless we will put dead members in the body of
Christ, who is the Author of life, and affirm that many profane and hypocrites
living in the visible Church, are members of the body of Christ, and that the
same man is a limb of the body of Satan and of the body of Christ together. Is
there any doubt that when St. Paul cauls the Church the body of Christ and the
fullness of it, he means the whole body of Christ? Out of which body those
Saints which are reigning in Heaven cannot be excluded, nor the Elect which are
yet unborn. That being granted, it is impossible that the visible Church be
meant in that text, seeing that the greatest and the best part of that Church
which the Apostle speaks of is invisible unto us; and there is neither reason
nor likelihood, that the profane and false Christians that are on earth, be of
the same body as the Saints which are in Heaven. Wherefore also the same
Apostle in the same Epistle says, that this Church has neither spot nor
wrinckle, which cannot be proper to any visible Church, and to the Roman Church
less then to any, she being defiled with so much uncleanness by the very
confession of the most passionate of our Adversaries, as we have showed many
times. Besides, that text does not speak of a necessity of joining with the
Church, but of the dignity and Spiritual Empire which the Father has bestowed
upon his Son our Lord.

To that text Monsieur Du Perron adds many texts of the Fathers, which say
that out of the Church there is no Salvation. I will do so much for him as to
suppose that by the Church he understands not some Heretical or Idolatrous
Church, but the true, the good, and the pure in doctrine. Now the question
between us is, whether the Roman Church be such: And this is that which must be
proved, not presupposed. And although this were proved, yet since the Roman
Church is a particular Church, not the Universal, I might as well find
Salvation in another particular Church equal to it in purity. After all, to
what purpose should one allege against us, that out of the Church there is no
Salvation, since we also hold it and believe it? For if it be question of the
Church of the Elect, it is out of question that out of it one cannot be saved.
As a branch cannot live separated from the body of the tree, so there is no
life to Salvation out of the body of Christ, who is the Spring of life. Or if
one speak of the visible Church, it is certain that none can be saved who by
profaneness or error in the foundation of the Faith, separates himself from the
communion of the Universal Church, and renounceth the communion of the Church,
to live after his own fancy, or make a Sect of his own. But of that matter, as
also whether this rule, that out of the Church there is no Salvaion, be liable
to some exceptions, we shall speak further hereafter. The main matter is to
show, that in the Roman Church Jesus Christ is preached according to the
Gospel, and his Word purely taught; for without that there can be no Salvation
in it. Take that away, all the titles of Catholic Church, chairs, keys,
succession, multitude, miracles, in vain will be bragged of; All that will
serve only to lead Souls into Hell more speciously, and to give authority to
untruth. As unchaste women are the most curious to trick themselves up, the
worst Churches will put on the most eminent titles. But as the Devil appearing
in the shape of a man's body, will counterfeit all the parts and likeness of the
body, but only the life and the brightness of the eye: Likewise false Churches
will put on the show of the Church of Jesus Christ, all but the light of his
truth.

It remains now, Judgment of the Work and wit of M. Du Perron.
that we give some general taste to the Reader of this Book of the Lord
Cardinal Du Perron, that by a pattern he may judge of the whole piece.

In the first place, if doing evil can deserve any praise, and if defending
Heresy with dexterity can be worthy of any commendation, that praise I cannot
deny to the memory of this Cardinal; that this Book of his is built with a
singular Art, to which he has bent all his faculties, and to make it complete
he has with a long labor employed all the dexterity of his wit, of which he
had to spare. Among all our Adversaries I find not such another elaborate piece
of Work. And whereas all his other Books are but small things in comparison, we
may say that in this he went beyond himself. How great is his diligence in the
search of Antiquity! How admirable his nimbleness in giving a fair color to
the weakness of his matter, in declining those questions which he judges
insufficient to bear the trial of a combat; and to set forth all that is most
specious for Popery! He finds out many new shifts which none had thought on
before him. And where the other Champions of Popery do not satisfy him, he
devises some new expedient, and takes another way. He gently declines the dint
of our Objections, and colors his want of strength with a show of contempt.
All this he cloatheth over with a civil language, and with a sweet and pleasant
style; but only in those places where he finds himself gravelled and pressed by
the evidence of truth. For then he does purposely involve his sense with dark
words, and heaps up a pile of distinctions in philosophical terms, raising a
cloud of dust about him, with a capricious and tedious style. By his great
reading in the Fathers he gathers up (more out of ostentation then necessity) a
multitude of allegations about light or uncontroverted things. But his little
skill in the Greek tongue and other humane letters, makes him trip often. His
whole book is swarming with falsified citations, which I undertake not in this
book to examine one by one, contenting my self to produce a few of many; for I
know that such an examination is wearisom to the Reader, and of no great
instruction. But in general, it is certain that none of those that have blurred
paper in France in the Popes behalf, can be compared unto him. I should do him
wrong, I say not to equal to him, but even to name after him some petty
clamorous wranglers, of the highest boldness, and the lowest ignorance, as
Father Gontier, Father Veron, Father Regourd, men whose impudence and venomous
choler has distempered their brains; who in other times should not be
suffered, but are fit for this time, in which audaciousness goes for learning,
pride for zeal, and a scolding injurious style for true eloquence. I could
almost be persuaded to place John Jaubert Bishop of Bazas in the same form; but
I spare his Miter, and receive his alehouse Rhetoric of foul words as so many
praises. All these start up after M. du Perron, as Wasps out of the body of a
dead Horse.

Nevertheless the more I esteem the wit and learning of Monsieur du Perron, the
more I deplore his condition for selling his pen unto the Pope, and bending his
wit to war with God. For whosoever shall seriously consider this book which I am to
examine, shall find in it a great contempt, yea, a secret hatred of the Holy
Scripture; of which he endeavors to breed a disgust into men's minds, to find
in it insoluble absurdities, and to undermine its authority. For besides that
in so great a book as his, Scripture is very seldom alleged, insomuch that
sometimes in fifty leaves there is no mention of God or his word; he makes bold
to maintain that the Church can change the things which God has commanded in
his word, In the second book of M. du Perron, in the third observation, chapter 3.
p. 674. Page 1110. and 1115. in the Treatise of the Communion under both kinds.
and has authority to dispense from the commandments of Jesus Christ. Of that
subject he has written an express chapter, whose argument is, Of the authority
of the Church to alter things contained in the Scripture. There he affirms that
there are things in Scripture, which the Church can alter, and has in effect
altered. And speaking of the form after which Jesus Christ has instituted his
Sacraments, he says that when great inconveniences occur in it, the Church can
bring to them, both dispensation and alteration. Especially concerning that
command of the Lord Drink ye all of it, he maintains that this precept is not
indispensable and unalterable; A blasphemous proposition arriving to the last
period of impiety! for none of the ancient Heretics ever went so far.

Innoc. III. Decret. de Concess. Praebendae Tit. 8. Cap. Proposuit. Secundum
plenitudinem potestatis de jure possumus supra jus dispensare. Et ibi Glossa.
Nam contra Apostolum dispensat. Item contra Vetus Testamentum. Item in Voto.
Item in sacramento.
They took pretenses indeed to dispense themselves from the commandments of God,
and contradict his word, making use of glosses and exceptions. But never any
heretical Church presumed to use this language, We acknowledge indeed that God
has given this commandment; but we have the power to alter it; and it belongs
to the Church to judge what commandments of God are dispensable. By that means
the Church shall not be subject to Gods commands, but as far as she thinks
good; and shall blot out of the Law of God whatsoever she disliketh; saying,
This commandment I judge to be dispensable. Thus shall man be above God, being
once judge of the Law of God. Such is the rude and hard dealing offered to God
by the Gloss of the Canon Lector ^n the thirty fourth Distinction of the
Decree, where it is said, that Papa dispensat contra Apostolum, the Pope
dispenses against the Apostle. Pope Innocent the third says the same. These
are his words, We can according to the fullness of our power dispense from the
right, and above the right. And upon that, the Gloss of the Doctors adds, For
the Pope dispenses against the Apostle, and against the Old Testament, and in
vows and oaths. Conformably to the gloss of the Canon Sunt quidam, in the
first Question of the twenty fifth Cause, Papa dispensat in Evangelio
interpretando ipsum, The Pope dispenses in the Gospel by giving interpretation
to it.

Thomas Aquinas goes so far as to say that Thomas 2a. 2ae. qu. 2. Art. 10. Ad
solam authoritatem summi Pontificis pertinet nova editio symboli. Vasquez. Tomo
III. Disp. 216. Number. 60. Licet concederemus hoc fuisse Apostolorum praeceptum,
nihilominus Ecclesia and summus Pontifex potuerunt illud justis de causis
abrogare.
the Pope can make a new Edition of the Symbol, which is making a new
Christian Religion. And so the Jesuit (c) Vasquez, Though we should grant that
it was a commandment of the Apostles, nevertheless the Church and the Sovereign
Pontifex could abolish it upon good causes. And Andradius lib. 2. Defens. fidei
Tridentinae: Minime vero majores nostri religione and pietate excellentes
Apostolorum haec and quamplurima alia decreta refigere in animum induxissent
nisi intellexissent, etc.
Andradius, Our ancestors men excellent in religion and piety, have disannulled
these and many other decrees of the Apostles. Whence he does infer, Idem
ibidem. Liquet mineme eos errasse qui dicunt Romanos Pontifices posse
nonnunquam in legibus dispensare a Paulo and primis quatuor Conciliis.
that those have not erred, that say that the Roman Popes can sometimes
dispense from obeying the Laws of the Apostle St. Paul, and the four first
Councils. For so much the Gloss of the chapter Quando personam, says in the
first book of the Decretals, Decretalium Gregorii IX. lib. 1. titulo 7. cap. 3.
The Pope can change the nature of things, and dispense above the right, and
the wrong he can turn into right. Which is the same as Bellarmin says Bellar.
in Barklayum cap. 31. In hono sensu dedit Christus Petro potestatem faciendi de
peccato non peccatum, and de non peccato peccatum.
That Christ has given to Peter (that is, unto the Pope) the power of making
that which is sin to be no sin; and that Idem. lib. 4. de Summo Pontifice cap.
5. Si Papa erraret in praecipiendo vitia vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur
Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra
conscientiam peccare.
which is no sin to be sin. And that if the Pope erred in commanding vices, and
prohibiting virtues, the Church should be obliged to believe that vices are
good, and virtues evil, unless she would sin against her conscience. We tremble
out of horror at these blasphemies and shake out the dust of our feet. Must the
Pope be above God? Can a mortal and sinful man dispense us from the commandment
of God? Or shall he be wiser then Jesus Christ and his Apostles? But of that
impious proposition of the Cardinal more shall be said in its proper place.

Of the like nature are these assertions of the Cardinal, when finding himself
pressed by the express word of God, he says that such a commandment was given
only for a time, and by provision, not for perpetuity; As in the question of
the Celibat of the Clergy he makes Chrysostom to say, that this commandment of
the Apostle [ Page 172.
Let the Bishop be the husband of one wife] was free in St. Paul's time, by
reason (says the Cardinal) of the rarity of unmarried persons in the time of
the birth of the Church. And a little after, They were constrained to accept of
married persons for the Priesthood, so that they had been but once married; and
acknowledges that custom to have lasted as far as Constantines reign, that is,
in the three first ages. By his reason we must say that when St. Paul made this
order [ 1 Timothy 3.2.
The Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, etc.]
he charged Bishops to be sober and blameless only for a time, not always: For
since these commandments are joined together by the Apostle, why shall the
Church have the power to dispense with the one, not with the other? And who is
he that first made that distinction? It is pity then that the Apostle forgot
to specify, till when, and for how long that commandment was to be kept, and
how long that permission for Bishops to have wives, was to take place. It was
ill providing for the good of the Church to command absolutely without
exception of persons and restriction of time, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, if that precept was given
but for a time, and provisionally, as M. du Perron will have it.

The same spirit of impiety is manifest in that other proposition in the
seventh chapter of the fourth observation of the second book; the argument of
the chapter in this; One must not go back to the time of the Apostles to
cleanse the Church from her pretended corruptions. By which principle the
Apostles and their writings, are divested of the quality of judges: Neither
must we have recourse any more unto their writings to end our differences. And
no more is wanting but to say that their books ought to be burnt: for what are
they good for if they must judge of nothing, and are unfit to resolve us?
Indeed M. du Perron denies that there is any corruption in the Roman Church,
but those pretended corruptions of which we accuse her he will have tried, not
by the writings of the Apostles, but by those of the Fathers that lived in the
time of the first four Councils; which is an open confession that the Apostles
are contrary to him, since he refuses them for Judges. Now this reason he
gives why he will be judged by the Fathers of the age of the four first
Councils, that is, from the year 325. of our Lord, unto the year 451. The
reason (says he) why we must rather have recourse to those ages, then to that
of the Apostles, is evident by the discourse of our observation, which is, that
of the first and second Age after the Apostles, far fewer monuments are extant
to see the entire face of the Church represented, then of those of the four
first Councils. I cannot comprehend with what reason he can say that of the Age
of the Apostles and of the Ages next unto them we have less clear Monuments to
represent the doctrine of the Church, then of the following Ages, since we have
the writings of the Apostles, who are better alone then all the writings of the
Fathers that came since; for the writings of the Apostles are of an infallible
certainty, and in them no discord is found; but the Fathers have been subject
to failings, and agree not among themselves. Wherefore also the Roman Church
condemns them very often.

This Authors impiety is no less manifest in the 12. chap. of his first book,
page 52. where he denies that the Faithful have a Theological Faith, and he
will have their faith to be only a Moral Faith: Which moral faith will be found
also in the Pagans, yea in the Devils. A virtue is called Theological, when it
is planted in man's heart by the documents which God gives us in his word: Now
faith comes by hearing of the word of God, says the Apostle, Romans 10.17. If
then the faith of the Christian is not a Theological virtue, it is humane or
devilish. Faith being the mother of all the Theological virtues, how can it be
other but Theological?

As for the Fathers of the three first ages, whom M. du Perron will not receive
for Judges, I maintain that from them, more then from the Authors of a latter
time, we learn the state and the doctrine of the Primitive Church. Yea, I say,
that to those Fathers of the three first Ages, we owe the intelligence of the
Fathers that are come since, which follow the steps of the former, and borrow
their terms. But how should the Fathers of the time of the first four Councils
be rather our Judges then the Apostles, since those very Fathers will be judged
by the Apostles, and acknowledge themselves obliged not to speak but after
them? Now the reason why M. du Perron stands rather upon the posteriour
Fathers, and inferior in Antiquity, is not that which he brings: The true
cause is, that the ancienter the Fathers are, the more contrary they are to
Popery. Also because those later Fathers are of an infinite length; and that of
twenty thousand persons in the Roman Church, scarce one has any considerable
knowledge of them. How is it possible then to end our differences by that
means? To fight a Duel, is there need of a Cart-load of swords? What other
sword do we need but that of the word of God, which God puts in our hand? A
sword before which the Devil trembles; a sword that gives sure blows, so that
one needs not after look for another weapon. To that sword indeed belongs that
which David said of Goliaths sword, There is none like it. 1 Samuel 11.9.


If a Reader, that has yet some liberty of judgment left, will here open his
eyes, it will be easy for him to discern what opinion the Cardinal had of
Christian Religion, and whether he spoke of it in earnest, or only to serve the
time, and follow the stream. Page 523.
In the fifty sixth chapter of the first Book he compares these two
Propositions; the one, that the Church is founded upon the person of St. Peter;
the other, that it is founded upon the faith or confession which St. Peter
made; Matthew. 16.
which confession is, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. And
see how he compares them: he says, that the first is original and perpetual,
but the other is accessory and temporal: The one consigned from the beginning,
the other brought in upon occasion. With him this maxim [that the person of
St. Peter, and by consequence that of the Pope is the foundation of the Church]
is such a maxim and ground as is perpetual, original, and from the beginning.
But this other maxim, or this says, that Jesus is the Christ, the son of the
living God, with him, is not the foundation of the faith, but accessorily, and
for a time, and is brought in but occasionally. After that, can we believe that
this Prelate did believe the Gospel? And what remains more for his followers
to do, but to put on a Turban, if it be once lawful in the Christian Church to
maintain that St. Peter and the Pope are the original and perpetual foundation
of the Church, but that this faith [that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living
God] is the foundation of the Church, only ad tempus, and upon occasion, and
not for perpetuity?

That this is no wrongful imputation, it is easy to show; for this is the
summary of his Discourse, That the Church is grounded causally, not formally
upon that confession of St. Peter, Thou art the Christ, the son of the living
God, that is, (as himself expounds it) that St. Peter's confession was the cause
why Jesus Christ chose him for the foundation, which is clearly saying that
this confession is not at all the foundation of the Church. As when the virtue
of a Gentleman is the cause why the King gives him an Office of Admiral or
Governor, that virtue is not the Admiralty, or the Government: Likewise if the
confession of St. Peter is the cause for which Christ made him the foundation
of his Church, it follows that this confession is not the foundation. The same
he shows, by saying that this confession is not the foundation of the Church
formally, that is, really. Also by making in the same place that proposition
[The confession of Peter is the foundation of the Church] like unto this: Page
522.
The faith of Peter has walked upon the waters, which is an improper and
figurate proposition, and a false one too, if it be taken literally. In this
especially the impiety is manifest, that this confession, Jesus is the Christ,
the son of the living God, is true properly at all times, and before that Peter
believed in Jesus Christ, the foundation of the Church. But the Cardinals sense
is, that it began to be the foundation of the Church when Peter pronounced it;
and will not admit it to be the foundation of the Church for any other cause,
but that Peter pronouncing that sentence, thereby incited Jesus Christ to make
him the foundation of the Church.

That which follows is no better, in the beginning of the ninth chapter, where
he disputes about the elect and predestinate unto salvation, he makes St. Paul
to say, that God has marked his elect with his seal. St. Paul says indeed, 1 Timothy 2. 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians. 4 30. Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.1.
that God has sealed us, and has given us the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts; And that having believed we were sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise: And he forbids us to grieve the holy Spirit, whereby we are sealed
unto the day of redemption. So the Apostle calls the inward testimony which the
Holy Ghost secretly bears in our hearts that we are Gods children. But the
Cardinal abolisheth (as far as in him lies) that Seal and inward testimony of
the Spirit of God in the hearts of the faithful, saying, that God has marked
his elect, not in them, but in himself: As if one said that a shepherd has
marked his sheep not in them, but in himself, so that the sheep are not marked,
but the shepherd. By so doing he makes the whole comfort of the Faithful to
fade away, opposing the Apostle who puts that seal in our hearts, Romans 8.16.
and says that the Spirit bears witness unto our spirit, and that it is we
that are sealed, not God. But Monsieur du Perron measuring other men's
consciences by his own, and not feeling in himself that inward testimony,
striveth to blot it out in others; he denies it to be in the faithful, and
will have it to be in God only.

Thus when the Lord Cardinal declares his opinion Du Perron in the second
observation, c 7. and 7. p. 553, and 554.
that one should rather suffer a King, yea and Jesus himself to be killed, then
to reveal a confession. And when he maintains, that 2 Book, 2. chapter p 774.
by the Books of Moses one cannot prove the immortality of the soul, which yet
is so clearly, and so often proved there. When he 4. Book in the answer to the
second instance, c. 6.
makes two kinds of redemption of our souls, the one original, the other
applicative. When he says that In his Book against M. du Plessis, p. 60.
the Sacraments of the Old Testament were vain Monuments and Cenotaphes, as if
God had given vain things unto his Church, like unto empty and imaginary
graves, whose inscription is false. When to make Holy Scripture ridiculous, he
makes a collection of those things which seem to him absurd, and to make it
more absurd, imputes to it those things which are not found in it, as that Genesis
2, it is said, that within the Garden of Eden were both Nilus and Euphrates,
which are above two thousand Leagues asunder; but there is no such thing there;
for the second chapter of Genesis speaks indeed of Euphrates, Page 1100. In
that text, Eccl. 9.5. there is only, neither have they any more reward. In his
second observation of the second book, chapter 8. p. 658.
but of Nilus not at all. Also when he says that in the ninth of Ecclesiastes
Solomon affirms, that the dead have no reward [par de la] yonder, meaning, it
seems, beyond this life, as if the souls were mortal. In all these (I say) he
lays open the secrets of his thoughts, even that he made very little account
of the holy Scripture, and of the mysteries of Christian Religion; and that he
was not well persuaded of the immortality of the soul.

This appears also in that when he alleges Scripture, among many passages
that have some color, he brings other texts which seem to be alleged merely
to make sport. To prove Lent, which is a fast of forty six days, he employeth
Scripture, saying, that God made the waters of the flood to rain forty days,
and forty nights: That the people of Israel were forty years in exile in the
wilderness: That in the ancient Law the chastening of these that were beaten
with rods, did not exceed forty blows: Which are goodly and convincing proofs.
So he defends the authority of the Church by these words of the Canticles 88.
chapter of the 1. book.
We have a little sister that has no breasts. With the like subtilty he
proves the primacy of St. Peter, Matthew. 17. where Jesus Christ P. 539.
bids Peter to pay the tribute for himself and for him. Of the like
ingenious vein was his proof In his book of the Eucharist against M. du Plessis.
by the Quatrains of Pibrac, which say, Adore sitting after the Grecians rule;
that the Apostles, though they were sitting at the table, yet did adore the
Host.

I doubt also, whether the Sorbon and other Doctors of the Roman Church will
approve of several things in this last book of his, and in that of the
Eucharist. As when he says, In the book of the Eucharist against Mr. du
Plessis, page 287.
that after the consecration God preserves the bread in the universal latitude
of its being. And his confession, whereby he acknowledges, In his book against
the King in the Treatise of the communion under two kinds, page 1108.
that the denying of the cup to the people diminishes the signification of the
Sacrament. And this new doctrine, whereby he makes two redemptions of our
souls, the one original, the other applicative; making two payments of the same
debt, the one original, the other applicative. Likewise I make a great question
whether the other Romish Doctors will like of his doubting In his Treatise of
the prayer for the dead, chapter 11. p. 950.
whether Purgatory be a real or a Metaphorical fire, which is only the horror
of conscience. Or of his saying in his Letter to M. Casaubon that the
invocation of Saints is not necessary to every particular man; that is, that
every particular person may very well be without praying to the Saints, and to
the Virgin Mary, and can be saved without that. Of the same sort is his
solution of the words of the Canon of the Mass, where the Priest prays for the
dead, Qui dormiunt in somno pacis, that sleep in a peaceable sleep, and by
consequence prays not for the souls tormented in a fire. The page 950. The
Cardinals book was printed without approbation of the Doctors.
Cardinals answer is, that the souls which are burning in Purgatory are
sleeping, not in respect of themselves, but in respect of the Church, as if a
man could wake in respect of himself, but sleep in respect of others.

For these and the like causes, I suppose that the Faculty, and the Doctors
appointed to examine Books that are put to the press, would not grant any
approbation to this Book of the Cardinal. For what may the reason be, that a
thousand frivolous books come out every day with the approbation of the Faculty
on the Front, and this only Book so important, and so long expected, has got
none?

The allegation of Fathers is that main work of the Cardinal, for which he has
bent all his sinews, and searched all sorts of Books with extreme diligence. If
ever any man was nimble in giving the slip, and turning passages from their
true sense, Monsieur Du Perron gets the prize in that craft. By an ingenious
dexterity he takes the words of respect and honor given to the Bishop of Rome
for words of subjection. The counsels which Popes have given unto their
friends, he alleges as Laws and Ordinances; and the several recourses of
oppressed persons to the Popes, he brings as so many appeals. And the brotherly
help which some Bishop of Rome has given to the afflicted, as the act of a
Judge and a Sovereign. The ordinances made within the Roman Patriarchate he
takes as Laws given to the whole Roman Empire; and the orders made for the
Bishops of the Roman Empire as Laws given to the Churches of the whole world.
He takes precedence or primacy, and the succession to St. Peter in the
Bishopric of the City of Rome for the succession in the Apostleship, and in
the Government of the Universal Church. The Intercession of Saints he takes for
the Invocation; the body Sacramental for the Natural: The Sacrifice of
thanksgiving for the sacrifice of Redemption: The free and voluntary
observations for necessary rules; and the extraordinary examples for ordinary
Laws. Where he cannot encounter our proofs, he gives a turn about, and alters
the State of the question; and after he has misrepresented our belief, he
comes in great state to thunder upon it with a multitude of authorities of
Fathers.

But yet sometimes he will fall out with those Fathers which he has called to
help, doing like the Chinesi, who after they have called upon their Demons, if
the success does not answer their requests, they beat and dash to the ground
their Images. 1 Book, chapter 56. p. 523, and 524.
He says that the Fathers, translating these words, Thou art Peter, and upon
that stone I will build my Church, and applying them to the faith or confession
of St. Peter, turn them from their true sense, to employ them against the
Arians, and thereupon accuses In the same chapter p. 526.
Austin of inadvertence. He disputes against the six hundred and thirty Bishops
that defined in the Council of Chalcedone, that the Bishop of Constantinople
must be equal to that of Rome in all things. He blames two hundred Bishops of
Africa, among whom were those two great men, Austin Bishop of Rome, and
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, for writing Letters to Celestin Bishop of Rome, to
forbid him to send Legates into Africa, or take cognizance of the causes already
judged by them, and desire him that he bring not the pride of the world into
the Church. Many times, under pretense of excusing the Fathers, he accuses
them; saying, that they have not spoken according to their sense, and that they
have dissembled for fear of being understood by the Catechumeni, and that the
mysteries should not lie open unto the Infidels. He says, that to learn the
belief of the Fathers, we must not seek it in their Books, where they dispute
against the Heretics or Infidels. He speaks of Austins treatises upon John
with contempt, saying, Page 877, and 878, 879. and in many other places.
that they are but popular Sermons, and that in them he does not declare his
sense. But the true reason of his exception against those Treatises is, that
they are clear against the eating of the Lords body, with the mouth of the
body. For the same reason he speaks of the Dialogues of Theodoret, as of books
where he hid his sense for fear of being understood by the Catechumeni. If we
produce some very express Texts of the Fathers, M. du Perron declineth them,
saying, Page 879, Page 879,

that the Fathers wrest and turn aside the Scripture, and play with it. And
that they have mediate, collateral, and accessory meditations, which are the
echo and the resounding of the literal sense to recreate the spirits of the
Readers, with the sacred mirth and ingenious invention of allusions and
Allegorical applications.

All this will be justified by the reading of this book: I could have wished to
have had to do with a living adversary, and would have been like Bees that
never sting dead bodies. But the writings, and the reputation of this famous
Prelate live after him, and give to the ignorant or malicious matter of
triumph, and to the infirm occasion of stumbling. Wherefore I thought that I
owed this labor unto the Church of God. In which labor to follow the steps of
the Cardinal, I was put to search the writings of the Fathers of the first five
Ages: Not to derogate in any wise to the perfection of the Holy Scripture,
which alone can, and ought to decide the questions about faith, and in things
necessary to salvation is so clear, that it needs no interpretation; but to
pluck off from our Adversaries that vizard of Antiquity, and to show that our
Religion is the prime and perpetual, and has the Ancients on her side; Also to
defend the honor of the Fathers, which are put to the rack to make them depose
against the truth, and speak contrary to their intention; Then to find out the
spring of errors, and the occasions of Popery, how Satan from small occasions,
by the lapse of time, has made great evils to arise, and from the abuse of
words has brought forth errors in the faith, and changed the voluntary
observations of some men into necessary and general Laws.

In this book, I have followed not the order of the Chapters of M. du Perron,
but the nature of things, and the order of times, both to give more perspicuity
and proportion to my work, and to exempt my self from repeating the same things
fifty times over as M. du Perron does. I have sometimes exceeded the limits of
my present subject, which is to answer the Cardinals book against his Majesty
of Great Britain, especially in the question of the Sacrament of Penitence, and
in that of the real presence, wherein I examine many passages of the Cardinals
book of the Eucharist against Monsieur du Plessis.

To be a Suitor for the equity of the Readers, I could allege my sickness of
two and twenty months, which has brought me to the brink of the grave, in
which nevertheless I have followed this work: also the interruption of several
journeys, many afflictions wherewith God has visited me, the business of my
calling, which requires a whole man, and my want of those helps and
conveniences, which this Lord Cardinal had in great plenty. But truth affords
a great advantage, and God makes hard things easy, when in our labor for his
cause we have no other end but his glory. By the mouth of children he
establishes his praise, and makes his strength perfect in our weakness. He
will make the labor of his servants fruitful, and will dissipate the clouds
of error by the brightness of his Gospel. Or if the hardness of this Age
hinders the fruit of our labor, though we have here sowed upon stones, yet we
shall reap in heaven. And God will bring a time in which the edge of his word,
which seems now to grow blunt by the hardness of hearts, will recover its
strength and virtue. To him be glory for ever, Amen.

A Pattern of Falsifications and depravations of passages alleged by the L.
Cardinal Du Perron, in his Book against the King of Great Britain.
The Reader shall find more of these observed in the Table in the end of this
Book.
THE L. Cardinal Du Perron in the sixth Chap. of his fifth Book, where he is
gathering the absurdities which he finds in the holy Scripture, in the 1099.
Page of the first Edition, says that in the second chapter of Genesis it is
affirmed, that within the Garden of Eden there was among other Rivers that of
Nilus, and that of Euphrates, which are above a thousand leagues asunder. But
there is no mention of Nilus in all that Chapter. It is easy for one to make
Scripture to say absurd things, when he falsifieth it.

In the same Chapter, page, 1101. he imposes on St. John that he says in the
fifteenth chapter he that comes after me, was made before me; of which there is
not one word in the whole Chapter. There is indeed in the first chapter (...),
he was before me, or he was preferred before me, not he was made before me.

St. Paul, Gal. 2.6. says, comparing himself with the most eminent among the
Apostles, They that are eminent have brought nothing to me, otherwise, (...).
Those that seemed to be somewhat added nothing unto me. The Cardinal in his
56. chapter p. 526. to perswad that St. Paul compares himself with the most
excellent Apostles, not in authority, but only in learning, translateth, They
that seemed to be something have taught me nothing. The vulgar version has
contulerunt, not docuerunt.

Deuteronomy. 18. v. 18. God says, I will raise them up a Prophet from among their
brethren like unto thee; which words are expounded by St. Steven, Acts 7.37. as
said of Jesus Christ. But the Cardinal in the second chap. of his third book,
to authorize by that text the Pastors of the Church, that the people may have
recourse unto them rather then to the Law of God, has translated, the Lord
will raise you Prophets, you shall hear them; putting the plural, Prophets,
instead of the singular, a Prophet, that he may transport to the Pastors of the
Roman Church that which is said of Jesus Christ alone.

M. Du Perron in his fifth book, chap. 18. of the fourth Instance page 990. to
prove that the Saints departed know our hearts, alleges, 1 Cor. 14.25. where
he makes St. Paul to say, that by the gift of prophecy the secrets of the
hearts are manifested. Which is a text falsified both in the words and the
sense; for these words, by the gift of prophecy, are of the Cardinals addition.
And as for the sense, St. Paul speaks not of knowing the hearts by prophecy,
but he speaks of the manifestation of the heart made by a confession, which
gives glory to God before the Congregation, as it appears by the following
words, Thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on
his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.

And that which is more intolerable, is that a little after, page 992. he
alleges the same text quite otherwise, and falsifies it another way, in these
words, When a man prophecieth, they that come in are confounded, because the
secrets of their hearts are manifested. There is no such thing in the text of
St. Paul. And observe that he sets down the text in a different letter, as an
allegation of the very words of the Apostle.

In the Page before, which is 991. to prove that the Saints departed hear our
Prayers, he brings in a text of 1 Cor. 13. in these words, Now I know in part,
but when that which is perfect is come, I shall know as I am known. Where St.
Paul speaks not of the knowledge which he should have of our Prayers after this
life, or of things that are done here in Earth, as M. Du Perron understands it,
but of the full knowledge which he should have of God in the life to come. Now
least that the Reader should perceive that this is the sense of St. Paul's
words, he has beheaded the text, having suppressed the precedent words, then we
shall see face to face; now I know in part, etc. Where it is clear that he
speaks of the sight of the face of God, not of the knowledge which the Saints
have of them that are in the World, as M. Du Perron will have it.

In the same place to prove that the Angels offer our Prayers unto God, and by
consequence know them, he alleges, Rev. 8.3. as if it were said there, that
the Angels offer the prayers of the faithful unto God: But there it is spoken
of one Angel only, offering incense with the prayers of the Saints. The
Cardinal has put Angels instead of an Angel, lest we should come to think that
this Angel is our Lord Jesus Christ.

Page 992. to prove that after this life the thoughts of the heart shall be
manifested of the one to the other, that is, that the thoughts of the living
shall be manifested to the Saints departed, he alleges, 1 Cor. 4.5. in these
words, Judge of nothing before the time, until that the Lord has enlightened
the hiding places of darkness, and manifested the thoughts of the hearts; That
text is falsified; for this is the right one, Judge nothing before the time,
until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall
every man have praise of God. M. Du Perron has cut off these words, until the
Lord come; and these also, and then shall every man have praise of God, because
these words show, that there St. Paul speaks of the day of Judgment, in which
the Lord Jesus Christ shall come, and things hidden shall be brought to light,
and praise shall be given to every one according to his works. And by
consequent it is not spoken there of the knowledge which the Saints of Paradise
have of the thoughts of men living upon Earth.

In his fifth book chap. 2. of the fourth instance page 964. to prove that we
must adress our Prayers to the Saints departed he alleges, Genesis 20.7. in
these words, Address thy self unto Abraham and he shall pray for thee. These
words Address thy self unto Abraham are of the Cardinals addition. Note also
that Abraham was then living, See in the last chapter of the sixth book of this
Work four Texts of Scripture falsely alleged by M. Du Perron, in his Oration
pronounced before the States at Paris.
wherefore though this text were not falsified, it were of no force for the
invocation of the Saints departed.

It is written, Joshuah 7.6. that Joshuah rent his clothes and fell to the
earth upon his face before the Ark of the Lord. M. Du Perron in the third book
of the Eucharist against Mr. Du Plessis in the eleventh chapter, to prove the
adoration of the Sacrament, alleges that text, but corrupts it, saying, that
Joshuah and all the people worshipped the Ark.

In the 56. chap. of the third book, page 526. to prove the primacy of Peter he
alleges a passage of St. Ambrose, of the fourth chapter of the book of the
Incarnation, in these words, This (meaning Peter) when he had heard, But you,
who do you say that I am? presently not forgetting his place, he made the
Primacy. It is an excellent passage of St. Ambrose, which M. Du Perron has
clipped to turn it to a contrary sense. These are the true words of Ambrose,
Petrus non immemor sui, primatum egit. Primatum utique confessionis non
honoris, primatum fidei non ordinis; that is, Peter not forgetting his place
made the primacy; the primacy indeed in the confession, not in honor; the
primacy in the faith, not in order. Ambrose acknowledges in St. Peter a
prioity or primacy in making his confession of Faith, not in honor or order.
Wherefore M Du Perron cuts these words away, Primatum confessionis non honoris,
primatum fidei non ordinis.

In the same chapter, page 527. to prove that Peter answered Jesus Christ, Thou
art the Christ the son of the living God, because that past the capacicy of the
other Apostles, he alleged Cyrillus of Jerusalem in the eleventh Catechesis,
in these words, All the other Apostles being silent (for that doctrine was
above their strength) Peter, etc. But there is in the Greek, (...), for that
doctrine was above humane reach, not that doctrine was above their strength.

In the same 56. chapter in the last line of the 531. page he says, that
Chrysostom in his Comment upon the Epistle to the Galatians, reads, Cephas,
James and John. Let the Reader see the place, he shall find that Chrysostom
reads James, Cephas and John, putting James before Peter.

In the same chapter, page 533. he alleges for St. Peter's Primacy a passage
of St. Austin, in the second book of Baptism against the Donatists, where
Austin alleges Cyprian in these words, as M. Du Perron relates them. You see
what St. Cyprian says, that the holy Apostle Peter, in whom so great a grace
of the primacie did shine, being rebuked by St. Paul, answered not that he had
the primacy, and would not be corrected by new men and posteriour unto himself.
So does this Cardinal allege that passage. But the Latin of Cyprian is much
different from it. These be the words, Cyprian in his Epistle to Quintus,
speaks thus of Peter, Nam nec Petrus (inquit) quem primum Dominus elegit, super
quem aedificavit Ecclesiam suam, cum secum Paulus de circumcisione disceptaret,
postmodum vindicavit sibi aliquid insolenter, aut arroganter assumpsit, ut
diceret se primatum tenere and obtemperari a novellis and posteris sibi potius
debere.
for says he, neither Peter whom the Lord chose first, and upon whom he
founded his Church, when Paul disputed with him about the Circumcision, assumed
any thing to himself insolently after that, or did appropriate any thing to
himself arrogantly, to say, that he had the primacy, and that new men come
after him were to obey him. In that passage St. Cyprian clearly says, tha if
St. Peter had assumed unto himself the primacy, or pretended that St. Paul
ought to obey him, he should have spoken arrogantly and insolently. But M. Du
Perron has pared away these words that displease him, Peter assumed nothing
insolently, neither did he appropriate any thing to himself to say that he had
the primacy. We will show hereafter that St. Cyprian makes St. Peter's primacy
to last but two years, that is, until our Saviors Resurrection, and says,
that after the Lords Resurrection all the Apostles were equal in honor and
power. Neither is this all the falsification of this passage; for M. du Perron
interprets the word posteris posteriours, instead of, come since, as Cyprian
means, as it appears by the word novellis, which goes before posteris. But
the Cardinal would give it such an exposition as would bear an inference, that
St. Paul was posteriour both in order and power unto St. Peter.

In the last line of the 54. chapter, page 520. he alleges Pope Leo the I. in
the 62. Epistle to the Emperor Martianus, and makes that Pope speak thus, None
of the Patriarchal Sees, but that of Rome, shall remain stable and unmoved.
That passage is altogether falsified. There is in the Latin, Nec praeter illam
petram quam Dominus in fundamento posuit, stabilis erit ulla constructio, that
is, Besides that stone which the Lord has laid for a foundation, no other
structure shall be stable.

Irenaeus in the third book chap. 3. speaking of the Church of the City of
Rome, says, Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse est
omnem convenire Ecclesiam; This the Cardinal translateth (44. chapter of the first
book, page 354. and in many other places) To the Roman Church by reason of a
more powerful principality, it is necessary that every Church Du Perron's
French word is convienne.
consent, interpreting convenire ad Ecclesiam, consent to the Church, instead
of flocking to the Church, and resorting to it from several places. The sense
of that passage is, that all the Churches of the Roman Empire resorted to the
Church of the City of Rome, because the Sovereign power of the Emperor and of
the Senate resided there. As it is said in the ninth Canon of the Council of
Antioch, (...), because that those that had business resorted to the
Metropolitan Church. Ireneus speaks not of the primacy of the Church, but of
the Sovereign power of the Empire. And whosoever understands Latin, knows
that convenire ad Ecclesiam signifies not to concur or consent with the Church
in doctrine, but to resort to the Church, and come to it from several places.

In the 30. chap. of the first book, toward the end of the 175. page, and in
the begininng of the 176. M. Du Perron says, that when Augustus and the
following Emperors established or restored the Office of Praefectus Urbicus of
Rome, they gave him power to judge of the appeals from all the Provinces of the
Roman World, as the Interpreter of Notitia Imperii Romani does acknowledge it:
And in the margin he cites the fourth chapter of the Comment of Pancirolus upon
Notitia Imperii. The passage of Pancirolus which the Cardinal cites is in
these words, Cui [paerfecto Vrbico] omnem imperii potestatem Augustus
concesserat, non tantum in urbe, sed et extra. That is, To whom the Emperor
Augustus had granted the whole power of the Empire, not only in the Town but
also without. I cannot wonder enough at the ill Faith of this Prelat, in
corrupting the passages of Authors; how he has suppressed the following words,
which limit the power of that Praefectus to a hundred miles about the City of
Rome. This is the whole passage. Augustus had given to the Prefect of the City
the whole power of the Empire, not only within the City, but also without,
Intra cent^simum ab urbe lapidem.
a hundredth miles about the City of Rome. This Cardinal being overprest with a
multitude of authorities of the Ancients, which limit the power of the Bishop
of Rome within the same limits as those of the Praefectura, or civil
Jurisdiction of the Prefect of the City of Rome, will have that prefect of the
City to have been the Judge of all the causes of the Empire. As if one would
have the Lieutenant Civil of Paris to receive the Appeals of all the causes of
France.

Thus in the same chapter, page 177. Gregory Nazianzen calls Rome, (...), that
which presideth over all, that is, over all the Empire; but the Cardinal
translateth that which presideth over all the Word.

In the 32. chap. page 199. he alleges the sixth Canon of the Council of
Nice, which gives order that the customs observed of old in Egypt, Lybia and
Pentapolis, be maintained; namely that the Church of Alexandria have the power
of all things, because this also is ordinary to the Bishop of Rome. To the end
of that Canon the Cardinal sows a tail of his own, and will have the Reader
to supply these words, over all the Church; as if that Canon said, that the
custom of the Bishop of Rome was to have power over all the World, which is an
intolerable license. That was a fit place to bring some example of the power of
the Bishop of Rome out of the Roman Empire; But it is more then he could do,
either there, or any where else.

In the same chap. page 198. he alleges the second book of Evagrius, chapter 4.
making him say, that the Pope was the head of all the Churches: Of which not
one word is found in the whole chapter. As for the Greek Acts of the Councils
which he alleges there in the margin, we will show in the right place that
all these are full of falsifications.

In the same page he alleges the first Action of the Council of Chalcedon in
these words, Hereby it appears that all primacy and principal honor was
always deferred unto the Bishop of Rome. That version of the Cardinal is
false. It is thus according to the Greek (...).
By the things done, and by the disposition of every one, we perceive that
before all things the preheminences and excellency of honor is kept according
to the Canons, to the Archbishop most beloved of God of the ancient Rome. The
Cardinal has omitted these words, according to the Canons, which show that the
honor then deferred unto the Bishop of Rome, was founded upon the Canons and
Ecclesiastical constitutions, not upon the Word of God; and has turned the
word preheminences or prerogatives into all primacy. The falsification is very
bold in adding the word all; for every Patriarch had his pre-eminence and
primacy, but not, all primacy.

In the 25. chapter of the first book, page 109. the Cardinal imployes the
testimony of St. Basil to defend the Popes authority. Basil in the tenth
Epistle complains of the pride of the Western men, of whom Damasus Bishop of
Rome and Ambrose Bishop of Milan were the chief. If the wrath of God (says he)
continues upon us, what help can we receive from the pride of the Western men,
who knew not the truth, and have not the patience to learn it? (...), etc.
and being forestalled with false opinions, do now the things which they have
done in the business of Marcellus, contending against those that announce the
truth, and strengthening heresy by themselves? The Cardinal in the 109. page
alleges that text, and to darken the perspicuity of it, he translateth the
brow of the Western men, instead of the pride and arrogance of the Western men.
And to sweeten the hardness of that passage, he alleges the 77. Epistle of
the same Basil, which he affirms to be written to the Western men, that is,
to Damasus Bishop of Rome and to his fellow Bishops, to whom Basil speaks
thus, We are ready to stand to your judgment, if those that falsely accuse us
can abide to stand face to face with us in the presence of your veneration. If
M. Du Perron must be credited, these are words of submission, whereby Basil
subjecteth himself to the judgment of the Western men, that is, of Damasus
Bishop of Rome and his colleagues. This is a notorious imposture; for that
Epistle is not written to Damasus, nor to his colleagues, but to the Bishops of
the Isles of the Mediterranean Sea, whom he calls (...) and (...), maritime men
and Islanders, and says that they are severed from the Continent, which cannot
be applied to Italy, which is a Continent. And the more submission Basil uses
speaking with those Islanders, the more is that passage against M. Du Perron,
since that honor is deferred to others then the Bishop of Rome.

Hence another falsification is discovered, chapter 33. page 233. where he
alleges these words out of the same Epistle, as spoken to the Western men,
that is, to the Bishop of Rome; Whether you hold your selves heads of the
Universal Church, the head cannot say to the feet. You are not necessary to me.
For these words are spoken to the Maritime Bishops or Islanders. But Monsieur
Du Perron has writ in his margin Basil. ad transmarinos Epist. 77. thinking
that (...) signifies transmarinos, whereas it signifies maritimos, as also in
the same Epistle they are called (...), Islanders, and severed from the
Continent. The words of the same Epistle are express to this purpose, (...).
The Lord has separated the Islands from the continent with the Sea, but has
tied the Islanders with those of the Continent by charity. This passage then is
so far from helping toward the primacy of the Prelate of Rome, that it rather
destroys it, since that title of Head is deferred to others then the Roman
Bishop, according to the custom of the Ancients to be liberal in titles of
deference even to those to whom they did not owe any subjection.

In the 42. chapter of the 3. book he corrupts a Text of Theodoret two ways, taking
the Council of Constantinople for that of Rome, and the Emperor Theodosius for
the Emperor Gratian, as I show in my fifth book in the tenth chapter.

In the 25. chapter of the first book, page 119. and 120. he says against
truth that Prosper Aquitanicus, and Marcellinus Comes put the death of the
Emperess Eudoxia many years after the death of Chrysostom.

In the 52. chapter toward the end of the page 458. he says, that the Fathers of
the Milevitan Council referred the final judgment of Celestius unto the Pope.
Which I prove to be false in my sixth book, in the third chapter.

In the same chapter, page 461. to prove that the Pope had power to summon to
appear before him all that are accused, he alleges the words of Innocent the
I. Bishop of Rome, in his Epistle, which is the 96. among the Epistles of St.
Austin, where Innocent speaking of Pelagius (as M. Du Perron relates it) speaks
thus, He must not expect to be summoned by us, but he must come to us that he
may be absolved. These words But he must come to us, are of the Cardinals
addition. There is in the Latin, Non a nobis accersi sed ipse potius debet
festinare ut possit absolvi.

In the same chapter, page 478. to prove that in Austins time the Bishop of
Rome had the power to send Bands of Soldiers into Africa to get his
commandments executed, In the sixth Book, cap. 6.
he alleges an Epistle of Austin which is newly coined, as I will show in the
right place.

The Bishops assembled in the sixth Council of Carthage, writ long Letters to
Celestin Bishop of Rome, warning him that he should send no more Legates into
Africa, nor receive Appeals from Africa, nor judge causes already judged in
Africa, nor bring the fumous pride of this world into the Church of Christ,
which makes profession of humility. There is in the Latin, Executores Clericos
vestros quibusque petentibus nolite mittere, nolite concedere, ne fumosum
typhum saeculi in Ecclesiam Christi quae lucem simplicitatis, and humilitatis
diem, Deum videre cupientibus praefert, videamur inducere. That is, Send not
your Clerks to be your Agents at the request of any that will desire you: Do
not grant it to them, that it may not seem that we will introduce the fumous
pride of this world into the Church of Christ, which bears the light of
simplicity, and the Sunshine of humility, before those that desire to see God.
But the Cardinal to elude that illustrious Text, translateth fumosum typhum
saeculi, the fumous whirlwind of this world, taking (...) for (...); for (...)
signifies pride and tumor; but (...) is a whirlewind; herein showing himself
little skilled in the Greek tongue: That typhus in that place signifies pride,
not a whirlwind, it appears hence, that in the same line it is opposed unto
humility.

Liberatus, Deacon, in the fifth chapter of his Breviary, says, that the
Emperor Theodosius by his Letters Patent written to the Bishops, called the
Council of Ephesus. And he relates after, how the Council assembled. Which
being met, the same Liberatus a little after, relates how Cyrillus and his
friends called the Bishops of the Council. His words were, Cyrillus cum
suishabens vices sedis Apostolicae, Concilio evocato ducentorum Episcoporum,
Nestorium vocaverunt. That is, Cyrillus with his [friends or Clergy] holding
the place of the Apostolical See, having called (or caused to come to him) a
Council of two hundred Bishops, called Nestorius. But Cardinal du Perron to
make the world believe that this Council had been called by the Pope, has
translated Concilio evocato having convocated a Council instead of having
called to him the Council. That it should be so understood, Liberatus shows it,
saying, that he called the Bishops of the Council, the Council being already
assembled by the convocation made by the Emperors command.

In the ninth chapter of the fourth observation, page 741. he alleges for St.
Peter's primacy these words of Cyprian in the 71. Epistle, Peter answered not
Paul that rebuked him that he had the primacy. This passage is falsified; these
be the true words, Nec Petrus vindicavit sibi aliquid insolenter, aut
arroganter assumpsit, ut diceret se primatum tenere: that is, Peter attributed
nothing to himself insolently, nor assumed any thing arrogantly, to say that he
had the primacy. That passage says, that if Peter had attributed unto himself
the primacy, he should have spoken arrogantly and insolently: Wherefore the
Cardinal has erlipsed these words, arrogantly and insolently.

In the second Observation, 2. chap. page 640. he falsifieth Socrates, making
him say, that the Council of Nice denounced excommunication unto the Quarta
decimani of Asia. But Socrates says, that it was Victor Bishop of Rome, that
denounced that excommunication, not the Council of Nice. See Socrates in the
fifth book, chap. 21.

In the 35. chap. of the first book, page 283. to prove that Hosius Bishop of
Cordova did preside in the Council of Nice in quality of Legate of Pope
Sylvester, Monsieur du Perron alleges Photius in the Book of the Councils
addressed unto Michael King of the Bulgars, and brings these words; With Vito and
Vincentius was joined Osius Bishop of Cordova. An horrible License of
falsifying; for in that book of Photius the clean contrary is found: Of which
book we have an extract, treating of the seven Ecumenical Councils from the
beginning of the first Tome of the Councils. These are the very words of
Photius; The first Ecumenical and holy Council has been celebrated at Nice in
Bithynia, where three hundred and eighteen holy Bishops undertook the judgment
of the truth. Tomus 1. Council. Edit. Colon. An. 1567. apud Ge^vinum Cale^ium.
Prae erat and Alexander qui sedem Constantinopolitanam obtinebat, vir cum
senectute, tum prudentia gravis, etc. and Sylvester and Julius illustres, ac
celebres Ecclesiae Romanae Pontifices, quorum tamen neuter interfuit, sed
Bitonem and Vincentium nomine s^o adesse voluerunt. Phocius Epistola ad
Michaelem Bulgariae Principem de septem Conciliis Oecumenicis.
Alexander did preside in it, who held the Sea of Constantinople, and Sylvester
and Julius illustrious and famous Bishops of the Roman Church. Nevertheless
neither of these were there in person, but they would that Bito and Vincentius
should be there in their names. Of Hosius he speaks not at all, and puts
Alexander Bishop of Constantinople before that of Rome.

In the fifth book, in the Treatise of the Invocation of Saints, 20. chapter page
1057. the Cardinal alleges a text of Theodoret against himself, thus, That
vice [of serving Angels] has continued long in Phrygia and Pisidia, (...).
and therefore the Synod assembled at Laodicea, the Metropolitan City of
Phrygia, prohibited by a Canon praying to Angels: and to this day Oratories to
St. Michael are seen among them. But the Cardinal has taken away that word of
St. Michael, for fear of wrapping the Roman Church in that condemnation; for
that Church has Oratories of St. Michael as well as those Heretics. He has
then put Oratories only, without speaking of St. Michael.

In the 19. chap. of the same Treatise, page 1009. he makes Eusebius to say in
the 13. book of the Evangelical preparation, that Plato has said, that
virtuous dead men must be honored, and their Monuments venerated and adored.
That is false, and Eusebius in the alleged place does not speak of it at all.

In the Controversy of the Prayer for the dead, chapter 10. page 948. he alleges
Josephus in the third Book of the war of the Jews, chapter 25. in these words,
Josephus describing the extremity of the siege of Jotapata, and the resolution
which they would take, rather to cause themselves to be killed then to fall
into the hand of the Romans, testifyeth that he dissuaded them from it by this
remonstrance, that the Law of their Nation did not permit that the souls of
those that had killed themselves should be prayed for. No such thing shall be
found in Josephus, but only (...), that is, there is an order among us, that
they that have killed themselves be hid without burial until sunset.

One of the boldest falsifications in Cardinal du Perrons book, is in the third
chap. of the same Treatise, page 984. in a passage of the 8. Book of Origens
against Celsus. To defend the invocation of Saints and Angels, he goes about
to prove, by Origin, that the Angels and blessed Spirits pray for us: A thing
which we deny not. In vain does he labor to prove that which is not
controverted. But the question is, whether Angels and Saints must be invocated,
and whether they must be prayed to that they would pray for us. Origin then
speaking of persons that fear God and pray to him, (...).
says that an infinity of sacred powers (so he calls Angels) join themselves
to their prayers, not being called upon or invocated. Which is an excellent
passage; but M. du Perron corrupts it, and translates (...) voluntarily,
whereas it signifies, not being called upon by Prayer or Invocation.

The Author of the Comment upon the Epistle to the Romans, attributed to
Ambrose, upon the first chapter says. For this cause we go to the King by Colonels
and Governors, because the King is a man, and knows not to whom he should
commit the administration of the Commonwealth. But to get Gods favor (for he
knows what all men deserve) suffragatore non opus est, sed mente devota, there
is no need of any that help us with his suffrage, but of a devout soul.
Monsieur du Perron translates this word Suffragator, a giver of advice or
attestation against the nature of the word, and the authors intention. For they
that employ Colonels or Governors to speak to the King, do it that they may
intercede for them, not that they may give advice or attestation to the King.
And Ambrose speaks of intercessors to God, not of persons that give advice or
attestation to God; for God to know us needs not the attestation of any.

In the 73. chap. of the first book, page 588. M. du Perron alleges a passage
of Chrysostom, out of the third Homily upon the Epistle to the Philippians,
where he makes Chrysostom to say, It is not in vain that the Apostles have left
a tradition, that sacrifice should be offered for the dead. That passage is
false; for Chrysostom says thus, (...), It is not in vain that the Apostles
have made that Law that in the formidable mysteries a commemoration be made of
them that are departed. This word Sacrifice, and the word Tradition are added
by M. du Perron.

In the third Observation, chapter 20. page 703. and 704. he falsifieth the
tenth Canon of the Council of Ancyra, translating (...) have been received,
whereas it signifies having undertaken, or having obliged themselves. The
Latins would say, qui in se receperunt.

Page 1084. Where he speaks of unknown Language, he alleges a passage of
Hierome in the preface of the second book upon the Epistle to the Galatians,
whereby he would prove that the Divine Service was celebrated among the
Galatians in a Language not understood, because their Service was in Greek, and
their vulgar tongue was like unto that of the Gauls of Triers. The Cardinal
makes Hierome speak thus, The tongue of the Galatians was like that of the
Gauls of Triers. But he fraudulently clips the words of Hierome, which say
that the Galatians had also the use of the Greek tongue, vulgar in all the
East. This is the true passage, Galatas excepto Sermon Graeco quo omnis Oriens
loquitur, propriam eandem habere linguam quam Treviros. That the Galatians,
besides the Greek tongue which all the East speaks, have a proper tongue, the
same as that of the Gauls of Triers.

In the second Observation, chapter 5. page 651. he proves secret confession
by Saint Cyprian, whose words he thus alleges, They that do penance, cannot
come to the Communion, unless the hand be laid upon them by the Priest or by
the Clergy. There is in the Latin, ab Episcopo and Clero, by the Bishop and
the Clergy. But M. du Perron has put the Priest for the Bishop, and or for
and, because the laying on of hands by the Priest and by the Clergy cannot be
applied to the secret Confession, but to the public penance.

(...).
In the same page he falsifyeth two passages of Basil, who in the short Rules,
in the 229. Rule says, Confession of sins must be made before them that can
heal it. But Monsieur du Perron, to exclude all other confession, but that
which is made unto the Priest, adds this word, only, and thus sets down that
passage, Confession of sins can be made only before them that can heal it.

To the same purpose in the same place is alleged another place of S. Basil
out of the 288. question in these words, Sins must be revealed only to those to
whom the dispensation of mysteries is committed. But the word only, is of the
Cardinals addition.

To the same purpose again he corrupts a passage of Leo in the Epistle to the
Bishops of Campania, (...).
which is the 80. He makes Leo to say, It is enough that the sins of
Consciences be showed unto the Priest by a secret confession. He has put
Priest for Priests; sacerdoti pro sacerdotibus: because the confession made to
many Priests avails nothing to prove Auricular Confession.

In the third chapter of the second Observation in the end of the 648. page where
he disputes of Auricular Confession, he alleges a place of Chrysostom, in
the 30. Homily to the people of Antioch, in these words, It is enough for thee
to confess thy sin to God alone, not to thy servant that upbraideth thee with
it. Item, Do not constrain thy self to come to a Stage before a great multitude
of witnesses. (...).
But he suppresseth the following words, Against me the sin is committed, To me
alone tell it in private, which are express words against the confession made
unto the Priest.

In the fifth chapter of the same Observation, page 650. he alleges these
words of Ambrose, for the secret confession, out of the sixteenth chapter of
the first Book of penitence; If any having secret crimes, makes nevertheless a
serious penance, how shall he receive there [a hundredth fold] if the communion
be not restored to him again? Here Monsieur du Perron stays and suppresseth
the following words which show that Ambrose is speaking of a public
confession. Volo veniam reus speret. Petat eam lachrymis. Petat gemitibus.
Petat populi fletibus.
I will (says Ambrose) that the guilty hope for pardon; Let him ask for it
with weeping. Let him ask it with groaning. Let him ask it with the tears of
the people, etc. Such dealing indeed is abusing the Reader, and unworthily
clipping the sense of the Fathers.

Ambrose in the nineth chapter concerning those that are initiated in the
mysteries, says, The Lord Jesus himself cries, This is my body. Before the
heavenly blessing, another kind is named; After the consecration, the body of
Christ is signified or represented. There is in the Latin, Ante benedictionem
verborum coelestium alia species nominatur, post consecrationem corpus Christi
significatur. Monsiur du Perron in the eight hundred seventy ninth page
corrupts this place, translating it thus, Before the blessing of the heavenly
words it is named another kind; After the consecration it is called the body of
Christ. See the third chapter of the eleventh Controversy of the seventh book
of this present Work, where I speak of this more at large.

In the fifth chapter of the Treatise of the Sacrifice, page 925. the Cardinal
alleges the twenty ninth Canon of the Council of Carthage in these words, If
in the afternoon some recommendations must be made of the dead, whether they be
Bishops or Clarks or others, Let them be made by prayers only, if it be found
that those that make it be no more fasting, reserving to the morning only the
recommendations made by oblation. These last words, reserving to the morning
only the recommendations made by oblation, are added by M. du Perron, and are
not found in that twenty ninth Canon.

See in this work, chap. 4. of the eleventh Controversy of the seventh book, a
notorious corruption of an excellent place of Theodoret.

And in the seventh chapter the corruption of the Canon Hoc est, by omission of
the word as.

St. Austin chap. 12. of the book against Adimantus has these words, Non enim
dubitavit Dominus dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui.
The Lord made no difficulty to say, This is my body, when he was giving the
sign of his body. Cardinal du Perron in the fourth book, and the fourth chapter
page 871. will have these words supplied, according to you, as though Austin
had said, The Lord made no difficulty to say, This is my body, when (according
to you (O Manicheans) he gave the sign of his body. Of which enormous license
in corrupting passages of the true sense of this place, see the eleventh
Controversy of the seventh book, chap. 8. of this work.

In the sixteenth chapter of the same book, page 907. he alleges a place of
Cyrillus of Alexandria, but with three corruptions of his own. That place of
Cyrillus is found in the defense of the eleventh Anathematismus, inserted in
the first Tome of the Councils, and is set down in these words; Number hominis
comestionem nostrum hoc Sacramentum pronuncias? and irreligiose ad crassas
cogitationes urges eorum qui credid^runt mentem, and attentas humanis
cogitationibus tractare ea quae sola pura and irrequisita fide accipiuntur? And
in the Greek, (...), and, (...).
Do thou pronounce that in our Sacrament we eat a man? And do thou in an
ungodly manner urge the understanding of those that have believed into gross
thoughts? Do thou attempt to handle with humane thoughts, those things which
are not received but only with a pure and not far-fetcht faith? The Lord
Cardinal altogether corrupts this text, translating it thus; Do not pronounce
that our mystery is an anthropophagy, or eating of man's flesh, irreligiously
engaging the spirits of the believers into fallacious reasonings, and
submitting to humane argumentations those things which are admitted by the only
and not inquisitive faith. He translateth (...) fallacious reasonings: But
(...) is not a reasoning, but a thought. And (...) signifies not fallacious,
but vain and easily wearing away. He had heard of (...) and he has mistaken
the one one for the other. And he translates (...) a faith not inquisitive,
whereas it signifies a faith not far-fetcht. And he omitteth the word of only
faith, in which lies all the strength of that place.

In the precedent page he translateth (...) are presupposed, whereas it
signifies are taken or received, as the Latin copies translate. As also Acts
27.23. (...) having taken, that is, eaten nothing, and in v. 36. (...) they
took meat.

The number of the places which the Cardinal depraveth, for want of sufficient
skill in the Greek tongue, is numberless. Some of many we shall bring here.

Page 279. going about to correct Sozomenus, he translateth (...) venerable,
which signifies hoary or gray-haired.

Page 126. he translateth (...) reverencing, whereas it signifies cogitantem,
thinking and imagining.

In the same page he translates (...) discretion, whereas it signifies trial
or examination.

Page 961. In the second instance he interprets (...) a bathing tub, or a
cistern, taking (...) for (...), whereof the first signifies the washing
liquor, the second a cistern or bathing tub.

Page 137. he translates (...) representing, whereas it signifies troubling or
importuning.

(...).
Page 317. (...) he expounds convocating, whereas it signifies summoning, or
desiring to come. And (...) he takes for (...) which he does fraudulently to
persuade that Damasus did convocate the Council; whereas Theodoret, whom he
alleges, says only that Damasus invited and desired the Eastern Bishops to
come to Rome to the Council; but that the said Bishops would not come. It was
an invitation without convocation.

In the first chapter of the Treatise of the Sacrifice, page 910 (...), which
signifies non amplius polluent, they shall defile no more, he translates, they
shall smoke no more, which is a great ignorance in the Greek tongue.

In chap. 49. of the first book p. 428. (...) he translates studious, taking
(...) for (...), for (...) signifies expetitus, and quod studiose expetitur,
that which is desired or sought for with care. Whence is derived (...) desired
by every one, and (...) worthy to be desired and sought for.

In chap. 34. book 1. page 247. (...) he translates should decree; whereas
(...) signifies to suggest, counsel, or represent. Besides, the place which he
alleged is clipped, to persuade that Anthimus Patriarch of Constantinople was
subject to the Bishop of Rome. It is taken out of the fifth Council of
Constantinople, held under Menas, in the fourth Action; The words are, that
(...).
Anthimus using fraudulent words, promised to do whatsoever the High Priest of
the great Apostolical See would suggest unto him. M. du Perron has cut off the
head of that place suppressing these words, using fraudulent words, least it
should be seen that Anthimus did not hold himself subject to the Bishop of
Rome. And instead of suggesting, he has put decreeing, to make the world
believe that Anthimus was subject to the Decrees and Ordinances of the Roman
Bishop.

The third Canon of the Council of Nice is this, (...).
The great Synod has altogether forbidden [or declared] that it be not
permitted, neither to a Bishop, nor to a Priest, nor to a Deacon, nor to any
other of the Clergy to have an associated woman, but only his Mother, or his
Sister, or his Aunt, or only the persons that are past suspicion. That Council
by associate women understands certain women which Priests kept at their home,
under color, of friendship, or service: Which was subject to sinister
interpretation. As now to be a Priests maid, is an ill name. The Grecians
called those she associates, (...); And the women so associated were also
called Agapets and strange women. This we show in this book by several
testimonies in the seventh chapter of the Controversy of the Celibat. Cardinal
du Perron in the twentieth chapter of the third observation, page 706.
understanding not the meaning of that word (...), or feigning that he
understands it not, will have that word to signify a married woman, saying
that the Council of Nice reckoning the women which are allowed to lodge in
Bishops houses, as the Mother, the Sister, and the Aunt, excludes the Wife out
of that number, pretending that the Council forbids Bishops and Priests to
marry. I prove in the seventh chapter forealledged, that M. du Perron did not
understand the significaiion of the word (...), and that he corrupts the Canon
of the Council of Nice, putting a doctrine upon the Council contrary to their
sense.

In the same chapter page 708. of the Cardinals book, a Canon of the Council of
Gangra is falsified. The Canon is such, (...).
If any make a difference about a married Priest, as if one ought not to be
partaker of the oblation when he does the service, let him be anathema or
accursed. There is in the Greek (...) of a married Priest, not of a Priest that
has been married, as M. du Perron will have it translated. I show in the
seventh chapter of the Treatise of the Celibat, that (...) signifies one that
is married, not one that has been.

The like ignorance of his in the word (...), I show in XI. Controversy of the
VII. Book, chap. 4. And another ignorance of the word (...) in his nineteenth
chapter; M. du Perron makes (...) to signify then, whereas it signifies
altogether. Many the like falsifications and depravations we represent in this
Work. They shall be found marked in the Table at the end, in the word
falsication, and in the word Ignorance.

I desire also the Reader to take notice that I abstained from examining the
places alleged to no purpose, and nothing to our Controversies, which make two
parts of three at the least of those places which M. du Perron alleges in his
Book.

The Confession of three POPES.
ONuphrius Panuinius an Augustinian Monk in the life of Marcellus the II. has
these words, Post longum in prandio silentium recordatus aliquando est Hadriani
Quarti verba, Romano Pontifice nemo est miserabilior, condition ejus nulla
miserior. Et paulo post, Non video quomodo qui locum hunc altissimum tenent
salvari possint.
Marcellus after a long silence in dinner time, remembered the words which Pope
Adrian the fourth had sometimes spoken, There is no man more to be pitied then
the Bishop of Rome, and no condition more unfortunate then his. And a little
after, the same Marcel continuing his discourse, struck the Table with his
hand, saying, I see not how they that hold this most high place, can be saved.

Aeneas Sylvius, otherwise called Pope Pius the second, in his sixty sixth
Epistle to John Peregral, says Nihil est quod absque argento Romana Curia
dedat; ipsa manuum impositio and Spiritus S. dona venduntur, nec peccatorum
venia nisi nummatis impenditur.
The Roman Court gives nothing without money, yea the imposition of hands, and
the gifts of the Holy Ghost are sold, and the remission of sins is bestowed
upon none but such as have money. The same in his Epistle to Martin Mayer which
is the one hundred eighty eighth, speaking of the state of the Christian Church
of the first ages, says, Sibi quisque vivebat, and ad Ecclesiam Romanam parvus
habebatur respectus.
Every one at that time lived for himself, and little respect was given to the
Roman Church.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I. Treating of the Church and of her Marks, and of the authority of holy
Scripture, and of Traditions.
Chap. 1. OF the nature of the question of the Church. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of the
word Church, and the diverse significations of the same. Page 3 Chap. 3. That
there is a Church of elect or predestinate. Page 6 Chap. 4. Reasons of the
Adversaries against the Church of the Elect. Page 7 Chap. 5. Reasons of
Cardinal Du Perron against the Church of the Elect, in the ninth chapter of his
book. Page 8 Chap. 6. Whether the societies of Heretics and Scismaticks or
Idolatrous Christians, ought to be called Churches. Answer to Cardinal Du
Perron. Page 12 Chap. 7. How that Proposition must be understood, that out of
the Church there is no Salvation. Page 13 Chap. 8. Whether the true Church be
always in sight. State of the question. Page 15 Chap. 9. That the Church to
which we must join that we may be saved, is not always eminent and exposed to
every ones sight. Answer to the Cardinal. Page 16 Chap. 10. Places of Fathers
upon that Subject. Page 18 Chap. 11. Passages and reasons of the Adversaries
for the perpetual visibility of the Church. ib. Chap. 12. Answer to that
question made to us, Show us where your Church was before Luther, remounting
from Luther to the Apostles. Page 20 Chap. 13. Whether the Church can err. Page
22 Chap. 14. That the Roman Church has erred, and erreth. Page 26 Chap. 15. Of
the Antiquities of the Roman Church. A Treatise wherein it is showed that the
ceremonies of the Roman Church are descended from the ancient Heretics, and
that the Pagans and Jews have contributed toward them. Page 38 Chap. 16.
Reasons why Cardinal Du Perron, making little account of the three first ages,
confines himsel to the time of the three first Councils. And that he sets down
unjust rules and such as himself observes not. Page 54 Chap. 17. Of the
authority of the Church. And whether she must have more authority with us then
the holy Scripture. Opinions of the Parties. Page 55 Chap. 18. Proofs that the
Word of God contained in the Holy Scriptures is above the Church, and ought to
be of greater authority with us then the Church. Page 58 Chap. 19. Reasons of
our Adversaries to the contrary. Page 60 Chap. 20. Examination of the places of
the Ancients which M. Du Perron objecteth to this purpose. Page 63 Chap. 21. Of
the Authority of the Church to interpret Scripture infallibly. Page 64 Chap.
22. Seven differences between our interpretations of Scripture and those of the
Roman Church. Page 67 Chap. 23. Examination of the reasons which Cardinal Du
Perron brings in the fifth chapter for the authority of the Church to interpret
Scripture infallibly. Page 69 Chap. 24. Of the authority of the Church to alter
that which God has commanded in Scripture. Confutation of the Cardinal. Page
70 Chap. 25. Which and of what nature must the marks of the Church be. Page 72
Chap. 26. Of the true mark to discern the true Church. Page 73 Chap. 27.
Testimonies of the Fathers. Confutation of the Cardinals answer. Page 75 Chap.
28. Reasons of the Cardinal and others, to prove that the true doctrine and
conformity to the Word of God is no mark of the true Church. Page 76 Chap. 29.
That the word Catholic cannot be a mark of the true Church. Page 79 Chap. 30.
Of the word Catholic, and in what sense the Church is called Catholic by the
Ancients. That Cardinal Du Perron has not at all understood what Catholic
signifies, nor the sense of Vincentius Lirinensis. Page 80 Chap. 31. Of
holiness in doctrine. Page 84 Chap. 32. Of the succession of Chairs. Whether it
be a mark of the true Church. And what that succession is of which the Fathers
speak. Page 85 Chap. 33. What the succession was, and what the calling of those
who in our Fathers time took in hand the reformation of Popery. Page 89 Chap.
34. That in the time of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and in the ages next to
the Apostles, many have preached the Word of God in the Church without
succession and without ordinary calling. Page 90 Chap. 35. A difference to be
observed between the Office of Pastor of the Church, and the means to enter
into it. Page 92 Chap. 36. That the Popes have a false title, and without any
Word of God to the succession of St. Peter in the charge of Head of the
Universal Church, and that such a charge is not grounded in Gods Ordinance.
Page 95 Chap. 37. Of the succession of Popes and Cardinals. By what ways the
Popedom uses to be obtained. Of Schisms. And that the Popes have no lawful
succession. Page 97 Chap. 38. Of the ways whereby Cardinals and other Prelates
come to their charges. Page 109 Chap. 39. Of the perpetual duration which M. Du
Perron calls indefectibility. Page 110 Chap. 40. Of the multitude and great
number. And that the multitude is not a mark of the true Church. Page 111 Chap.
41. Examination of the proofs which M. Du Perron brings to prove that the true
Church had always the greatest number. Page 113 Chap. 42. Of Miracles. Page
114 Chap. 43. Of Union in the visible Church. Page 116 Chap. 44. Whether the
Universal Church must be called Roman. Page 117 Chap. 45. Of Antiquity, whether
it be a mark of the true Church. Page 118 Chap. 46. Of the Fathers and ancient
Doctors, and of their authority. Page 120 Chap. 47. That our Adversaries
condemn the Fathers, and by consequent cannot have them for Judges. Page 122
Chap. 48. That the Roman Church opposes her self to the consent of ancient
Doctors. Page 126 Chap. 49. Doctrines in which the Roman Church rejects every
Father in particular. Page 133 Chap. 50. How far the ancient Church was from
the belief which is now received in the Roman Church. Observations upon the 18.
chapter of the first book of Card. Du Perron. Page 143 Chap. 51. Of the pretended
power and authority of the Church to add unto Scripture. And of the unwritten
Traditions. And why the Pope not only equalleth them unto, but prefers them
before the holy Scripture. Page 148 Chap. 52. That the holy Scripture
contains the whole doctrine necessary to Salvation. Examination of the
Cardinals answers. Page 152 Chap. 53. Testimonies of Fathers of the sufficiency
of Scripture against unwritten Traditions. Page 153 Chap. 54. The Cardinals
reasons for Traditions against the perfection of Scripture. And first of the
Traditions which he calls Mosaical and Patriarchal. Page 159 Chap. 55. Texts of
the New Testament which Cardinal Du Perron brings for the Traditions not
contained in the Scripture. Page 161 Chap. 56. Doctrines held in the Christian
Church, which the Cardinal says not to be contained in Scripture. Page 163
Chap. 57. Of the Traditions which the Fathers allow. Page 164 Chap. 58. Of the
prohibition of reading holy Scripture. Shifts of Cardinal Du Perron. Page 167
Chap. 59. Defense of the purity and truth of Scripture against the Cardinals
accusations and falsifications. Page 174 Chap. 60. Of Canonical and Apocryphal
books. Proofs by Gods Word that Tobit, Judith, Maccabees, etc. are not
Canonical. Page 177 Chap. 61. Untruth and errors in the Apocryphal books. Page
178 Chap. 62. That the Cardinal attributes weak objections to us and defends
that which we do not impugn. Page 191 Chap. 63. That we reject not the
Apocrypha because they are contrary to us. And that they are rather favorable
to us. ibid. Chap. 64. Belief of the ancient Greek Church about the Canonical
books. Page 193 Chap. 65. Belief of the Fathers of the Latin or Western Church
about the Canonical books; and that the Cardinal does not truly represent it.
Page 196 Chap. 66. Confutation of the Cardinals shifts. Page 199 Chap. 67. Of
Austin's opinion concerning the canonical books, and of the canon of the III.
Council of Carthage, upon which the Cardinal grounds himself. Page 204 Chap.
68. Of the canon of the holy Scriptures defined by Pope Innocent the I. And of
the Decretal Epistle of that Innocent to Exuperius. Page 207 Chap. 69. That the
Popes have put their Canons and Decrees not only in the same rank as Canoincal
Scriptures, but above. Page 208
BOOK. II. Wherein is treated of St. Peter's Primacy, and of his abode at Rome.
Chap. 1. THat the Government of the Universal Church, cannot and must not be
Monarchical. State of the question. page 211 Chap. 2. That St. Peter had no
jurisdiction over the other Apostles, and was not Monarch of the Universal
Church. Answer to the Cardinal. page 214 Chap. 3. Testimonies of Fathers upon
this Subject. An excellent place of St. Ambrose falsified by the Cardinal. And
a text of the Apostle falsified likewise. page 216 Chap. 4. Examination of the
text of Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, etc. Shifts of the Cardinal. page 218 Chap.
5. Six reasons of the Cardinal to prove, that by this stone the Person of Peter
is understood. page 222 Chap. 6. Other proofs brought by the Cardinal out of
Scripture. page 223 Chap. 7. Of Cyprians opinion about Peter's Primacy. That the
Cardinal has not understood it, and how all the Apostles have been Heads of
the Universal Church. page 225 Chap. 8. Of St. Peter's being at Rome.
Examinations of the Cardinals reasons. page 226 Chap. 9. The Cardinals
falsifications about this matter. page 234 Advertisement to the Reader. page
237
BOOK III. Which is the first part of the History of Papacy. Wherein so much of
the History of the Ancient Christian Church is deduced from the beginning unto
the year 300. of Christ, as will prove that then the Bishop of Rome was not
acknowledged Head of the Universal Church.
Chap. 1. THat in the first age the Bishop of Rome was not acknowledged the
Head of the Universal Church. page 239 Chap. 2. That the Bishop of Rome in the
second age was not acknowledged Head of the Universal Church. Vindication of
Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea against the Cardinals false accusations page 241
Chap. 3. That in the third age the Bishops of Rome were not acknowledged Heads
of the Universal Church. page 246 Chap. 4. That the Cardinal would not make use
of the authority of the Decretals to prove the Popes Primacy in the three first
ages. And of the authority of the said Decretals. page 252 Chap. 5. The first
cause why M. Du Perron would not make use of the Decretal Epistles of the
Bishops of Rome of the three first ages; even because in many places they are
contrary to the Roman Church of this time. page 253 Chap. 6. Other causes why
the Cardinal would make no use of the Decretals of the three first ages. Of the
barbarousness of those Decretals, and how Scripture is profaned in them. page
255 Chap. 7. Evident untruths in the Decretals of the three first ages. The
gross ignorance in History, of him that coined them. page 257 Chap. 8. That
many of our Adversaries have acknowledged the untruth of those Decretals. page
260 Chap. 9. Of the Popes motives for causing these false Decretals to be
forged; and when and by whom they were forged. page 261
BOOK IV. Proving by the History of the Bishops of Rome from the year 300. of
the Lord till two years after the death of Constantine the Emperor, which is
the year of our Lord 340. That in all that age the Bishop of Rome was not
acknowledged Head of the Universal Church.
Chap. 1. OF the idolatry of Marcellinus Bishop of Rome, and of the Council of
Sinuessa. page 265 Chap. 2 Of the Judges given by Constantin to Cecilianus and
to the Donatists. And of the Council of Arles. page 266 Chap. 3. Of the
deliverance and establishment of the Church under Constantin. page 267 Chap. 4.
Of the diversity of the Churches in observing the day of Easter. page 268 Chap.
5. Of the convocation of the Council of Nice; Answer to the Cardinal. page 269
Chap. 6. That the Bishop of Rome did not preside in the Council of Nice.
Confutation of the Cardinals assertion that Hosius was Legate of the Roman
Church in that Council. page 270 Chap. 7. Of the Canon of Nice which sets
limits to the Roman Bishopric. And of the suburbicary Churches. Absurdity of
the Cardinals interpretation. page 272 Chap. 8. Of the convocation of the
Council of Tyr. page 275 Chap. 9. Death of Sylvester Bishop of Rome. How little
his authority was. ibid. Chap. 10. Baptism and death of Constantin. ibid. Chap.
11. How poor and weak and few are the proofs which Cardinal Du Perron brings
out of the three first ages, till the year of Christ 340. to defend the Popes
Primacy. page 276 Chap. 12. How our Adversaries being destitute of true proofs
of the Popes primacy in the time that followed next to the three first ages,
have forged false Epistles and supposititious Decrees. page 280 Chap. 13. Of
Constantin's donation and the untruth of if. page 282 Chap. 14. Of the Baptism
of Constantin mentioned in the same Donation. page 286
BOOK V. Proving by the Ecclesiastical History from the year of our Lord 340.
unto the year 400. that then the Bishop of Rome would begin to exalt himself,
but missed of his attempt. And what hindrances he met with.
Chap. 1. OF the persecutions happened to Athanasius. And how Julius Bishop of
Rome would make himself Judge of his cause. Of the convocating, sitting, and
success of the Council of Sardica. page 289 Chap. 2. Three points which the
Cardinal finds in this History to establish the Popes primacy. And the
falsifications which he accumulateth in this matter. page 292 Chap. 3. Of the
Council of Sardica. page 297 Chap. 4. Of the convocating of the Council of
Sardica. How much the Cardinal is mistaken in it. page 300 Chap. 5. Of the
Presidency in the Council of Sardica. page 301 Chap. 6. Of Liberius Bishop of
Rome, and of the Schism after his death. ibid. Chap. 7. Of the Fathers famous
in that time, Hosius, Athanasius, Meletius, Gregory, Nazianzen. page 302 Chap.
8. Of Damasus Bishop of Rome, and of Basil Archbishop of Cesarea. Ignorance of
the Cardinal in the Greek tongue. page 303 Chap. 9. Of Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, and of his retreat to Rome, and of Gregory Nazianzen Patriarch of
Constantinople. page 305 Chap. 10. Of the convocating of the first Council of
Constantinople, which is the second Universal Council. How the Cardinal has
falsified the Epistle of the Oriental Bishops to Damasus Bishop of Rome. page
306 Chap. 11. Of the invitation and request of Damasus Bishop of Rome, whereby
he desired the Bishops assembled in Council at Constantinople to transport
themselves to Rome, and come to the Council which Damasus held there; and of
the small authority which the Council of Rome had in comparison of that of
Constantinople. The Cardinals Faults. page 307 Chap. 12. Remarkable passages in
the Council of Constantinople. page 308 Chap. 13. Of Hierome, and of the title
of Pontifex left by the Emperor Gratian. page 309 Chap. 14. Of the abolition
of the Penitentiary Priest by Nectarius. page 311 Chap. 15. Of Epiphanius
Bishop of Cyprus, and of John Chrysostom. ibid. Chap. 16. Of Ambrose Bishop of
Milan, and that in his time the Church of Milan was not subject unto the Bishop
of Rome. page 312 Chap. 17. Contention of Paulinus and Flavianus competitours
of the Patriarchat of Antioch. page 316 Chap. 18. Observations upon the History
of the four first ages. And how the Cardinal has found nothing in it for his
purpose. ibid.
BOOK VI. Proving by the Papal History from the year of the Lord 400. unto the
Council of Chalcedon, which is the IV. Universal Council, held in the year 451.
That in all that time the Bishop of Rome was not acknowledged the Head of the
Universal Church.
Chap. 1. NArration of that which happened to John Chrysostom Patriarch of
Constantinople. Page 319 Chap. 2. Of the power of the Patriarchs of the fifth
age. Page 323 Chap. 3. Of the Milevitan Council, and of the prohibition there
made to appeal unto Rome. The Cardinals answers are examined. Page 324 Chap. 4.
Of the Schism happened at Rome between Bonifacius and Eulatius. Page 327 Chap. 5.
Of the Council of Carthage called the sixth. Of the appeals from Africa to
Rome. The remonstrances of the Bishops of Africa to the Bishop of Rome upon
that subject. Confutation of the 40. chapter of the Cardinals first book. Page
328 Chap. 6. Examination of the LII. chap. of the Cardinals first book about
the abovementioned Epistle of the 6. Council of Africa, written by the Fathers
of the Council to Celestinus Bishop of Rome, concerning the appeals from Africa
to Rome. Page 331 Chap. 7. Notes upon the XLVIII. and XLIX. Chapters of the
first book of Cardinal du Perron. His ignorance in Greek. Page 337 Chap. 8. Of
St. Austin Bishop of Bona in Africa. Whether he did acknowledge the Bishop of
Rome head of the Universal Church. And what was in his time the order and
dignity of Patriarchs and Apostolic Sees. Page 338 Chap. 9. Of the Epistles of
the Bishops of Africa (of whom Austin was one) to Innocent the first Bishop of
Rome. And that our Cardinal labors without ground to turn them to his
advantage. Page 341 Chap. 10. A place of Austins 162. Epistle examined. Page
344 Chap. 11. Of Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople. Of the convocating of
the first Council of Ephesus, which was the third Universal. And that the
Emperors by their own single Authority convocated the Councils. Page 346 Chap.
12. Of the assembling of the first Council of Ephesus. The Cardinals
falsifications. ibid. Chap. 13. That none but the Emperor could or ought to
convocate an Universal Council: And that the Bishop of Rome did not meddle with
that. Page 348 Chap. 14. Of the Patriarchs that were present in the first
Council of Ephesus. And of the strife between Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria,
and John Patriarch of Antioch. Page 349 Chap. 15. Of the order of sitting in
the first Council of Ephesus. And in what quality Cyrillus did preside in it.
How Monsieur du Perron corrupts that History. Page 350 Chap. 16. Some
incidencies happened in the first Council of Ephesus, or by occasion of the
same, conducing to this question. Page 352 Chap. 17. Occasion of the second
Council of Ephesus, and by whom it was convocated. Page 353 Chap. 18. Of the
things happened in the 2. Council of Ephesus, and who presided in it. Page 354
Chap. 19. Of the appeal of Flavianus and of Theodoret Bishop of Cyr to Leo
Bishop of Rome; And of the appeals in general. That the Cardinal did not
understand the nature of those appeals. Page 355 Chap. 20. Of the
excommunication that Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria fulminated against Leo
Bishop of Rome; and of other censures pronounced against the Bishop of Rome.
Page 360 Chap. 21. Of the Letters, and of the Law of Valentinian the 3. And of
the Law of the Emperor Leo, contrary to that of Valentinian. Page 361 Chap.
22. Of the ordination of the Patriarch of Antioch by that of Constantinople.
Page 364 Chap. 23. Of the assembling of the Council of Chalcedon, which is the
4. universal Council. ibid Chap. 24. Who presided in the Council of Chalcedon.
Page 365 Chap. 25. Of that which past in the Council of Chalcedon, and of the
Canons made in the same about the order of the Patriarchs, and the
Ecclesiastial Policy. Page 366 Chap. 26. Of the 28th. Canon of the Council of
Chalcedon, and of the protestation which the Legates of Leo Bishop of Rome made
against it, and how they offered to falsify a Canon of the Council of Nice.
Page 368 Chap. 27. Answer to the nullities which M. Du Perron brings against
this canon of Chalcedon. Page 370 Chap. 28. Confutation of the exposition which
M. du Perron gives to the canon of the Council of Chalcedon. Page 372 Chap.
29. Of the Acts of the council of Chalcedon, and of the little credit which
ought to be given to the Tomes of the Councils, both Greek and Latin. Page 373
Chap. 30. Answer to the examples which Cardinal du Perron brings in the 34. chapter
to prove that notwithstanding this Canon of Chalcedon, the Bishops of
Constantinople have been subject to the Bishop of Rome. Page 374 Chap. 31. A
Summary Answer to the examples, posteriour to the 4. Universal Council brought
by the Cardinal in his 34. Chapter. Page 376 Chap. 32. A multitude of
falsifications of Cardinal du Perron. Page 382
BOOK. VII. Wherein diverse Controversies are examined, handled by Cardinal du
Perron in his second, third, fourth, and fifth Book.
First Controversy. Of the Invocation of Saints. Chap. 1. STate and
distribution of the question. Page 387 Chap. 2. That the glorified Saints know
not all that is done in earth, and know not the hearts and thoughts of men.
Confutation of the Cardinal. Page 388 Chap. 3. The opinion of the Fathers about
this point. Page 391 Chap. 4. Examination of the Texts and Reasons which the
Cardinal brings to prove that the Saints know all things, see our thoughts, and
hear our prayers: His foul dealing is laid open. Page 396 Chap. 5. What
assurance the Roman Church has, that the Saints whom they call upon, are true
Saints. Page 399 Chap. 6. Whether Saints and Angels ought to be worshipped.
Page 402 Chap. 7. What was the opinion of the three first Ages, and till the
midst of the fourth, about the invocation of Saints and Angels. Page 406 Chap.
8. Vindication of Origin upon the point of Invocation of one only God, against
the accusations of Cardinal du Perron. Page 410 Chap. 9. A place of Origens 8.
book against Celsus falsified by Cardinal du Perron. Page 414 Chap. 10. Reasons
why Hierome said, that the Fathers writing against the Pagans, often write
against their own sense. Page 415 Chap. 11. Of the opinion of those that
condemn not Invocation of Saints, but think it unnecessary. Page 418 Chap. 12.
Opinion of the Fathers about invocation of Saints, from the year of the Lord
365. unto the fourth Council. Page 419 Chap. 13. What honor is due to Angels
and deceased Saints, and of the worship of Dulia and Latria. Page 429 Chap. 14.
Of the Legends of Saints. Page 433 Chap. 15. Of the Psalter attributed to St.
Bonaventure. Page 434
Second Controversy. Of Images. 1. Chap. OF Gods Images. Page 436 2. Chap. Of
the Images of Saints. Page 438 3. Chap. Reasons of the Adversaries for the
adoration of Images. Page 448 4. Chap. That the excuses and reasons which our
adversaries bring for the defense of their Images, are the same which the
Pagans alleged against the ancient Christians. Page 449 5. Chap. When the
Images of Saints were first brought into the Latin or Occidental Church, and
of the progress of that abuse. Page 451 6. Chap. Of the origin and progress of
Images in the Greek and Oriental Churches. Page 452
Third Controversy. In answer to the third instance of the 4. Book of Cardinal
du Perron. Of Prayer for the Dead. 1. Chap. OF prayer for the dead, and of
Purgatory. What Scripture says of it. And of the Purgatory of the Primitive
Church. Page 455 2. Chap. Of Indulgences given unto the dead, and generally of
Indulgences. 46^
Fourth Controversy. Of the Celibat of Clerks and Monks. 1. Chap. A Comparison
of continent Virginity with Matrimony. That many Prophets and Apostles were
married. Examination of the Cardinals shifts. Page 469 2. Chap. That the
Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 7. obliges incontinent Clerks to marry: Confutation of
the Cardinals reasons. Page 472 3. Chap. Another Text of the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 4. against the prohibition of marrying; examination of the Cardinals
answers. Page 475 4. Chap. Another Text of the same Epistle, 3. chap. Page 477
5. Chap. Vindication of the assertion of his Majesty of Great Britain, that
Canonists teach that Fornication is more tolerable in the Ministers of the
Church then lawful Matrimony. Page 479 6. Chap. Answer to the reasons and
testimonies which the Cardinal brings against the marriage of Clerks. Page 480
7. Chap. What was the belief of the ancient Church about the marriage of the
Ministers of the Church. The reasons and allegations of Cardinal du Perron are
examined, and some of his falsifications observed. Page 483 8. Chap. Examples
of Clerks married, both Ancient and Modern. Page 492 9. Chap. Confession of the
Adversaries. Page 494 10. Chap. Of the disorders happened by the Celibat. Also
of the Carthusians, and of St. Francis, and his rule. Page 496 11. Chap. Of
affected austerity. Reasons whereby the Cardinal maintains professed
slovenliness. The origin of Monks. Page 499
Fifth Controversy. Of Fasting. Chap. 1. THat in the question of Fasting, and
of Lent, M. du Perron does not touch the state of the question, but discourses
about things not controverted. Page 505. Chap. 2. That as sobriety and fasting
are recommended in the word of God, so distinction of meats is condemned by the
same. Page 507 Chap. 3. Of the custom of the ancient Church about distinction
of meats. Page 508 Chap. 4. Of ordinary Fasts upon week days, practiced in the
ancient Church, and of Saturday Fast. Page 513 Chap. 5. Of the Fasts of
Saturday, and the Lords day. Page 514 Chap. 6. Examination of the Proofs,
whereby Cardinal du Perron goes about to prove that Lent is of Divine
institution. Page 515 Chap. 7. That Cardinal du Perron was ignorant of the
origin of Lent, and in what sense that word was taken in the Ancient Church.
Diversity of ancient customs in this matter. Page 516 Chap. 8. How the
discipline of fasting in the Roman Church is full of absurdity and abuse. Page
521
Sixth Controversy. Auricular Confession. 1. Chap. FOur sorts of Confession in
our Churches. Answer to the Cardidinal. Page 523 2. Chap. That the testimonies
of the Fathers which Cardinal du Perron objecteth to us to establish the
auricular Confession are to no purpose. Some falsifications observed. Page 526.
3. Chap. Of the Penitentiary Priest abolisht by Nectarius. How Cardinal du
Perron alters, and corrupts that History. How he disguiseth and concealeth
the doctrine of Chrysostom about confession. Page 528 4. Chap. Why Cardinal du
Perron contradicts the Councils of Trent and Florence, making confession not
to be part of the Sacrament of Penitence. That Penitence cannot be called a
Sacrament. Page 533 5. Chap. What we find amiss in the auricular confession of
the Roman Church. Page 537 6. Chap. Examination of the 6. and 7. Chapters of
the second observation, wherein Cardinal du Perron treats of the secret of
confession, and of the danger thereby created unto the life of Kings. Page 542
Seventh Controversy. Of the Authority and power of the Pastors of the Church
to pardon sins. And of Sacramental absolution. 1. Chap. HOw negligently M. du
Perron treats of Sacramental absolution. A summary answer to that he says of
that subject. Many Falsifycations are observed. Page 550 2. Chap. What is that
pardon of sins which the Pastors of the Church grant, and how far their power
to forgive sins extends. And of the power of the keys. Page 556 3. Chap. That
the Pastors of the Church cannot blot out sins before God. And cannot by
pardoning sins exempt sinners from Gods judgment. That unto God alone, as the
only judge of souls and consciences, it belongs to forgive sins. And that the
absolution of the Priests of the Roman Church is void and of no virtue. Page
559 4. Chap. Proof of our doctrine by the ancient Fathers; and even by the
Roman Church. Page 566 5. Chap. Of the abuse of the Keys, and of Absolution,
both that which is called Sacramental, and that which is given without the
Sacrament. Page 573
Eighth Controversy. Of Penitential satisfaction, where also is spoken of
satisfaction in general. 1. Chap. DOctrine of the Roman Church about
penitential satisfaction. Page 585 2. Chap. Of the word of satisfaction, State
of the Question. Page 590 3. Chap. That the holy Scripture makes Christ, and
the merit of his death to be the ground of the remission of sins, as his death
being the only ransom and propitiation for our sins. And that the Roman Church
feigning to acknowledge the sufficiency and perfection of that satisfaction,
debaseth and weakens it with all her power. Page 593 4. Chap. This Maxim of
the Roman Church is examined, that God having forgiven the whole fault, does
not always forgive the whole pain. Page 595 5. Chap. Proofs of our adversaries,
whereby they pretend to prove that God after all the fault is forgiven,
inflicteth the satisfactory pain. Page 598 6. Chap. That the satisfactions of
the Roman Church derogate from Christ's satisfaction, and are injurious against
Gods Justce. 602. Page 602 7. Chap. Causes why we especially reject the
satisfactions of the pretended Sacrament of Penitence. Page 610 8. Chap.
Reasons of the Adversaries for humane satisfactions. Of the application of the
merit of Christ. And of humane merits. Page 612 9. Chap. That none can satisfy
Gods Justice for another. Page 621 10. Chap. Answer to the Invectives of our
adversaries upon this matter. And of their reproach to this Author, that he is
a Friars Son. Page 625 11. Chap. What tyranny the Popes have exercised over
England for some Ages under color of absolution ann satisfaction. And from
what horrible bondage England was delivered by the light of the Gospel. Page
629 12. Chap. In what sense the word of Penitence is taken in Scripture, and in
the Fathers. Page 658 13. Chap. In what sense the words of Penitence and
Satisfaction are taken in the writings of the Fathers, and that the Penitence
of the Ancient Church is much different from the Penitencies of the Rhman
Church. Page 660
Ninth Controversy. Of the Necessity of Baptism. 1. Chap. CArdinal du Perron's
Reasons for the absolute necessity of Baptism. Examination of the doctrine of
the Church of Rome upon that point. How they abuse this Text, Joh. 3.5. Except
a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. Page 664 2. Chap. Sense of the forealledged Text, Joh. 3.5. How unworthily
and unjustly the Cardinal deals with Calvin. A notable ignorance of the
Cardinal. Page 671 3. Chap. How contemptible Baptism is in the Roman Church,
and miserably disgraced. Page 673 4. Chap. The doctrine of our Churches, about
the virtue and efficacy of Baptism. Page 674 5. Chap. How the Romanists after
they have disgraced Baptism, exalt it with improper praises. Page 675
Tenth Controversy. Of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist. 1. Chap. STate of the
Question, how M. du Perron does not touch it, but wanders about useless
discourse. Page 680 2. Chap. That the Sacrifice of the Mass was not instituted
by Christ. And of the fruit and efficacy of the Sacrifice of the Mass. Page 681
3. Chap. Examination of the Cardinals reasons, to prove that the Fathers call
the Eucharist a Sacrifice in a proper, not in a Metaphorical sense. Page 684 4.
Chap. That the Fathers call the Lords Supper a Sacrifice, because it is the
commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ's death. Page 686 5. Chap. Examination
of the Cardinals shifts. Page 690 6. Chap. Other reasons for which the Fathers
called the Lords Supper a Sacrifice. Page 692
Eleventh Controversy. Of the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament:
And of Transubstantiation. 1. Chap. OF the first Institution of the holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Page 694 2. Chap. That the doctrine of the real
presence, and of transubstantiation, is repugnant to Christ's institution. The
Cardinals reasons are examined. Page 696 3. Chap. Of the sense of the 6. chap.
of John, and of the spiritual manducation of the body of Christ, and how many
absurdities and inconveniences follow the oral manducation of Christ's flesh
taught in the Roman Church. Page 705 4. Chap. How and in what sense the Fathers
alleged by the Cardinal call the Sacrament the body of Christ, and say that
Christ's body is made in the Eucharist, and that we eat his flesh in it. Answer
to the Cardinals depravations. Page 710 5. Chap. That the Fathers did not
believe transubstantiation, but believed that the substance of bread and wine
remains after the consecration. Page 723 6. Chap. What is the signification
of the word Sacrament. And in what sense the Fathers call the Eucharist the
body of Christ. Page 731 7. Chap. That the Fathers not only call that which we
receive in the Eucharist, sign, figure, symbol, type, and antitype; but also
teach that the words of the Lord are Sacramental, that is, in these words the
name of the thing signified is given to the sign. Page 732 8. Chap. Some
passages of Austin, wherein he teaches that Christ's words. This is my body,
and except you eat my flesh, etc. are figurative. The Cardinals answers are
examined. Page 737 9. Chap. Examination of Cardinal du Perron's answer, whereby
he endeavors to give reasons why the Fathers call the bread and wine of the
Lords Supper, signs, figures, types, and symbols of the body and blood of
Christ, even after the consecration. Page 743 10. Chap. Some passages of the
Councils upon this subject. Page 745 11. Chap. That the Fathers did not believe
accidents without subject in the Eucharist. Page 748 12. Chap. That the Fathers
not only speak of a Spiritual manducation, which is not done with the mouth,
but also understand Christ's words, Ioh. 6. of a Spiritual manducation. Page 751
13. Chap. That the Fathers believed not that the wicked and unbelievers, or
hypocrites could eat the Lords body. Page 754 14. Chap. Confutation of two
shifts, which the Cardinal uses upon all occasions. Page 755 15. Chap. Showing
how the Fathers say, that the Fathers of the Old Testament ate the same meat
which we eat in the Eucharist. Page 760 16. Chap. That the Fathers believed not
that the body of Christ is really present under the element of bread, but that
he is in heaven only, not in earth. Page 764 17. Chap. That the Fathers
acknowledge the same participation of the body and blood of the Lord in
Baptism, and in the preaching of the word as in the Lords Supper. Page 767 18.
Chap. After what manner the Christian Church of the first Ages celebrated the
Lords Supper. How the ancient Customs show evidently that they believed not
the real presence. Page 768 19. Chap. Proofs of the customs represented in the
chapter before. Page 771 20. Chap. Of the adoration of the Sacrament. Weakness
of the Cardinals proofs. How he falsifieth Scripture. Examination of his
allegations. Page 776 21. Chap. That in the first ages of the Christian Church
the Sacrament was not worshipped. The Cardinals allegations and proofs are
examined. Page 778 22. Chap. The Cardinals allegations out of the Fathers are
examined, beginning at his allegations out of the Catecheses of Gregory of
Nyssa. Page 783 23. Chap. Answer to the other allegations of the same chapter.
Page 786 24. Chap. Answer to the authorities and reasons brought by Cardinal du
Perron in the 14, 15. and 16. chapters. Page 788 25. Chap. How the Cardinal
sends the Reader to a larger Book of his of the Eucharist. That the beginning
of that Book shows what one should think of the rest. Page 792
Twelfth Controversy. Of the Communion in one kind. And of the power which
Cardinal du Perron ascribes unto the Church, that is, to the Pope, to dispense
from the commandment of Christ. Page 793
Thirteenth Controversy. Of private Masses. Chap. 1. OF Private Masses. And
the shameful traffic of the same. page 801 Chap. 2. That Masses without
communicants and assistants, said to the intention of a private man that
prays for them, are repugnant unto the Word of God. page 803 Chap. 3. That
the ancient Church did not know private or particular Masses, and did not
celebrate the holy Sacrament without communicants and assistants, to the
intention of a particular person. page 805
Fourteenth Controversy. The Antibarbarous. OR, Of unknown Language: Both in
the prayers of private persons, and in the public Service. Where also the
principal clauses of the Mass are represented, which might offend the people if
they understood them. Chap. 1. THat false Religions love obscurity, but true
Religion brings her doctrine to light, and keeps nothing hidden. page 810 Chap.
2. Two differences between us and the Roman Church about unknown Language. page
813 Chap. 3. Of Prayers of particular persons in a tongue unknown to the very
persons that pray. page 814 Chap. 4. That in the Ancient Church every man
prayed in his own Tongue. page 816 Chap. 5. That the public Service in a
Languge not understood, is contrary to the Word of God and to reason. page 817
Chap. 6. The same is proved by the example of the Church of the Old Testament.
page 822 Chap. 7. That the ancient Christian Church over all the World used an
intelligible tongue in the public Service. page 823 Chap. 8. Two causes that
move the Pope and his Clergy to maintain the celebration of Mass and of the
ordinary Service in the Latin tongue. page 828 Chap. 9. A third cause why they
will not have the Mass to be understood by the people. Some clauses of the Mass
which would offend the people if they were understood. ibid. Chap. 10.
Examination of the reasons of our Adversaries; Of Card. Du Perron especially.
page 836 Chap. 11. Examination of the proofs which the Cardinal brings out of
Antiquity for the Service in a strange tongue. page 841 Chap. 12. How Latin
was brought into the Divine Service in France and Spain. page 843 Chap. 13. Of
England and Germany, and how the Roman Service and the Latin tongue were
received in those Countries. page 846 Chap. 14. Of Africa, and how the Service
in the Latin Tongue came to it. page 849 The Authors Thanksgiving to GOD for
the finishing of this Work. page 851.

BOOK I. OF THE ANSWER TO Cardinal du Perron, TREATING Of the Church, and of
her Marks, of the Authority of the Holy Scripture, and of Traditions.
CHAP. 1. Of the Nature of the Question of the Church.
SUch is the ignorance and perverseness of man, that he gets harm by the most
salutary things, turning his helps into hindrances, and directions to salvation
into stumbling blocks. A truth justified by this Controversy of the Church:
For this word Ecclesia (which with us is the Church) is a word importing Union,
and calling together the wills, as well as the bodies: Yet it is that which now
adays causes the greatest division of minds; A Bond of Concord, is become an
apple of discord.

This is the work of Pride and Ambition. For under the title of Church, a
Temporal Monarchy is built in this world; whence it is come to pass, that the
word has lost its signification. For by the Church, which is said to be the
Sovereign Judge of doubts concerning the Faith, from whose Authority the
Authority of Scripture is made to depend, the Assembly of the Faithful is not
understood, but some few Prelates that do and undo, and rule according to their
pleasure.

The worst is, that the word Church is used as a Scarecrow to fright simple
souls, and to enslave their consciences, pinning them altogether upon the
Authority of certain persons, to dissuade them from enquiring of the Holy
Scriptures, which alone can make us wise unto salvation. And whereas there be
many contrary Churches, there is one among the rest whose Leaders boast that
they cannot err, that the world may wholly rely upon them about the doctrine
and way of salvation.

The ill order that is used in treating that point, contributes very much
toward that evil. For that question is set in the van, which ought to be in
the rear; this being laid for the Foundation and first Principle. That a man
must believe the Church, before he be taught what the Church must believe. They
will have the people to follow their Leaders, not enquiring whether they keep
the right way, and teach the true Doctrine. But how shall a man join with the
Assembly of the Faithful, before he know what it is to be faithful? And how
shall one know what it is to be faithful, unless he know first what the
Doctrine of Faith is? Among many contending Churches, how shall I know the
true, and the pure Church, if the rules of Truth and Purity are hid from me, by
a Prohibition of reading the holy Scripture, in which only those rules are to
be found? Prudent men will know before they choose. Only in the most important
point of all, which is Salvation, the world will choose the Church, before they
know the things that make it to be the true Church.

For which this reason is given, that the work would be too long to examine all
the questions by Scripture. Wherefore the Divines of the time will reduce all
Controversies to the question of the Church; for (say they) he that is sure
that he is in the true Church, is sure also that he has the true Faith and
Doctrine. But they fancy that to be a long work, which in effect is short: For
the Faith of the Faithful is content with a few Articles, wherein the substance
of Piety consists, which are set down in the Scripture in such clear terms,
that they need no interpretation. And though the labor were long, yet in a
thing so important, the difficulty must not breed neglect; much less, to avoid
a long way, must we take an impassable and endless way. For since one cannot
know which is the Assembly of the truly Faithful, but by the knowledge of the
true Faith, whosoever without knowing which is the true faith, chooses the Church
which he will join to, throws, as it were, at dice for his Salvation. And
though he should light of the true Church, he should be never the better
Christian for that; for he should owe his Religion to custom, or to his birth,
or to some accident, without having any true piety or knowledge of God: He
would have been of another Religion, if he had been born in another Country, or
if he had met with other Leaders of his blindness.

In vain also the Controversies of Religion are begun by that of the Church, to
make short work; for it is a thousand times the longer way. For the only
question of the Church, as it is handled in our time, is a sea without either
bottom or shore, and the whole body of Divinity is short in comparison of that.
For among the marks of the true Church, they put the succession of Chairs in
the same Doctrine from Christ until now: Whereby one is obliged to know all the
Histories of the Church over all the world, for sixteen hundred years, and to
search what every Bishop, who has been sitting in that Chair in sixteen
hundred years has believed, upon every point of Divinity. There contrary
Chairs are found, and very often Histories are wanting: For the Exposition of a
passage of a Father, there is many times as much (if not more) contention, as
for the sense of a Text of Scripture. And after all, that Father is no God, and
is fallible, and our adversaries condemn every Father in many things. Neither
can the people get any skill in the Fathers, the Books being Greek and Latin,
of infinite length.

Indeed he that is sure that he is in the true Church, is sure that he has the
true Faith and Doctrine, at least, as for the foundation, and the essential
points of Religion. But I deny, that therefore he knows the true Doctrine,
because he knows that he is in the true Church; yea, therefore he knows that he
is in the true Church, because he knows that the Church in which he is has the
true Doctrine, and is in the communion of those that believe and observe it.

How much that method has spoiled Divinity, it is evident and lamentable: For
instead of treating by Gods Word, of the nature of God, of the corruption of
man, of the relation of the Law with the Gospel, of Redemption by Jesus Christ,
of Justification by Faith, of the exercise of good Works, of the adoration of
one God only, and of the saving calling of the Faithful, in which points true
Divinity consists; we are drawn by our adversaries to dispute of the
succession of Chairs, and of the prerogatives of the Roman See; Whether the
Church be above Scripture? that is, Whether men be above God? Whether the Pope
can err? Of the contestations of other Patriarchs with the Bishop of Rome. Of
the appeals of the Church of Africa. Of the Suburbicary Towns. Whether the
Council of Sardica was universal? and a thousand things of that kind, of no
use for salvation. We need not then wonder that Atheism multiplieth, since in
our days Christian Religion consists in disputes, from which the people get
no instruction, and the consciences reap no comfort; and in an infinite heap of
allegations of humane passages, God hardly finds any place, and his Word is
very seldom made use of. Yea, the use that is made of it, is to subject the
authority of it unto that of the Church: For (say they) it is the Church that
makes the Scripture to have the force of a Law, and that which gives authority
to Scripture, the Roman Church being the infallible Judge of the sense of
Scripture, even of the sense of those very Texts which speak of the duty of the
Church, and are employed to establish the authority of the Roman Church. By
this means the Roman Church is become judge in her own cause, and is an
infallible Judge of the sense of the Laws to which she is subject.

So did not the Apostles; for (as you may see in the Book of the Acts) they
instructed the people in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and alleged the Writings
of the Prophets; but sent not the people to the Church, or to the authority of
any sovereign and infallible Chair.

We will then enter (with the favor and assistance of our God) into this
matter, which the malice of men has so entangled and beset with thorns; and as
occasion will require, we will examine the Reasons and Objections of Monsieur
du Perron: Not always following the order of his Chapters, but of the matter,
to avoid confusion; and that we may not be constrained to say (after him) fifty
times over the same thing. For to make his Book swell, he beats over and
inculcates many times the same things, which are never the more true for being
often repeated.

CHAP. 2. Of the word Church, and of the several significations thereof.
BEfore we speak of the nature of the Church, it will be necessary to remove
the ambiguity of the word, and to show how many ways that word is taken in
Scripture: For our adversaries hide themselves within these thorns, and play
with the ambiguity of that word as they list, intangling and confounding that
which Scripture distinguishes.

I leave the more remote significations; as when in Scripture a knot of wicked
men is called Ecclesia, a Church, that is, an Assembly: As Acts 19.32. where a
crowd of Pagans crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, is called Ecclesia, a
Church: And Psalm. 26.5. where there is according to the vulgar version, I hate
the Church of the wicked: Also that improper ordinary term, whereby Temples are
called Churches: Likewise that custom of calling the Church the Clergy only,
as if the people were no part of the Church. In that sense they speak of the
liberties of the Church, that is, of the privileges of the Clergy; and in that
sense they say, the Church goes before the Nobility and the Commons. Also that
extravagant manner of speaking, when by the Church the Pope alone is
understood; as does Pope Innocent the III. Cap. Novit. Extra. de Judiciis.
who attributes to himself the determining of a difference between Philip
August King of France, and King John of England; because it is written, Tell
the Church. And Cardinal Bellarmine in his second Book of the Councils,
Salmeron. Tom. 13. tertia part in Epi. Pauli disp 2. p. 172. Congregatio canum
vel avium Ecclesia aliquo modo dici potest.
chap. 19. The Pope must tell it unto the Church, that is, unto himself. Also
that profane saying of the Jesuit Salmeron, that a kennel of Dogs may be
called a Church.

I will then confine my self to those significations of the word Church, which
serve to our Controversies.

1. In the holy Scripture the word Church is taken sometimes for the Universal
visible Assembly of all that profess to be Christians, and to believe in Jesus
Christ. It is that Church which S. Paul calls The pillar and ground (or
rather stay) of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15, because her duty is to defend and stay the
truth against error, as being made and appointed for that. Of that same Church
the same Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 2.20. saying, that in a great house there are
not only vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of wood, and of earth. It is
that floor in which the good grain is mingled with straw, Matthew. 3.12. for that
Church is made up of good and bad, and the pieces and particular societies of
which that Universal Church is composed, are not equal in purity.

2. Sometimes also that word Church is attributed to particular Assemblies,
which are parts of the Universal visible Church, and of which the Universal
Church is composed. Such were in the Apostles time the Churches of Corinth, of
Rome, of Philippi, and the seven Churches to whom the Spirit of God speaks in
the second and third Chapters of the Revelation. Each of these particular
Churches is also for her part, a pillar and stay of truth; for every particular
Church is bound to defend the truth.

3. Sometimes also by the word Church, the Pastors only and Leaders of the
Church are understood; as when the Lord Jesus bids, that in a quarrel
between two brothers, the offended party tell it unto the Church; for Jesus
Christ in the following verse gives unto that Church the power of binding and
loosing, Matthew. 18.
which cannot be proper to any but the Pastors of the Church.

4. Sometimes also by the Church, the people only is understood; as when the
Apostle commands the Pastors to feed the Church, Acts 20.8. and the same
Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. commands the Bishop to be one that rules well his own
house, having his children in subjection with all gravity: For (says he) if a
man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of
God?

5. But besides these four significations of the word Church, the holy
Scripture takes that word in a higher and holier signification, meaning by the
Church very often, the whole Assembly of the true Faithful and Elect whom God
has predestined unto salvation: This is that Church which S. Paul, Ephesians.
1.23. calls the body of Jesus Christ; it is that which is called the Spouse
of Christ, and, the Jerusalem of God; it is that which the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 2.9. calls the chosen Generation; and because Scripture says, that the
Elect are written in the Book of Life, and that their names are written in
heaven, Luke 10.
the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 12. ver. 23. calls it the Assembly, and the
Church of the firstborn which are written in heaven.

Of these Elect some are already glorified, some are in this world mingled
among the wicked, some are not yet called and converted unto the faith: Many of
them also are not born yet, and are only enrolled in Gods counsel to fight when
their time comes, and to get the victory. So there is a difference between the
Church of the Elect, and the Church Triumphant; for the Triumphant Church is
but part of the Church of the Elect.

Out of that Church there is no salvation: It is that Church which we say to be
invisible; not only because the glorified Saints are out of our sight, and
because those that belong to Gods Election, and are not yet born, cannot be
seen; but also, because those Elect that live on earth, though they be visible
men, yet are not visible in their quality of Elect; for Election is not
discerned with the eye, only it is charitably presumed by the profession of
faith, and by good works; nevertheless, the Church of the Elect shall be
visible in the day of Judgment.

Of that Church principally the Symbol speaks in this Article, I believe the
holy Catholic Church; for those things are believed which are not seen, as the
Apostle says, Heb. 11. Faith is the evidence of things not seen; and, 2 Cor.
5.7. We walk by faith, not by sight: Wherefore immediately after these words, I
believe the holy Catholic Church, in that Church the communion of Saints is
placed, to exclude the profane and hypocrites: And again, to that same Church
the Remission of sins is attributed, and life everlasting, which are graces
belonging only to the Elect and truly faithful.

Besides these four significations of the word Church, the ancient Doctors use
to understand by the Church (which very often they call Catholic) the whole
Society of the Christian Churches which are Orthodox, sound in the faith, and
united together in Communion, opposing that Church to the Heretical and
Schismatical Societies. In that sense our adversaries take the word Church, and
call it the true Church, and the Catholic Roman Church. Cardinal du Perron
defines it thus in Chap. 8. page 30. That it is the Society of those whom God
has called to salvation by the profession of the true faith, sincere
administration of the Sacraments, and adherence unto the lawful Pastors. The
Jesuit Salmeron in Tom. 13. page 172. gives this definition of the Church, The
Church is the Assembly of those that are called by faith, and by the
participation of the Sacraments, and thereby unto grace and felicity: Which
acception of the Church we will not reject, but use it often in this Book, to
accommodate our selves unto the language of our adversaries, for we delight not
to dispute about words: Yet it has that incommodity, that it recedeth from the
soil of the holy Scripture, and takes the word Church otherwise then it is
taken in the word of God.

From all that was said it is evident, that there being many sorts of Churches
differing in nature, it is impossible to define them all with the same
definition, and that Cardinal du Perron does unjustly charge us in Chap. 8. and
69. page 34, 35. of his first Book, that sometimes we restrain the Church to
the predestinate only, sometimes we extend it to the whole multitude of those
that profess Christianity, making it sometimes visible, sometimes invisible,
like the ring of Gyges: Indeed that man should show himself short of wit and
learning, that would give to the same Church diverse and disagreeing
definitions; but since there are diverse sorts of Churches, and of different
nature, it is impossible to define them with one definition. We do not say,
that the same Church is sometimes visible, and sometimes invisible; only we
say, that the Church of the Elect is not discerned with the eye, neither is, or
ever shall be visible before the day of Judgment, but that the true and
orthodox Church is always visible to them that belong to it: To them that are
without, as Turks, Jews and Pagans, we grant that it is invisible, as we shall
see hereafter: For although they see a Society of men, they do not see that
such a Society of men is the true Church.

So much of the word Church, and the diverse significations of the same. Of
which word Monsieur du Perron says in his first Chapter, page 2. that Jesus
Christ is the first that has effected and consecrated the word Church to
signify a Society of Religion; affirming, that before Jesus Christ the word
Church signified only a civil Assembly, that is, a Parliament, or the meeting
of the States of a Nation; but that Jesus Christ has first taken it in a
Religious sense: A great oversight to begin his Book withal, to think that
Jesus Christ ever made use of the word Ecclesia, [which the English call
Church,] for Ecclesia is a Greek word: Now Jesus Christ spoke among the Jews in
the Jewish Tongue only. The Hebrew word (...) Kahal, which signifies Assembly,
is often taken in a Religious sense, as 2 Chronicles. 1.3. Levit. 8.3, 4, 5. 1 Kings
8.14. and in many other places.

CHAP. 3. That there is a Church of Elect or Predestinate persons.
THe word of God is so express upon this, that one can hardly doubt of it,
attributing such things unto the Church as are unsuitable to the Reprobate and
Hypocrites that are in the visible Church: As when it is called the body of
Christ; for in the body of Christ, who is the life, there is no dead members,
and none can belong to the body of Christ, if he be a limb of the Devil. And if
sometimes the visible Church be called the body of Christ, it is in
consideration of the Elect and truly faithful which make part of that Church,
whom only the Spirit of God regards, when he calls the Church the body of
Christ.

1 Pet. 2.9. S. Peter calls the faithful, a chosen generation: And the Apostle
to the Hebrews chap. 12. v. 23. calls them the general assembly and Church of
the firstborn which are written in heaven, which cannot be applied to the
Reprobate. And whereas that Church is called in the Scripture the Spouse of
Christ, the profane and wicked Christians are not the Spouse of Christ, nor
part of it: For if by reason of the soundest part, the Church of Christ is
called a chaste immaculate Spouse; by the same reason, in respect of the
infected and disloyal part, which commonly is the greatest, she might he called
an Adulteress, and an Harlot.

Luke 12.32. the Lord Jesus calls his Church the small flock to which the
Father is pleased to give the Kingdom, which can be attributed to none but the
Elect and truly faithful.

Heb. 3.6. The Apostle calls the Church the house of God; but he says
together, that we are his house, if we hold fast the confidence and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, declaring, that they alone are the
house of God, that persevere unto the end.

John 10. The Church of Christ is compared unto a sheepfold, and the faithful
are called sheep. If in that Church a multitude of Wolves and Goats is put,
exceeding the sheep in number, it is no more a sheepfold.

1 John 2.19. S. John speaking of Hypocrites revolting from the Church, says,
They went out from us, but they were not of us; as if he said, They went out
from the visible Church, by forsaking the outward profession, but they were not
of the Church of the Elect. And he says in the same place, if they had been of
us, they would no doubt have continued with us.

The same was acknowledged by the Ancients. Origin on Matthew. 16. says, that
all souls that are not holy are not the Church, nor part of the Church which
Christ builds upon the rock.

Basil in the Chapter of the judgment of God, which is among his Ascetica,
speaks thus, (...).
To call them members of Christ, among whom dissentions, and quarrels, and envy
is found, it were a very rash part. Jerome says the same upon Ephesians. 5.

Austin in the third Book of the Christian Doctrine, chap. 32. Non enim revera
Domini corpus est quod cum illo non erit in aeternum.
That is not truly the body of Christ, which shall not be with him for ever.
And in the Book of the Unity of the Church, chap. 4. Quicunque de ipso capite a
Scripturis sanctis dissentium, etiamsi in omnibus locis inveniantur in quibus
Ecclesia designata est, non sunt in Ecclesia.
All those that dissent from the Church about the head, though they be found in
all places wheresoever the Church is showed, are not in the Church. And in the
twentieth Book of the City of God, Nunquam a Diabolo Ecclesia seducitur
praedestinata and electa ante mundi constitutionem.
The Church predestined and elected before the creation of the world, shall
never be seduced by the Devil: nothing can be more express. And in the ninth
Chapter of the Unity of the Church, he maintains, that those persons are not of
the Church that shall not possess the Kingdom of Heaven. And in the second Book
against Cresconius, in Chap. 21. Malos non pertinere ad Ecclesiam Dei quamvis
intus videantur, ex hoc manifestissime apparet ^am in corpore Christi non sunt
quod est Ecclesia, quoniam non potest Christus habere membra damnata.
They are not of the body of Christ, which is the Church, because Christ cannot
have damned members. Wherefore in Chap. 9. of his Manuale ad Laurentium,
Ecclesia tota hic accipienda est non solum ex part qua peregrinatur in terris,
verum etiam ex illa quae in coelis.
he composeth the Church mentioned in the Symbol, of two parts, the one a
Pilgrim on earth, the other being in heaven.

It cannot be said, that Austin retracted himself in the second Book of his
Retractations. chap. 18. as Cardinal du Perron says in chap. 9. For there he
does but expound his meaning, saying, That when in his Books of Baptism, he
spoke of a Church without either spot or wrinckle, that must not be so taken,
as if the Church at this present were such a one, but as being prepared to be
such when she shall appear once glorious: Which is most true, and hinders not
that Church without spot or wrinckle to be the Church of the Elect; but Austin
refers that perfection to the time of her glorification. But in how many
places does he compose the Church with the faithful that are on earth, and
those that are already received in Heaven? About that is the whole work of the
City of God employed; for within that City of God, which is the Church, he
comprehends also the Saints in Paradise. And upon Psalm 59. De toto mundo
electa est Ecclesia, and mortificata a terrena vita.
The Church is elected from all the world, and mortified from the earthly life:
He makes then a Church of the Elect.

Ecclesiam dupliciter posse dici, and eam quae non habet maculam and rugam, and
eam quae in Christi nomine absque plenis perfectisque virtutibus congregatur.
Jerome upon Gal. 1. says, that the Church is of two sorts; the one without
spot and wrinckle, which is the Church of the glorified Saints; the other,
which has not yet attained the perfection.

Hence our Adversaries are plunged, and know not how to come out: For when the
Apostle Ephesians. 5. speaks of the Church without either spot or wrinckle, which
is the Spouse of Christ, they will have that Church to be the Roman Church. But
the Jesuit Salmeron makes no difficulty to contradict it; for by that Church
without either spot or wrinckle, he understands the Church of the glorified
Saints Salmeron. Tom. 13. Disp. 1. ex Epist. Pauli, p. 173.
; thereby acknowledging another Spouse of Christ then the Roman Church, and a
Church more pure, and more perfect.

The Catechism of the Council of Trent, in the Exposition of the Article of the
Symbol, I believe the Church, etc. says, that Ecclesiae duae potissimum sunt
parts, quarum altera triumphans, altera militans vocatur, etc. Jam in Ecclesia
militante duo sunt hominum genera, bonorum and improborum.
the Church has principally two parts, the one Triumphant, the other Militant,
composed of good and bad: Making the wicked to be the same Church with the
Saints of Paradise, and rather choosing to join such contrary things in a body,
then to make them two several Churches, lest it should be acknowledged that
Scripture speaks of another Church then the Roman.

CHAP. 4. Reasons of the Adversaries against the Church of the Elect.
AGainst this Doctrine our adversaries bestir themselves: For to exalt the
dignity of the Roman Church, they adorn her with those titles which Scripture
gives to the Church of the Elect, calling her the Spouse, and the Body of
Christ, that out of which there is no salvation, and the Virgin without either
spot or wrinckle. But as for the Church of the Elect, they disgrace her as an
invisible Chimera of our making, and acknowledge no other Church but that
Hierarchical body of the Roman Church; despising S. Bernards authority in his
78. Sermon upon the Canticles, where he says many times that the Elect are the
Church, and the Spouse mentioned in the Canticles. The title of the Sermon is
this, Quod sponsa, id est Ecclesia electorum, praedestinata est a Deo ante
sacula.
That the Spouse, that is, the Church of the Elect, is predestined by God
before the ages: And which is more, they oppose Gregory the first, whom they
surname the Great, where he speaks often of the Church of the Elect, especially
upon the seventh penitential Psalm, where he says, Electorum Ecclesia de
gentibus congregata.
That the Church of the Elect is gathered from the Nations. And so upon the
fifth penitential Psalm, chap. 6. he says, Sanctam Ecclesiam de sanctis in
aeternum permansuris constructam, nullis hujus vitae persecutionibus
superandam, ipse super quem aedificata est evidenter ostendit, cum ait, Portae
inferorum non praevalebunt adversus eam.
that the Church composed of the Saints, which remain for ever, shall never be
overcome by persecutions; which he proves by the words of the Lord, that the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. That Pope so famous did not
believe, that in that text Christ spoke of the Roman Church; for it is not
composed with Saints that remain for ever, since our very adversaries confess
that some Popes are damned. Bernard in his sixth Sermon upon the Psalm, Qui
habitat, after he has complained of the corruptions of the Church of Rome, so
far as to say, that it remains no more but that the Son of perditton should be
revealed, adds, Hic plane gravissimus erit incursus; sed ab hoc quoque
Ecclesiam electorum veritas liberabit.
This will be a very grievous assault, but he that is the Truth, shall also
deliver the Church of the Elect from it. Hincmarus in his Book of fifty five
Chapters, chap. 35. speaks of Sanctam omnium electorum Ecclesiam conscriptam in
coelis.
the Church of all the Elect which is written in Heaven.

What more? the last Council of Lateran, in the tenth Session, by the mouth of
the Archbishop of Patras, acknowledges a Church of the Elect: Vt in illo
constitueret unam sanctam Ecclesiam electorum omnium matrem.
That he might (says he) establish in him one holy Church, Mother of all the
Elect.

But our adversaries being of late grown more crafty, reject all that, and
rejecting the Church of the Elect, acknowledge no other Church but the Roman;
perceiving well enough, that if there be a Church of the Elect, the Pope cannot
be the head thereof, since themselves say, that many Popes were damned. Neither
could they promise so much to themselves, as to be able to persuade the world
that the Pope is the head of the glorified Saints, and that Noah, Moses, and
Abraham, were members of the Roman Church, although the last Council of
Lateran, in the ninth and tenth Session say, that the Pope has all power in
heaven and earth.

To prove then that there is no Church of the Elect, they bring many texts of
Scripture, which show, that in the Church there are some good, and some bad,
comparing the Church unto a floor where the good grain is mingled with the
straw; and to a great house, where there be some vessels to honor, and some to
dishonor; and to a net gathering good and bad fish. They bring also texts that
speak of a visible Church, intending thereby to prove that there is no
invisible Church; with as much reason, as if I would prove that there is no
reasonable creature, because there are some unreasonable. To the same end they
bring many passages of the Fathers: It is the subject of the ninth Chapter of
Cardinal du Perrons Book.

But in vain does he labor to prove that which we grant: For we acknowledge a
visible Church, where the good are mingled among the bad. And it is of that
Church that the Scripture speaks in the texts which they allege; which hinders
not, but that God has a multitude of Elect, and that the name Church is given
them in Scripture.

CHAP. 5. Reasons of Cardinal du Perron against the Church of the Elect in the
ninth Chapter of his Book.
THe ninth Chapter of the Cardinal is employed to fight against the Church of
the Elect, and to show that there is no such thing: Upon that he bends all his
sinews, and his great wit makes an extraordinary effort: wherefore we also must
seriously examine it. His first Reason is this:

I. The word Ecclesia is derived from a Verb which signifies a calling, and
not predestining. So he will prove that there is no Church of the Elect,
because the Etymology of that word Church does not signify predestining.

A Reason founded upon a false maxim; viz. that whatsoever is proper to any
thing, must be expressed by the Etymology of the word: As if I said, That the
Pope can err in the faith, because the Etymology of the word Pope signifies
not certainty or infallibility in the Doctrine; there is none but would charge
my reasoning with inconsequence.

II. His second Reason is so confused, that we cannot answer it before we set
it in order. The Argumentation is such: Every Society must have a communion of
parts among themselves.

The Church is a Society: Ergo,

The Church must have a communion of parts among themselves.



The Argument is true: But upon that Conclusion he builds another Argument,
which has not the like truth: The Church must have communion among her parts.

Now the predestinate have no communion among them: Ergo,

The predestinate are not the Church.



Of that Argument the minor Proposition is manifestly false: The Elect, or
predestinate have many things common among them; they have all one Father, who
has adopted them; one elder Brother, the Lord Jesus Christ; one Spirit, that
conducts and sanctifies them; one and the same right in the Kingdom of Heaven.
August. Enchirid. c. 11. Haec ergo quae in sanctis Angelis and virtutibus Dei
est Ecclesia.
S. Austin is far from that opinion; for he says, that even the Angels are
part of the Church.

Against that the Cardinal says, that Predestination, quatenus Predestination,
puts nothing in the persons of the predestinate.

Indeed that word Predestining does not clearly import that communion; but
hence it follows not, that there is no such communion, although the word does
not express so much: So I might say, That the faithful are not happy, because
the word Faithful expresses no happiness. And yet when that word Predestinate
is once well understood, it will be found that it imports that communion, and
puts many common things in the predestinate: For when we say, that there are
Elect or predestined men, we understand that they are predestined unto
salvation, and to the means to attain it. These means are the Spirit of
Regeneration, Faith and Adoption in Jesus Christ: Since then they are all
predestined to that, all have that common among them by Predestination.

To defend that Proposition so notoriously false, he brings another worse,
which depriveth the faithful of their chief comfort. He affirms, that when
Paul, 2 Timothy 2. says, That God knows them that are his, and has marked them
with his seal; it must be understood, that God has marked the predestinate in
himself, not in them; as if I said, that a shepherd has marked his sheep, not
in them, but in himself; so that it is the shepherd that is marked, not the
sheep. That Divinity is somewhat extravagant.

And it is contrary to Scripture, which teaches us, that God marketh those
that belong to him, in themselves: For S. Paul tells us, Ephesians. 1.13. that this
mark or seal is the Spirit of promise, which in many other places he calls the
Spirit of Adoption: Having believed, you have been sealed with the Spirit of
promise: and Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, See 2 Cor. 1.22.
and Romans 8.15.
whereby you are sealed unto the day of Redemption. The Holy Ghost then being
the seal, and the mark wherewith God seals his children, can we say that God
marketh himself by his Spirit? Nay, he puts that Spirit in the hearts of his
children; as the same Apostle says, Gal. 4.6. Because you are sons, he has
sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts: Thus Ezekiel. 9.4. and Rev. 7. God
seals his Elect in the forehead: Is not that marking them in themselves? The
same Apostle speaking of that Spirit of Adoption wherewith God seals his
children, Romans 8.15. says that this Spirit cries in their hearts, and bears
witness unto their spirits, that they are Gods children: That witness then is
in themselves, and is not a mental designation in God, as the Cardinal
speaks. Yet herein his ingenuity is commendable, for this is a confession
that he feels not that mark within himself, and has not that inward seal of
his Election. But he should not have judged of others by himself; he ought not
to have measured by the ill state of his conscience, the conscience of the
Apostle, who speaks by experience.

III. The third Reason of the Cardinal, is much entangled and darkened with
perplexed words. It comes to this: The Church is the body of Christ, by analogy
to an organical body.

Now it is the essence of an organical body to have diverse organs and offices:

Those offices and organs are in the Church, not by Predestination, but by the
outward and visible calling.



Out of these three Propositions he draws no Conclusion, as it is impossible to
draw any; for they have neither order nor dependence. I suppose that he
intended to frame such an Argumentation: All bodies have organs, and several
offices.

Now among the Elect there is no such organs and offices: Ergo,

The Elect do not make a body in the Church.



The first Proposition is not universally true; for there are many bodies
without organs, as the Heavens, the Moon, the Earth, and the Sea. That maxim
may be good for a natural animated body, or for a civil body, as a
Commonwealth; but when it is in question of a Spiritual Society, that Maxim is
not necessary.

The second Proposition is also false, by the judgment of the Roman Church,
which puts different offices among the Saints, bestowing upon the Virgin Mary
the Office of Queen of Heaven, setting one Saint over a Country, another over
the Cattle, another over women in childbed, and calling them Advocates and
Mediators of Intercession.

And as for the Elect that are on earth, the Apostles were elected when they
were in the world, and yet were organs to bring men to salvation, to which
themselves were predestined. True it is, that the charge of Apostle or Pastor
comes not from their Predestination unto salvation, but from the outward
calling. But is it any whit unreasonable, that God should use the outward
calling, for the execution of his counsel concerning the Eternal Election? It
matters not whence it comes that the Apostles are organs serving for the
spiritual body of the Elect, so that it be certain that they are so.

IV. He adds a fourth Reason: S. Paul says, that God has tempered the
honor of the members, that there be no schism in the body.

Now the predestinate are not susceptible of schism, as predestinate, but as
called: Ergo,

It is not Predestination, but Vocation, that constitutes the body of the
Church.



A monster of Syllogism, which has neither head nor tail, and has no
coherence, and where one may number as many terms as words.

Here is the like again, built upon the model of the other: S. Paul says, that
every man is a liar.

Now the predestinate are not susceptible of a lie, as predestinate, but as
men: Ergo,

It is not Predestination, but Humanity, that Constitutes the Body of Man.



In that there is not one crum of reason, nor the shadow of any, neither does
the Conclusion do any thing against us, so it be understood of the visible
Church, which also is alone capable of schism.

V. The fifth Reason is no better: The Church is our Mother, Gal. 4.26.

Now the Church does not beget us by Predestination, but by Vocation. Ergo,

It is Vocation, not Predestination, which constitutes the Church, in the state
of a Church, and Mother of the faithful.



These are indeed woeful Syllogisms, where there is neither form nor common
sense. Though the last of them were in good form, the Conclusion makes nothing
against us; for we know, it is necessary that a visible Orthodox Church, in
which the Gospel is purely announced, beget us unto God, and be our Mother. And
we grant, that the Apostle in that text of Gal. 4. speaks not of the Elect, but
of a Church visibly erected by the preaching of the Gospel, and freed from the
Ceremonies of the Law.

VI. He adds another Reason of the like weight: One knows his Mother, before
he knows his Father.

Now our certainty of being children of the Church, cannot be a means to make
us know that we are Gods children: Ergo,

The definition of the Church must consist in the Vocation, not in the
Predestination.



Never any man did Syllogize in such an extravagant way. By such Arguments one
might as well prove, that twice two make seven: And with all that arguing, he
fights against his own shadow, making us say, that in the Predestination, the
definition of the Church consists, which we do not. For as for the visible
Church, we know that Predestination enters not into her definition; and as for
the invisible Church, which is composed only of the true, faithful, and
children of God, this is her definition, It is the Assembly of the faithful,
whom God has adopted in Jesus Christ, to save them. Of that Church,
Predestination is neither the matter nor the form, but the efficient cause, why
these, rather then those, belong unto this Church.

VII. His seventh Reason is, that neither Christ, who has been the Godfather
of that Society, nor his Apostles, have ever employed that name of Church, but
to design a visible Society.

That we deny, and have proved the contrary in Chap. 3. when our adversaries by
the Church, understand the Pope alone (as we have showed) they do not take the
word Church for a visible Society.

The first text that the Cardinal alleges, is against himself: For when
Christ says, Upon this stone I will build my Church, it is certain, that he
speaks of the Church of the Elect, as Pope Gregory the I. told us before: The
following words show it evidently, And the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it; which should be false, if he spoke of a Church, a great part of
which goes into Hell. And truly, from the Apostles times unto this, the gates
of Hell, that is, the power of the Devil, has often prevailed, and still
prevails over the visible Church; having often abolisht many Churches, by the
violence of persecutions, and corrupted many parts of the Church by Heresies,
Idolatry, and Vices. For although Satan never utterly abolisht the visible
Church, yet it is prevailing against a State, when one robs it of great part of
its Country; it is prevailing against a man to put him out of his house, to
maim part of his body, and infect many of his members with the plague: It was
given unto the Beast to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them, Rev.
13.7. To overcome one, is prevailing against him: But as for the Church of the
Elect, not one of that Church can perish; none shall pluck them out of the
hands of the Son of God.

In vain the Cardinal makes a flourish with the word Building. I will build
(says he) shows that he speaks of a constituted Church, not by Predestination,
which is established of all Eternity, but by outward, earthly, and temporal
calling.

I answer, that although the Predestination of the Elect be Eternal, yet God
calls them in time, and successively one after another; yea, some predestinate
persons are not yet born. So that it is with good reason, that Christ uses the
future, I will build. Predestination is established of all Eternity, but not the
pedestinate.

He adds, that this word Keys, signifies the Authority of the Ministry,
which is true; but God uses that Ministry, to assemble his Elect: That Reason
then is to no purpose.

Next, he alleges many texts that speak of the visible Church, which no body
denies: If I say, that Scripture speaks of beasts, does it follow that there is
no men? If Scripture speak of a visible Church, does it follow that there is no
invisible Church? In vain then does he fill well nigh two pages with such texts.

The last of them is Heb. 12.23. where the Apostle speaks thus, You are come to
the General Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, which are written in
Heaven. What can that Church be, but that of the Elect and predestinate, of
whom Scripture says so often, that their names are written in Heaven, and that
they are written in the Book of Life? as, Luke 10.20. Rejoice, because your
names are written in Heaven; and, Rev. 20.15. Whosoever was not found written
in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of fire.

The Cardinal answers, that the Apostle speaks of the Triumphant Church: Of
which I desire the Reader to take notice; for he has told us before, that the
word Church signifies a visible body, called by an outward calling; and now he
acknowledges, that the Apostle is speaking of a Triumphant Church, which is
invisible. Also he has told us, that the Church is an organical body: But now
forgetting what he said, he acknowledges a glorious Church, where those organs
are not. So he undoeth all that he has done.

Nevertheless, let us see whether the Apostle speaks here of the Triumphant
Church. That I affirm to be impossible: For the Apostle says to the Hebrews,
that they were come to the Church of the firstborn, which are written in
Heaven: Now they were not yet come to the Triumphant Church, since they were
yet upon earth.

And if by those that are written in Heaven, we must only understand the
glorified Saints, it will follow, that Christ spoke against the truth, when he
said to his Apostles, Luke 10. That their names were written in Heaven; for
they were not yet glorified.

This is not contradicted by the Apostle, when he says in the same place, You
are come to the Heavenly Jerusalem: For the Heavenly Jerusalem comprehends the
whole Society of the Elect, to which whosoever is joined, is no less joined to
those that are in Heaven, then to those that are on Earth.

CHAP. 6. Whether the Societies of Heretics, and Schismatics, or Idolatrous
Christians, must be called Churches. Answer to the Cardinal.
THe Question is, Whether the Societies of Idolatrous, or Heretic, or
Schismatical Christians, ought to be called Churches? and, Whether when by
Heresies or Schisms the Church is torn in pieces, every piece can, or ought to
keep the name of Church? About that, the 57. Chapter of the Cardinals first
Book is spent. For my part, I hold that Question to be useless, because it is
but a dispute about a word: We have true Controversies enough, without forging
imaginary Controversies. To take the word in the sense that our adversaries
take it, for the whole Society of the truly faithful, it is certain, that the
Societies of Heretics, separated from that body, are not the Church. But if by
the Church, we understand the whole body of those that profess Christianity,
there is no doubt but that the Societies of Heretics are Churches, and parts
of that Universal Church. It appears to me, that our adversaries admitting
the Baptism of those whom they call Heretics, acknowledge them to be Christian
Churches; for the Sacraments of the Christian Church, are not to be found out
of the Christian Church. So the ten Tribes of Israel are often called by the
Prophets, Hos. 4.6.
the people of God, because they kept the Circumcision, and were of Jacobs
posterity. M. du Perron, chap. 61. speaks of Christian Heretics: Now there are
no Christians out of the Christian Church. The Apostle writing to the
Galatians, calls them the Church, in the beginning of his Epistle, although
they erred in an important point of the faith, retaining the Circumcision, and
putting a necessity upon the observation of the Ceremonies of the Law: For that
it was a vice of the body of the Church, not of some particular persons, it
appears, in that the Apostle speaks to the body of the Church without
distinction, chap. 1. 6. and 3. 1. and 5. 7. and 9. Cardinal du Perron,
although he denies that it was the opinion of the whole Church, yet
acknowledges that S. Paul confuteth that doctrine, as if all the Galatians had
embraced it. Thus the Spirit of God writes to the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3.
which nevertheless he calls poor, blind and naked. A man sick of the plague, is
nevertheless a true man: As health is not the form or the essence of a man, so
purity in the faith is not the essence of the universal visible Church. Her
essence or essential form consists in the collection in one body under the
profession of Christianity.

CHAP. 7. How this Proposition must be understood: That out of the Church there
is no Salvation.
THe Cardinal is continually urging this Proposition, that there is no
salvation out of the Church; And that he has not God for his Father, that has
not the Church for his Mother. It imports then to know in what sense, and how
far that Proposition is true.

I say then, that if by the word Church, you understand the Church or Assembly
of the elect, or predestined unto salvation, it is clear and questionless
that out of the Church so understood there is no salvation: For whosoever is
none of the elect, is of necessity a reprobate.

If by the Church, you understand some particular Church, as the Greek, the
Roman, the English, it is certain that out of such a Church a man may be saved.
For example, if the Roman Church were as pure in the faith as it is corrupt,
yet a faithful man could be saved in any other particular Church of the like
purity.

But if by the Church, one understands the whole body of those that profess
themselves to be Christians, or the whole body of the Orthodox Churches united
in communion; it is certain that out of the Communion of the Church taken in
that sense a man may be saved. For if one were unjustly excommunicated from
that Church, and should die during that excommunication, he should not be
therefore excluded from salvation. For God is not subject to men's vices, nor
obliged to comply with the unjust passions of Pastors handling the keys
unrighteously, or abusing them ignorantly. Such a man having the Church for his
Stepmother, shall nevertheless have God for his Father.

It may also happen that a Pagan or a Jew being prisoner, or living in a
country where there is no Christians, will come by reading, or conference, or
inspiration from God, to acknowledge the truth of Christian Religion, and make
a resolution to profess it at the next opportunity, and as soon as he shall
have his freedom: if Death prevent such a man before he can openly join with
the Communion of the Church, I make no doubt but that he may be saved,
believing in Jesus Christ, though he never did aggregate himself to the
Communion of the Church. For our Saviors words can never be false, Whosoever
believes in Jesus Christ, has eternal life, Joh. 6. The thief crucified with
Jesus, and converted when he was near death, was a Pagan before, or of no
religion; we cannot tell that ever he was a Member of the visible Church, yet
he was saved.

In this sense then that Proposition may be true, That out of the visible
Church there is no Salvation. Who so by profaness or error in the foundation of
the faith does separate himself from the Communion of the universal visible
Church, and renounceth the Communion of the faithful, to live according to his
fancy, and to be no more a Member of the Church, that man cannot be saved. Of
such men the Apostle Jude speaks ver. 18, 19. where he calls those mockers and
sensual men that separate themselves; And the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 10.
v. 25. forbids us to forsake the assembling of our selves together. In this
sense Cyprian in his book of the Unity of the Church, says, He has not God
for his Father, that has not the Church for his Mother. For he speaks of
Schismatics, who out of pride despise the Communion of the Orthodox Church,
and are authors of dissension and division in the Church.

But in our days, this Proposition, That out of the Church there is no
salvation, is taken otherwise. For thereby they mean that out of the Roman
Church, and out of the Popes subjection none can be saved. One particular
Church the furthest gone in the way of perdition, condemns all other Churches
to eternal perdition.

Of that question this is an appurtenance: Whether Heretics and Schismatics
can be saved? Those are called Heretics, who by some error in the faith have
separated themselves from the Orthodox Church. Those are called Schismatics,
not Heretics, that separate themselves from the Orthodox Church for some
causes that concern not the faith. As the Donatists made a schism from the
Orthodox Church of Africa for the ordination of Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage,
pretending that he had been created Bishop by Bishops that had delivered the
holy Scriptures unto the persecutors. But Satan for fear that the Schism should
heal up, added to it presently some difference in the doctrine, moving a
quarrel about rebaptizing of Heretics.

In this question it is better to say too little then too much: For a godly,
wise man will abstain from making a rash judgment of the salvation of others,
remembering the sentence of Jesus Christ, Mat. 7.1.
Judge not that you be not judged. He will ponder the causes of the separation,
and distinguish the persons. For there be some errors in light things, not
fundamental in Religion, upon which a separation may happen, by the pride and
pertinacy of some Pastors, even of them that are Orthodox: As the error of the
Quartadecimani, who celebrated the feast of Easter precisely upon the
fourteenth day of the Moon of March; for which cause Victor Bishop of Rome
separated himself from their Communion; Wherein although the error was on their
side, yet the schism was on Victors side, and he was more guilty then they. To
pronounce that the people which is no cause of the schism, is damned eternally
for such an error, is a rash part, and a bold judgment of the salvation of
others. For no doubt but that such separations commonly happen by the ambition
of the Pastors that lead the people, who groan under that yoke, and desire
concord, grieving for the separation. Yea it may happen that both the Churches
that forsake their mutual communion are both in the wrong. It may happen also,
that the party that has the truth on his side, is cause of the schism, by the
harshness, or ambition, or want of charity of them that govern. As when two
Brothers are quarrelling, they are Brothers nevertheless: So it is possible
that two dissenting Churches will be nevertheless Members of the same body, in
Gods account, whose wisdom is not obnoxious to our violence. But men prone to
think well of their own righteousness, and having little charity for their
Brethren, will pronounce all that keep not communion with them, excommunicate
Heretics and Schismatics, and assign their quarter in hell; whereas they
should have a tender care to take heed to make up the least breach, by bearing
with the weak. I would then put a great difference between the Authors of
Schism, who are Satan's Incendiaries, and the makers of the breach; and the
simple people that cannot resist the authority of the Pastors of that Church in
which they are born and bred, and have a real inclination to concord.

I could wish also that a man should not be pronounced an Heretic, that is
ignorant of some Article of Faith by a simple and negative Ignorance, such as
is that of Infants; not by an obstinate ignorance, which armeth it self with
reasons against the Truth. Thus the Apostles were at first ignorant of the
Resurrection, and were not Heretics for that.

I wish also that an Error be not presently called an Heresy, when it is
about a light thing, not about the Fundamentals of Faith. It was with some
severity that the Luciferians were listed among the Heretics, because they
would not receive to Episcopacy those that had held the same degree among the
Heretics; also for the traduction of the soul.

But above all, M. du Perrons judgment seems to me rash and bold, Page 669.
in the fourth Chapter of the third Observation; where he says, that there are
some points, of which if the Church should bate one syllable, she should cease
to be the true Church of Christ, and would remain the Synagogue of Satan. Among
which points he ranketh the doctrine of the Baptism of Heretics. Whereby he
condemns the whole African Church in Agrippines and Cyprians Age, and calls
it the Synagogue of Satan, and inwraps good Cyprian in the same condemnation.
For they did not receive the Baptism of Heretics, no more then the Donatists
that came since, and have followed them in that point: For which cause Steven
Bishop of Rome called Cyprian (who was far better then he) Psuedo Christum and
Pseudo Apostolum and dolosum operarium. Epistola Firmiliani quae est 75. inter
Epistolas Cypriani,. 21. and 22.
a false Christ, a false Prophet, and a deceitful workman. As on the other
side, Cyprian Epist. 74. calls Steven proud, ignorant, lover of Heretics,
Enemy to Christians.

M. du Perron beats incessantly upon the necessity of Communion with the Roman
Catholic Church, maintaining that out of that Communion, there is no
Salvation. But he forgets to resolve a difficulty, Whether an Orthodox Church
living in another Hemisphere then ours, and for want of Navigation, not so much
as knowing that there is a Roman Church, must be deprived of Salvation; the
defect not coming from her, but from the nature of the place, and the
remoteness of the situation?

CHAP. 8. Whether the True Church be always in Sight? State of the Question.
IT is not a point disputed, Whether the Church of the Elect be Visible; for it
is a thing confessed of all, that the Elect are not discernable with the eye. The
question is, Whether the Church to which we must join, that we may be saved, be
always exposed to our eye?

We are also agreed upon this, That they that belong to that true Church, see
and know that it is the true Church. Also that such as are not of that Church,
as Pagans, Jews, and Heretics; see indeed that Society of men which is called
the Church, but see not that it is the true Church. These are the words of
Bellarmine, chap. 15. of the third Book of the Church, One may see a Society
which is the Church, but one sees not that it is the true Church. Cardinal du
Perron says the same, Chap. 19. To Heretics and Schismatics, the Church,
Page 63.
though never so eminent, has always been obscure and hidden; not for want of
light and eminency of her own, but by reason of their darkness and blindness.

So there is two ways of seeing the Church, The one to see her only as she is
a Society of men; the other to see that she is the true Church. Thus the Jews
saw Jesus Christ, but did not see that he was the Christ, the Redeemer. In the
first way many Pagans, Jews and Heretics see the Church; but none but those
that are of the Church, or have knowledge enough to join with it, see that it
is the true Church. So far we are agreed.

The question between us is, Whether the true, pure, and Orthodox Church be
always exposed to those men's sight that are without the verge of the Church,
and whether they can see her at least as a Society of men, for without that
they could not aggregate themselves to her?

Our Adversaries maintain, That the true Church is always in sight, and
visible to them that are without. We on the contrary hold that the true
Orthodox Church never was exposed to the sight of all the men of the world,
there being always many Nations that never heard of Christ, nor of Christian
Church; And such hard and contrary times coming sometimes upon the Church, that
the Church seems to vanish and be dissipated, or extinct by persecutions; of
which I will bring some examples in the following Chapter.

CHAP. 9. That the Church to which we must join, that we may be saved, is not
always eminent and exposed to every ones sight. Answer to the Cardinal.
THe Word of God affords us many examples of this. Was the Church of God
exposed to the sight of Infidels, when the people of Israel was in Egypt,
serving the Idols of the Egyptians? For God by his Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 20.
upbraids them, that when by his Prophets he exhorted them to forsake the Idols
of Egypt, where they lived, none of them would obey or leave her abominations.

Was the Church Visible to the Infidels in the time of the Kings, Ahas and
Manasseh, when those Idolatrous Kings shut up the Temple of God, and Idols were
set up in all the Towns of Juda? and when the High Priest Vriah set up an Altar
after the Pagan manner within the Temple, which was the only Temple in the
world consecrated unto the true God?

M. du Perron. Chap. 88. says for answer, that Manasseh came to repentance:
But what is that to our purpose? That King indeed repented toward the end of
his days; but the fifty two years of his reign are a sufficient time to make a
long interruption in the visibility of the Church. He says also, that although
there had not been any assembling in the Synagogues at that time, and although
all public exercise of Gods service had been suspended, yet the Massacres of
the faithful did not suffer the true Religion to be unknown and invisible.

This answer is a plain shift: For here the question is not of the Visibility
of Religion, which may remain in some particulars, but of the Visibility of the
Church; which Visibility cease when there is no more Assemblies.

Was the Church exposed to the sight of them that are without, in the time
marked, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. For a long season Israel has been without the true God,
and without a teaching Priest, and without Law. Where it cannot be said, that
by Israel the ten Tribes are understood: For it follows in the Text, But when
they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord God of Israel, and sought him, he
was found of them. This conversion never was in the ten Tribes since their
revolt.

Was the Church Visible in the time of Daniel, when the only Temple dedicated
to the ordinary service of God was destroyed, and the Jews captive in Babylon,
bowed the knee before the Idol set up by Nebuchadnezzar, all but Daniel and his
three friends! Dan. 3.6, 7.

And although in all those times the Church had been visible to the
neighboring Nations, yet she was not visible to the Chinesi, Americans,
Sarmates, etc. And here our Adversaries ought to determine how far, and to how
many Nations the Church was visible.

A very express example to this purpose is the time that the Lord Jesus lived
on earth. There was then no other Visible Church in the world but the Jewish
Church, nor any succession of Chairs, but that of the Priests and Scribes; yet
they conspire against Jesus Christ, and make a Council, in which they decree,
that whosoever should confess Jesus to be the Christ, should be cast out of the
Synagogue; That is, excommunicated, Joh. 9.22. which sentence is the worst of
all doctrines. Where was at that time that true Church always visible and
eminent in purity? For our Adversaries hold, that then the Jewish Church had
yet her full authority and purity, alleging for that Mat. 23.2, 3. The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair. All therefore that they bid you
observe, that observe and do. To say with M. du Perron, that the Jewish Church
was then near her period, and that her Lease was well-nigh expired, is
confessing that at least some years had past without a visible Church.

Wherefore the Cardinal seeing that he could not deny, that the state of the
visible Church under the Old Testament was often interrupted, says, It follows
not, if that happened to the Jewish Church, that the same can happen to the
Christian Church, which has great privileges above the Jewish. In the same
manner (says he) as there is three periods of man's generation; The first, in
which man lives only with the life of Plants; the second, in which he lives
with an Animal life; and the third in which he lives with a Reasonable life.
And that it does not follow, if under the two first states the soul is
corruptible, that under the third it must be so too. But he is mistaken in his
Philosophy: For it is most false, that there is a time or period in which a man
lives only with a plants life; for in that time he is not yet a man. That is
said of the embryo, not of man, who never is a man till he have a reasonable
soul. But the Church is always a Church, and is one and the same body from
Adam unto the last day. If the Roman Church had promises of visibility and
perpetuity as express as the Church of Israel, she would brag of them with
great ostentation. God speaks thus, 2 Chronicles. 33.4. In Jerusalem shall my Name
be for ever. And 1 King. 9.3. I have hallowed this house to put my Name there
for ever. And Psalm. 132.14. Zion is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I
have desired it. And yet God has put away that people from his Covenant,
because these promises were to be understood conditionally, if that people
would adhere unto God, and to his service. But the Roman Church has no promise
in the Word of God to ground her perpetuity upon it: Nor has the very
Christian Church in general any promise to be always eminent and visible to
them that are without; but Scripture teaches us the contrary.

In the beginning of the preaching of the Apostles, when she was enclosed in
Jerusalem, she was not visible to the Sarmates, Spaniards and Moors.

Shall the Christian Church be visible in the time mentioned, Revel. 13.3.
where it is said, That all the world shall wonder after the Beast? Or in the
time marked by the Lord Jesus Christ, Luke 18. Do you think that when the Son
of man comes he shall find faith in the Earth? The Roman Church that investeth
herself with the Title of Universal; was she visible to the Americans before
the Navigations of the Spaniards and Portughese? And when it is said, Revel.
12. that wings were given to the woman (which is the Church) that she might
fly into the Wilderness, where she might be hid for a time; was that Church
then eminent and visible unto the Infidels? Do not our Adversaries say, that
the Antichrist shall abolish the continual Sacrifice, that is, (as they
understand it) the Mass? At that time then the Roman Church shall be no more:
For they hold that a Church cannot be without a Sacrifice; at least at that
time she shall have no visible and no eminent state.

And since God commands his Church, Revel. 18. to come out of Babylon, may we
not thence gather that the Church shall be for a time hid in Babylon?

And who doubts, but that the Church may come to be so dispersed for a season
by persecutions, that she may even be unseen to some of the faithful, until God
gather them again?

CHAP. 10. Places of the Fathers upon that Subject.
THe Ancients are full of passages to that purpose. Austin, who sometimes to
favor his cause against the Donatists, will have the true Church always
eminent in multitude and splendour, in some other places is speaking otherwise.
In the 80. Epistle to Hosychius speaking of the last times, Ecclesia non
apparebit, impiis persecutoribus ultra modum. saevientibus.
The Church (says he) shall not then appear, the impious persecutors
exercising their violence beyond measure. And in the 45. Epistle to Vincentius,
Ipsa est quae aliquando obscuratur and tanquam obnubilatur multitudine
scandalorum.
The Church sometimes is obscured, and is as it were covered with clouds by the
multitude of scandals. He adds indeed, That at that time Ecclesia in
firmissimis suis eminet; the Church is eminent in those that are most firm in
the faith. But the faith of particular persons shows indeed the Religion, but
shows not the Church, when no Congregations are seen. In the same place
speaking of the time of Constantius, he says, that at that time the Catholics
were of small number, compared to the Heretics. And in the 119. Epistle, Chap.
6. Ecclesia adhuc in illa mortalitate carnis constituta, propter ipsam
mutabi^itatem, Lunae nomine in Scripturis significatur.
The Church being yet in that mortal condition of the flesh, is by reason of
that mutability signified by the Moon in the Scriptures. And soon after,
Obscura videtur Ecclesia in tempo^^ peregrinationis suae.
The Church looks obscure in the time of her Peregrination.

Ambrose in the 4. of the Hexameron, Chap. 2. Videtur sicut Luna deficere, sed
non defici^; Obumbrari potest, deficere non potest.
The Church seems to fail like the Moon, but she fails not; She can be
obscured, but she cannot fail.

Tertullian in his Exhortation to Chastity, Chap. 7. Sed and ubi tres, Ecclesia
est, licet Laici; unusquisque enim de sua fide vivit.
Where three are, though they be Laymen, there the Church is; for every one
lives by his faith.

Hilary in his Book against Auxentius, Vos parietum amor cepit; male Ecclesiam
Dei in tectis aedificiisque veneramini. Male sub hoc nomen pacis ingeritis.
Montes mihi and lacus and and carceres and voragines sunt tutiores.
You are taken with the love of walls; You reverence the Church of God amiss,
in the roofs and buildings: you propound the name of peace amiss under that
color; Mountains, and Lakes, and Prisons, and Boggs are unto me more safe. And
that none say, that he speaks there of the only Church of Milan, he says in
the same place, that in the East it is a rare thing to find a Catholic Bishop
or people.

CHAP. 11. Testimonies and Reasons of the Adversaries for the perpetual
Visibility of the Church.
AGainst this our Adversaries bestir all their strength. M. du Perron in Chap.
2. opposes it with many texts, Isai. 2.2. And it shall come to pass in the
last days, that the Mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the
top of the mountains; And all the hills shall flow unto her. [For so he
alleges that Text.] But that Text promises not a visibility, and perpetual
eminency to the Church, and at all times. It is a prediction of a time, when at
the preaching of the Gospel, many Nations shall be converted: which happened in
the time of the Apostles and their Disciples. This is made plain by the
following words; For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. He speaks of a time, when the Word of God must be carried
from Judea and Jerusalem to the Gentiles, which came not to pass but in the
Apostles time.

The same answer will serve for two other Texts which he brings; The one out of
Isa. 60.3. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising. The other is out of chap. 61.9. Their seed shall be known among the
Gentiles, and their offspring among the people. These Texts promise a time
when the Church shall be much exalted in the sight of the Nations, but speak
not of visibility and perpetual splendour.

To these Texts he adds two of the New Testament. The first of Mat. 5.14. You
are the light of the world. A City that is set on a hill cannot be hid. By the
City Lib. de unitate Ecclesiae.
Austin understands the Church. Basil in his abridged definitions in the 277.
Interrogation holds that thereby good works must be understood, because it is
added, that men may see your good works. But the true exposition is that of
Hierom in the second Dialogue against the Pelagians, and of Chrysostom in the
Homily upon this place; Who say, that by the City set on a hill the Apostles
are understood, whom Jesus Christ calls also the light of the world, and because
both their persons and preaching were to be set forth in the sight of all
Narions. Thus God said to the Prophet, Jer. 1.18. Behold I have made thee this
day a defenced City. Yet suppose that this City set upon a mountain be the
Church; What can be gathered from it, but that the Church shall be eminent and
visible as long as it is set upon a hill? But this Text does not say that it
must always stand there. The Church of God is in a moving and wayfaring
condition. God has often removed her from one place to another.

The second Text which he alleges out of the New Testament, is, Mat. 18.17.
Tell it unto the Church; But if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as an Heathen man and a Publican. This we may call playing with the word
of God. The question is, whether the Church, which is called Catholic or
Universal, be visible? Is it any thing to this purpose to bring a Text where,
by the word Church the Pastors of a particular congregation are understood? For
that Text speaks of differences and offenses between two Brothers, which to
appease the universal Church is not convocated. Besides, they that are
commanded by the Text to make their address unto the Church when they have
received some wrong from their neighbors, belong unto the Church: But here the
question is, whether the Church be always visible to them that are without?

M. du Perron was not ashamed to allege Psalm 19.4. He has put her tabernacle
in the Sun, to prove that God has made his Church visible and eminent. But
that Text is falsified, which is thus, according to the Hebrew truth. See
Sixtus Senensis editionis Venetae, page 220. where he speaks thus. Genuinus ac
proprius hujus literae sensus and expositio sit Deum posuisse Soli tabernaculum
in coelo.
In them (that is in the heavens) he has set a tabernacle for the Sun. A man
that has recourse to such proofs, shows himself conscious of a great weakness
of his cause.

Having so ill alleged Scripture, he brings in the Fathers to no better
purpose. Cyprian in his book of the Unity of the Church, says, That the Church
clad with the Suns light, spreads her beams over all the world. He speaks of
the Orthodox Church of his time, which was of a large extent: But he says not
that it should be so for ever. Also he alleges Chrysostom in the fourth
Homily upon Isaiah, and makes him say that it is more easy to put out the Suns
light, then to obscure the Church. But that Text is falsely interpreted: For the
word (...) of Chrysostom signifies to be, put out and utterly abolisht, not to
be obscured. This falsification is notorious.

Out of the same Chrysostom, in the same place he alleges this, The Sun is
not so manifest, nor his light, as the actions of the Church. Yea to them that
are of the Church, and have eyes to see. But as for them that are out of the
Church, and are blind in their understanding, M. du Perron has confessed before,
that the Church is to them invisible.

Of Saint Austin, whom M. du Perron makes his main ground, as one that gives
often multitude for a mark of the true Church, we will speak hereafter, and
show that it is a deceitful mark.

Here one may ask, How then shall it be possible for the ignorant to be saved,
if the Church sometimes be out of sight? For how shall they join with a Church
which does not appear? That Objection has the like force against our
Adversaries: For they acknowledge that there is, and ever was in the world a
multitude of Nations that know neither Christ nor Christian Church, which
therefore cannot aggregate themselves unto the Church, since they do not see
her. That Objection then does not strike at us, but at God, who knows the
ways to bring to salvation those that belong to his election.

CHAP. 12. Answer to that Question made to us; Show us where your Church was
before Luther, remounting from Luther to the Apostles?
OUr ears are even tired with that stale Objection: Show us where your Religion
was, and your Church before Luther and Calvin?

This is not a question of Divinity, but of History: A question not to be
resolved but by the search of all the Books of Ecclesiastical History for they
space of fifteen hundred years: which Books being Greek and Latin, and of an
endless prolixity; if by that search we must attain to salvation, I know not
who can be saved; seeing that even among the Doctors, scarce one of an hundred
has a mediocrity in that knowledge, and such as think themselves learned in
it, do not agree among themselves.

In that Objection, mockery and fraudulent injustice are evident. Mockery, in
that they will have us to answer presently, and in few words, a question that
needs above twenty years to frame an answer to it. And truly our Adversaries
might with good reason laugh at us, if we would have them to prove to us in few
words, that their Religion was believed in several countries, and in all ages
from the Apostles till now.

Fraud also and injustice is evident in this, that to take us off from
examining their doctrine by Scripture, they will cast us upon endless
histories, where they know that the people can see nothing, and into a dark
labyrinth that has no way to come out.

And how unjust are they to exact that of our people, which God does not
require of us? and to which themselves do not oblige the people of the Roman
Church? For God does not oblige us to be learned in histories, that we may be
saved; but he obliges us to know, and to follow the rules of faith and manners
contained in his Word. He will not ask us in the day of Judgment, whether we
have believed as the Roman Church, or the French, or the German believed before
Luther? But we shall be judged according to the Gospel; as Saint Paul says,
Romans 2.16.

Neither do they oblige their people to know the whole succession of chairs,
and the whole thread of Histories of several countries since the Apostles. And
there is none, I say not only of the people of the Roman Church, but even of
the Doctors, that can affirm without rashness and untruth, that in the list of
the Bishops of Rome, or of Milan, or of Lions, etc. none of them has changed
any thing in the doctrine of his predecessor. All that is mere darkness unto
the people, and the Doctors of the Roman Church never examine their people upon
that.

In our respect especially that question is both absurd and unjust; for it
presupposes that the Orthodox Church must be visible to us in all ages. Now we
have proved that the Church sometimes seems to be extinct, and has not always
a visible eminency.

And to make the injustice of their dealing superlative, they present that
question to us by the wrong end: For common sense teaches us, that in the
search of Histories one must begin with the most ancient, but they would have
us to begin by Luther, and so remount to the Apostles, as if one began the
History of the Jews at Herod, and from thence should come to the Maccabees,
from thence to David, and from David to Abraham: For they avoid speaking of the
time of the Apostles, because they know that their ReligiOn was not then in
being. Also because they know that the example of the Apostles is a rule and a
law for the following ages. And seeing that our Religion is conformable unto
that of the Apostles, the perceive that if one began that way, the search of
the History of the following ages would be superfluous, since all the following
ages ought to be ruled by that first age.

There then we must stop them, and since they will handle Controversies in the
Historical way, let us begin by the first and the most ancient, and let us see
which of the two Churches is most conformable to that of the Apostles; Whether
it be that Church which calls upon the Saints; that worshippeth Images and
Relics; that pretends really to Sacrifice the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Mass; that calls the Virgin Mary the Queen of Heaven; that celebrates the
Service in a tongue unknown to the people; that believes a fire of Purgatory;
that depriveth the people from the Cup in the Communion; that says the Bishop
of Rome is Successor to St. Peter, not only in the Bishopric of the City of
Rome, but also in the Apostleship, and in the Primacy over the Universal
Church, having the power of Canonizing Saints; releasing of Vows and Oaths;
dispensing against the Apostle; giving Indulgences to the dead, and drawing
souls out of Purgatory; gathering the overplus of the Satisfactions of Saints
into the treasure of the Church, and converting it into a payment for others;
and having the power to dispose of the Life and Crown of Kings, etc.

Or whether that Church which believes none of these things, and rejecting
those Traditions, keeps her self to Scripture only, be the Church conformable
unto that of the Apostles? The Sun is not more clear then it is evident, that
not only no trace of those things is found in the writings of the Apostles, but
that even many ages after the Apostles, one man shall not be found that had a
Religion any whit like the Religion of the Roman Church of our days. Which our
Adversaries do sufficiently acknowledge, when they say, That the Pope and the
Roman Church can change that which the Apostles have constituted, as Cardinal
du Perron maintains, and with him all the Romish Doctors of our age, as we
have proved, and will hereafter prove more accurately.

The Reader may observe in that question another evident mockery, full of
insultation: For a thief that has robbed a man of his cloak, should add
mockery to his theft, if he asked him, Where is your cloak now? So the Pope who
has for many ages used his utmost endeavor to abolish the Church in the West
by bloody persecutions, is now asking, where that Church was, which he thought
he had extinguished?

It were easy for us to show, that before Luther, there was in France, in
Germany, and in other places, diverse Churches of our belief, which our
Adversaries charged with odious names, calling them Waldenses, Albigenses,
Picards, and the like; (in the same manner as they call us now Hugonots,) and
calumniously ascribing impious doctrines unto them. The sudden change happened in
Luthers time, showed that Europe was full of people that knew the Truth, and
sighed for Reformation, groaning under their captivity.

At this time also the Church of Ethiopia, containing seventeen great
Provinces, agrees with us in the Fundamental points of the Faith, although she
observe many small superstitions: For she is not subject unto the Pope, knows
neither his Indulgences, for his Laws; believes neither Purgatory nor
Transubstantiation, makes no Adoration of the Host in the Holy Communion, nor
any elevation for worship: Celebrates the divine Service in the native
language; Communicates under both kinds; worshippeth no Images: Has no private
Communion; has but one Table or Altar in every Church; has married Priests;
Baptizeth men-children forty days after they are born, and women-children
threescore days after, thereby showing, that they believe not Baptism to be
absolutely necessary unto salvation: as may be seen in the History of Francis
Alvarez a Portughese Monk, who has lived there six years. For M. du Perrons
imputation to those Churches, that they are Eutychian, is a calumny. It is
true, that they are subject unto the Patriarch of Alexandria who is an
Eutychian, but that subjection is not in the Doctrine, but only in that the
said Patriarch has the right of the nomination of the Abuna, or first Prelate
of the Ethiopians, when the Sea is vacant.

It is certain, that the Greek Church, more ancient then the Roman, and from
whom the Roman Church has received Christianity, draws much nearer to our
Religion then the Roman; seeing that she does not acknowledge the Bishop of
Rome; despises both his Laws and indulgences; believes no Purgatory, and no
Transubstantion; gives the cup to the people; has the Divine Service in the
ancient Greek tongue; and has married Priests.

But the search of Histories decideth no Controversies. We are ruled by no
History but by that of the Apostles time; for they have given Laws for the
following ages. Wherefore whenever our Adversaries ask us where our Religion
was before Luther? Note.
we must ask them, where their Religion was in the time of the Apostles? for
there both they and we ought to begin.

CHAP. 13. Whether the Church can Err?
THe Roman Church boasts that she cannot err. And in the question, whether
the Church can err, she bears her self as an infallible Judge. So that she is
Judge in her own cause, and an infallible Judge of her infallibility.

By the Roman Church, which they will have to be an infallible judge, the
people is not understood, but the Prelates that govern the people. This is
arrogant language: For so the will of man, which ought to be ruled by the Word
of God, is become the Rule it self; and Scripture is become of little
necessity, if it be so, that the Pastors our leaders cannot swerve out of the
way; and no other duty will lie upon us but to follow them, and stand to their
verdict.

The Apostles had the gift of not erring; yet none of them durst ever say, I
cannot err: That was the language of the Jews, when they conspired against the
Prophets sent by God: And under that false confidence, hardening themselves in
evil, they would say, The Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor the Word
from the Prophet: Jer. 18.18.
But God gives them the lie upon that, and tells them, Ezekiel. 7.26. The Law
shall perish from the Priest, and the counsel from the Prophet, or the Ancient.

Against that Doctrine of pride, Scripture does furnish us with many examples.
The Church of the Old Testament was idolatrous in Egypt, as may be seen, Ezekiel.
20.7, 8. Aaron the High Priest set up an Altar to the Golden Calf, and
dedicated an holy day to it, Exodus 32. Whereupon Moses chides him, and says,
What did this people unto thee, that thou have brought so great a sin upon
them? Augustine. lib. questionum in Exodum quaes. 46. Notandum est quemadmodum
illud totum malum quod populus fecit ipsi Aaroni tribuatur.
Austin says that Aaron was the cause of all the evil. Vriah another High
Priest set up a Pagan Altar within the Temple of God, 2 Kings 16.10, 11. Under
King Ahaz the Temple of God was shut up, and the sacred service ceased for a
time, 2 Chronicles. 29.7. King Manasseh built Altars to Baalim in the House of God,
the only Temple in the world dedicated to Gods service, and made Sacrifices
unto false Gods in the two Courts of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 33.4, 5. In which
Temple how many abominations and idolatries were committed, is to seen, Ezekiel. 8.

2 Chronicles. 15.3. It is said, Now for a long season Israel has been without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without law. Which cannot be
understood of the ten Tribes, as we have proved; for those ten Tribes never had
a lawful Priest.

Did not the Church err in the time of Isaiah, who upbraideth the people of the
Jews, that his watchmen were blind, and were all ignorant? Isai. 50.10. Or in
the time of Jeremiah, who thus rebukes the Church of his time, The Prophets
prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, Jer. 5.31. And Chapter
2. verse. 8. The Priests said not, Where is the Lord? And they that handle the
Law knew me not. And v. 26. Their Priests and their Prophets say to a stock,
Thou art my Father, which is the language of Idolaters. The same Prophet
upbraideth Judah, then the only people of God, that they had as many Gods as
Towns, Jer. 11.13.

Did not the Church err in Malachi's time, who speaks thus to the Priests that
taught the people, Ye are departed out of the way, you have cause many to
stumble at the Law, and have corrupted the Covenant of Levi? Mal. 2.8.

The Priests and Scribes that held the ordinary Chairs in the Church, Chap. 9.
were enemies of Jesus Christ, and decreed that whosoever should confess him to
be the Christ, should be excommunicated, Joh. 9.12. And Caiaphas the High
Priest pronounced that Jesus Christ was a blasphemer, Mat. 26.

If then that Church, which was the only Church in the world where God was
served, is fallen into error; is it credible, that when there are many contrary
Churches, any of those Churches ought to presume that she can never err?

Yet our Adversaries defend that arrogant Doctrine with some Texts of
Scripture, which they oppose unto experience, and to the examples attested by
Scripture, to make the Word of God to fight against it self.

They allege in the first place the Prophet, Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips The
English version says not shall, but should, to show that it is a Commandment,
not a Promise.
shall keep knowledge, and they shall keep the Law at his mouth, for he is the
messenger of the Lord of Hosts. They should have added the followings words,
where God accuses the Priests to have erred and seduced the people; But you
are departed out of the way, and you have caused many to stumble at the Law:
The abuse lies in this, that of a Commandment they have made a Promise. As if
I took the words of the Law, Thou shall not kill, for a Prophecy that there
shall be no murder in the world. God says, The Priests lips shall keep
knowledge, to command them to keep knowledge; not to promise them that they
shall always keep it.

They fence themselves with Christ's words, Matthew. 23.2. The Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses seat; All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do, etc. To which they add, that Caiaphas the High Priest for
that year prophesied, that Jesus Christ should die for the Nation, Joh. 11. as
if Prophecy had been inseparably annexed unto the Priesthood; or as if
Caiaphas could not teach false Doctrine.

All that is studying to deceive ones self: For Jesus Christ Matthew. 15.
accuses the Scribes and Pharisees of transgressing the Commandment of God by
their Traditions. And Matthew. 16. he warns his Disciples to beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, that is, (as himself expounds it) of their Doctrine.
And Matthew. 5. he repurgeth the Law of the false constructions and rules which
the Doctors of that time had pinned upon it. And Caiaphas is he that pronounced
in judgment, bearing the authority of High Priest assisted by the Priests and
Scribes, that Jesus Christ was a blasphemer.

Wherefore when Jesus Christ commanded that all should be done that the Scribes
and Pharisees should teach, he meant all that they should teach conformably to
the Law and the Word of God, as it is specified, Deuteronomy. 17.11. where the version
of the Roman Church is express to this purpose; thus rendering that Text, Thou
shall do all they shall teach thee according to the Law. Chrysostom Hom. 72.
upon Matthew understands it so. And Hilary 24. Canon of the Comment upon
Matthew.

As for Caiaphas, he prophesied by the will of God; not because he could not
err, but that the quality of the person might give more weight to that
Prophecy whereby Jesus Christ is justified by his enemies, and the fruit of
his death is expounded.

It is to no purpose, to say, that God promises his Apostles, Joh. 14.26. to
send them the Comforter that would teach them The English version has all
things.
all truth. For all that is promised to the Apostles, does not belong to the
Roman Church: Yet it may be said, that God teaches still the Roman Church, and
all the Heretical Churches in all truth: For God speaks to them in his Word,
but they resist his teaching, and choose rather to adhere unto falsehood.

It is no more to the purpose to allege these words, Tell the Church, Matthew.
18.17. For there it is not spoken of the Universal Church, but of the Pastors
of a particular Church; nor of the judgment of the Doctrine, but of the
reparation of wrongs done to a particular person. Note also that St. Peter is
one of those to whom Jesus Christ said, Tell it unto the Church. By these words
then St. Peter is subjected unto the judgment of the Church. Above all, the
presupposition of our Adversaries in this place is intolerable, pronouncing
that by the Church, the Roman only be understood. Why the Roman rather then the
Greek or the African?

M. du Perron heaps up many texts of Scripture, to prove that the Church is
exempted from a possibility of erring; but they are of no use to this purpose:
For some of them speak of the Church of the Elect, as that Text, Cant. 4.7.
Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee. Did that Prelate believe
that the Roman Church has no spot in her manners? Such is also the text of
Isaiah 52.1. Henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised
and the unclean. And this Matthew. 16.18. The gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church.

Pope Gregory the 1. expounding the 7. Penitential Psalm, expounds this text of
the Church of the Elect, not of the Church of Rome. These are his words,
Sanctam Ecclesiam de sanctis in aeternum permansuris constructam, nullis hujus
vitae persecutionibus superandam, ipse super quem aedificata est, evidenter
ostendit, cum ait, Portae inferorum non praevalebunt adversus eam.
He upon whom the Church is built, evidently showed, that the holy Church which
is composed of Saints that shall abide for ever, shall never be overcome by any
persecutions, when he said that the gates Hell of shall not prevail against her.

Some other texts which the Cardinal brings, speak of the duty of the Church,
not of her infallible purity; as when she is called the Pillar and stay of
Truth, 1 Timothy 3. because she is appointed for the defense of the Truth. In the
same sense heretical Churches are pillars and stays of untruth; but thence it
follows not, that they can never be converted unto the true Faith.

Or they are texts that speak of every faithful man, not of the Universal
Church, as this, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. What communion has light with darkness? and
what concord has Christ with Belial? Hereby the Apostle exhorts every
faithful man to separate himself from the world, and from the uncleanness and
allurements of Satan. Or if this belongs also to the Universal Church, it is an
Exhortation, not a Declaration, or a Promise of an infallible purity. Of the
like nature is the text of 2 John 10. If any bring not this Doctrine, -- do not
bid him God speed.

Or they are texts that speak especially of the Town of Jerusalem, not of the
Christian Church; as that which is said, Isai. 1.26. Thou shall be called the
City of Righteousness, the faithful City.

Or they are texts alleged without any color of reason, as this, Hos. 2.20.
I will betroth thee unto me in faithfulness. Ergo, the Church cannot err: And
that Church is the Roman. Such proofs have neither strength, nor the show of it.

The texts of the Fathers, which the Cardinal brings to the same end, serve
only to raise the bulk of his Book. They say only that the Catholic Church, by
which they mean the Orthodox, is separate from that of the Heretics: a thing
that no man denies. But the question is, Whether to the Church, which at this
present is pure, it may not happen hereafter to fall into some error?

The fore-warnings which the Word of God gives us of the corruptions that will
creep into the Christian Church, are stronger then any reason for the
infallibility of the same; and experience has confirmed them. Our Savior
Jesus, Luke 18.8. says to us, When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith
on the earth? The Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. foretells that a time shall come,
when men will not endure sound doctrine; -- And shall turn away their ears from
the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. And 1 Timothy 4.1. That in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and to
doctrines of Devils. Of which doctrines he does specify two; the prohibition
of marriage, and the abstinence of meats, which God has made for man's use. The
same Apostle 2 These. 2. foretells that the Son of perdition, who is the
Antichrist, and calls himself God, and boasts of miracles, shall place his
seat and his domination in the Temple of God. We read Rev. 13.3. that all the
world wondered after the beast: and v. 7. that the Beast makes war with the
Saints, and overcomes them. And power was given her over all people, and
tongue, and Nation: So that all that dwell on the earth shall worship her.
Where shall at that time be that visible Church which cannot err? Do not our
Adversaries say, that the Antichrist shall abolish all outward service, and all
public exercise of Christianity? And that one may not think that this so
horrible corruption shall not come to pass but toward the end of the world;
The Apostle in the fore-alledged place, 2 These. 2. declares, that even in his
time the mystery of iniquity did already work, and that Satan was laying the
plot of that work; for already they began to speak of preheminences, and the
Church had many Diotrephes. Already they said, I am of Cephas, and I am of
Paul: Already they were disputing of the service of Angels and abstinence of
meats, out of humility, and for exercise, Col. 2. And the Apostles were put to
fight against Justification by Works. Hierom upon Habak. 1. speaks thus of the
Antichrist; He shall gather all Nations, and draw all peoples to his error; yet
the same, when afterward they shall see him killed by the Spirit of the mouth
of Christ, shall comprehend that all that was foretold of him was true. After
the Council of Rimini under the Empire of Constantius, Arianism was preached
over all the Churches: Insomuch that Hierom in his Dialogue against the
Luciferians, says, that the whole world did groan, and wondered to see it self
turned Arian. Liberius Bishop of Rome, with three or four more with him, held
for the true faith; but soon after he was overcome, and subscribed to Arianism.

It is most considerable, that the Jesuits Ribera and Viegas, who have written
upon the Revelation, and Bellarmin himself in the third Book de Pontifice, and
many others, by the great harlot called Babylon, clad with scarlet, sitting
upon seven hills, that rules over the Nations, that shall seduce Kings and
people, which is mentioned in the 13, 17, and 18. chapters of the Revelation,
understand the City of Rome. It is also to be noted, how in chap. 17. it is
said, that the same great harlot shall seduce Kings, and make Nations drunk:
And that in chap. 18. the last ruin of that Babylon is described, after which
ruin, she shall be built no more again: Things which cannot be attributed to
the Pagan Rome, which seduced not Kings but extermined them. Neither was Rome
ever razed under the Paganism, nor ruined with a final ruin.

What? may one say, Dare you affirm, that the universal Councils representing
the Church of the whole world, can err in the faith?

I answer, that there has been no universal Council since the Apostles time,
in the sense that the word universal is taken, namely, for a Council convocated
out of the Church of all the world. The Councils which are called Universal,
are so called, because they were convocated out of the universal Roman Empire
by the authority of the Emperors: Out of which Empire there has been always a
a great number of Christian Churches. Not that I would say that the Councils of
Nicea, of Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, and that of Chalcedon have
errred: But it is one thing to say that they have not erred, and another thing
to say that they could not err. The universal Councils which the Pope
assembleth in these last ages, are Councils of the universal Papal Monarchy.
The other Churches have no part in it, but to be condemned, unheard.

The Doctors of the Roman Church believe not that the universal Councils cannot
err, since they oppose with so much violence the first Council of
Constantinople, and that of Chalcedon, for rising (as they speak) against the
Bishop of Rome, and despising his authority. We shall see hereafter the
invectives of Cardinal du Perron against that so famous and authentical Council
of Chalcedon, where there were six hundred and thirty Bishops. Bellarmin in his
Preface upon his Books de Pontifice, says that Primi qui serio primatum Romani
Pontificis oppugnarunt, videntur fuisse Graeci, anno, 39. etc.
those two Councils have earnestly assaulted the Primacy of the Pope of Rome.
The Jesuit Cotton makes the same complaint against these two Councils in the
Preface of his Institution.

The Pope Paschal in the Decretal Significasti de Electione, Tit. 6. Quasi
Romanae Ecclesiae Concilia ulla Legem praefixerint, etc.
declares that the Roman Church is not subject to the Councils, and maintains
that Councils depend upon the authority of the Roman Church. And Pope Gelasius
in the Tome of the bond of Anathema, quarreling with the Council of Carthage,
says, Seeds Apostolica sola rescindit quod praeter ordinem congregatio
Synodica putaverit usurpandum.
The Apostolical See alone makes void that which a Synodal Assembly would usurp
against the order. Finally, Doctor Andradius, who was present at the Council of
Trent, declares that Andrad. lib. 2. Defens. fidei Tridentinae. Liquet minime
eos errasse, qui dicunt Romanos Pontifices posse nonnunquam in Legibus
dispensare a Paulo and primis quatuor Conciliis.
Those err not, that say that the Popes can sometimes dispense frem the Laws of
Saint Paul, and from the four first Councils, which are the Councils of
greatest authority.

CHAP. 14. That the Roman Church has erred, and erreth.
BUt because all that our Adversaries preach of the infallible purity of the
Church tends to no other end but to invest the Popes and the Roman Church with
an infallible perfection, it will be expedient to show by invincible proofs
that the Roman Church erreth, and has erred. We shall not produce the errors
or impieties of particular Doctors, although their Writings be published with
approbation; nor the errors and heresies of Popes, wherewith we might fill a
great Volume. I will content my self to produce the errors approved not only by
the Popes, but also by their Councils: For there principally our Adversaries
place infallibility, when the Pope speaks in a Council, and that Council is
approved by the Pope. Also the public Laws unanimously received over the whole
Roman Church.

1. In the year of our Lord, 787. a Council was assembled at Nicea, which the
Roman Church approves, and reckons among the Universal Councils; And it is
called by our Adversaries the seventh universal Council: there sat the Legates
of Pope Adrian, who not only approved that Council, but writ a That Book is
found in the third Tome of the Councils after the Council of Nicea.
book purposely for the defense thereof.

If then that Council has erred, it cannot be denied that the Church of Rome
has erred. Let us see then what was done in that Council. 1. In the seventh
Action, that Council commands the adoration of Images upon pain of anathema, in
these words: We hold that the Images of the glorious Angels, and of all Saints
must be adored and saluted: But as for him that has not the will so to do, but
staggereth, and is doubtful about the adoration of the venerable images, this
holy and venerable Synod does anathematize him.

2. In the fourth Action of the same Synod these words are found: Images are of
equal worth with the Gospels and the venerable Cross. And in the same place,
Major est imago quam oration, The image is greater then the word, or the prayer.

3. In the fifth Action there is a manifest error, whereby (that there may be a
ground for making images of Angels) the Council declares that Angels are
corporal. The Church (say these Fathers) holds that the Angels are not at all
without bodies, but that they have a delicate body made of air or fire.

4. That same Council to prove the adoration of Images, corrupts the Scripture
with an horrible license. These Fathers allege that it is said in the second
chapter of the Canticles, Show me thy face, and let me hear thy voice. Also
that God created man after his image and likeness, Genesis 2. Also that Abraham
adored the Hittites, Genesis 24. That Moses adored Jethro his Father-in-law, Exodus
18. And that none having lighted the candle sets it under a bushel, Luke 18.16.
Whence they infer that we must worship images. And these goodly allegations are
approved by Pope Adrian in the forementioned Book.

And that the world might know what adoration was commanded in that Council; In
the fourth Action those are condemned, which said that images must only be
venerated without adoration. All they that confess that they venerate images,
and yet deny them adoration, are reproved as hypocrites.

5. In the year 869. a Council was held at Constantinople, which our
Adversaries call the eight Universal Council: Baronius in the year 869. of his
Annals,. 19. says, that the Popes were wont in their reception to swear the
approbation of that Council. The third Canon of that Council is in these word:
Sacram imaginem Domini nostri Jesu Christi aequo honor cum libro sanctorum
Evangeliorum adorari decernimus.
We decree, that the sacred image of Jesus Christ, be adored with the same
honor as the Book of the holy Gospels. And a little after: It is In Latin
dignum est.
convenient by reason of the honor which is referred unto principal things,
that derivative images be honored and adored as the Book of the holy Gospels,
and the figure of the precious Cross.

6. In the year of our Lord, 891. See Sigonius de regno Italiae, Platina,
Anastasius, Luitprand. Stella, etc.
Formosus obtained the Roman Pontificat against the oath which he had taken in
the hands of Pope John the ninth, that he would never receive the Papal degree
though he were elected to it. From which oath Marinus that succeeded John,
dispensed with the said Formosus, giving him leave to be perjured.

To that Formosus, who was five years Pope, Stephen the seventh succeeded, who
called a Council, wherein it was judged, that a man that has received the
Papacy contrary to his oath, is no lawful Pope, and that he could not be
dispensed from his oath: Whereupon the said Stephen caused the body of Formosus
to be dug out, cut off his fingers, those wherewith Bishops used to
consecrate, and caused him to be sordidly interred as an unlawful Pope.

But as soon as that Stephen was dead, his Successor Romanus, made void all
that his Predecessor Stephen had done. And soon after, John the X. held a
Council at Ravenna, which reversed the judgment of the precedent Council
against Formosus, and restored his memory to his former honor.

That John being dead, his Successor Sergius the III. condemned Formosus again,
declared him an unlawful Pope, thrust his body out of the grave, caused him to
be executed ignominiously, as if he had been alive, and then cast him into the
river.

The question was of the necessity of keeping an oath, and whether the Pope can
dispense with an oath made to God? Upon that question, you have diverse and
contrary Councils, where the Pope did preside, which conclude contrary things,
and condemn and reverse the decisions one of another. Sure then there was error
in one of the parties; for two contradicting opinions cannot be true together.
And note that the worst opinion prevailed in the end. For yet at this day the
Pope dispenses from oaths, that is, he takes on him the power of declaring
that a man is not bound to be faithful unto God.

7. In the year of our Lord, 1059. Pope Nicolas the II. Did. 2. de Consec.
Can. Ego Berengarius.
assembled a Council against Berengarius, where it was declared and pronounced,
that the bread and wine which is put upon the altar after the consecration, is
not only the Sacrament, but also the true body of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
that not only the Sacrament, but the body of the Lord is It seems they meant
sensibly.
sensually and in truth, handled by the hands of the Priests; broken and
bruised by the teeth of the faithful.

The Roman Church of this time believes that no more: She says indeed, that
the species under which the body of the Lord is, are sensibly and truly broken
and bruised; But she believes not that the body of the Lord, be sensibly and
truly broken and bruised by the teeth of the faithful: For note that the
Council makes two things, sensibly, and truly broken; the Sacrament, and the
Lords body. Neither does the Roman Church believe that the bread after the
consecration, be the body of Christ.

Baron. Ann. 1076.
8. In the year of our Lord, 1076. Pope Gregory the VII. called a Council to
Rome, where among many articles, these three points have been resolved and
determined.

That there is no other name under heaven, but that of the Pope.

That no Book is canonical without the Popes authority.

And that all Kings must kiss the Popes feet.

The first Point attributes unto the Pope, that which is attributed unto Jesus
Christ alone, exclusively to all others, Acts 4.12.

The second declares, that the Gospels and the Books of the Prophets and
Apostles, are not to be received, unless the Pope approve them by his
authority: And yet these sacred Books had already their full authority before
there was any Pope or Bishop of Rome. The Books of Moses and of the Prophets
were authentical long before the Apostles.

Of the third, the pride is detestable; for it attributes unto the Pope an
honor which Jesus Christ and his Apostles never asked or looked for: But they
have been subject unto Emperors, and have paid them tribute, and have appeared
before their judicial Seat: Neither did they ever give their feet to any man to
kiss.

9. In the year 1215. Pope Innocent the III. assembled a Council at Rome in the
Lateran Church, and made it as great and solemn as he could, because at that
time those whom the Roman Church nicknamed Waldenses and Albigenses, did
multiply; Also because they were to consult how to recover the holy Land taken
by the Saracens. In that Council the third speaks thus; If the Temporal Lord
care not to satisfy within the year, let it be made known to the sovereign
Prelate, that from that time he declare his subjects absolved from his
subjection, and expose his country to be seized upon by Catholics, that they
may extermine heretics.

In that decision of the Council, there are four most pernicious errors.

The first is an usurpation of the Pope, approved by the Council, whereby he
disposes of the temporals of Princes, as if the disposition of them belonged
unto him; and divests them of their Lands and dominions, without the authority
of Gods word, and without any example of the Ancient Church.

The second error is, that it makes Ecclesiastical censures, which are
spiritual corrections, to become temporal punishments: as if a Priest to lay a
penance upon a sinner, would cut his purse, or rob him of his cloak, or put him
out of his house.

The third error is, that this Canon absolveth Subjects from the oath of
allegiance, which they have sworn to their natural Prince, and teaches them to
be perfidious and dis-loyal with a good conscience, though against the Word of
God, which says, Thou shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths, Mat. 5.33.
though it were to thine own hurt, Psalm. 15.4. And against the rules and
examples of the Apostles, who have commanded Christians to pay tribute, and to
be subject to Princes and higher powers, although Princes were Pagans and
persecutors in those days, Romans 13.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

The fourth error is, that in the same chapter, the Pope and the Council preach
murder and massacre, and set on the people to extermine those whom they call
heretics: which not only is against the Law of God, but against that of
Nations: For even Pagan Princes never permitted their subjects to fall upon
their Fellow-Citizens, and massacre them. These are not the ways to plant the
Gospel; which prepares us to sufferings, and to be persecuted, not to
persecute. If that exhortation to slaughter is ill beseeming any man, much more
a Pastor of the Church, who ought to teach to render good for evil, and to
love them that hate us.

10. As for recovering the Holy Land, at the end of that Council there is a
Papal Bull; but with approbation of the Council, the language whereof makes
ones hair stand up, so horrible is the impiety of it. There a Commandment is
made to all that belonged to Croisada, to meet in Sicily, or the neighboring
places, in July to begin that journey; To persuade the people to undertake that
voyage, the Pope by the Councils authority speaks thus; To all that will bear
that labor in their own persons, and at their charges, We grant full Remission
of those sins, of which they shall have Contrition and Repentance; and in the
Retribution of the Righteous, we promise them in Paradise an augmentation of
Eternal Salvation. What was that Pope, and what that Council, that could
promise to Soldiers a degree of glory in Paradise, above the common sort?
especially seeing that the Pope and the Prelates were not themselves sure that
they should never go into Hell? But let us hear the rest: But to them that will
not go in that voyage in their own persons, but only shall send fit men
according to their means, we give full Remission of their sins. To those poor
souls an equal degree is not promised: They were to content themselves with the
remission of all their sins; and for all reward, they had no more but eternal
life.

11. But here is the extremity of impiety. The same Bull with approbation of
the Council denounces to all that will refuse, and not care for this
Commandment, that they shall answer him in the last day of judgment before the
terrible Judge: As if the Pope must then be an Assessor of the Judge; or as if
he must condemn sinners in the day of Judgment. Thou Earth-worm, who turnest
up against Heaven, Is that the style of the Apostles? Is that the Apostolical
humility?

12. In the year of our Lord 1300. Boniface the VIII. instituted the Jubilee
every hundredth year, in which they that come to Rome for the great Pardons,
should get full, more full, and most full remission of sins. That liberality is
fetched from the treasure of the Church, wherein the Pope lays up the
overplus of the Satisfactions of Jesus Christ and the Saints, of which
treasure the Pope is the keeper and the steward; converting them into a payment
for those that visit the Roman stations. Wherefore the Citizens of Rome and
Inhabitants of the neighboring places have a great advantage above others; for
they have the full remission of their sins at their door, and get it without
pain and cost. But they that live three or four hundred leagues from Rome, and
have neither Horse nor money, are deprived of those spiritual graces.

The following Popes moved with a fatherly compassion to the people, have
shortened that term, and brought the Jubilee first to every fiftieth year, then
to every twentieth year; and there is hope that shortly they will bring it to
every thirteenth year: For it cannot be said, what a mass of wealth that
Jubilee brings to the Pope, and to the Inhabitants of Rome, by the offerings
and the sojourning of strangers that flock to Rome from all parts. It is the
most famous and the most lucrative fair of Babylon.

The invention of the Jubilee is spick and span new, there being no trace of it
in all Antiquity; whereby the Popes of this time accuse the High Priests of the
Old Testament, and the Apostles and their Successors for many ages, to have
neglected the overplus of the Satisfactions of Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Moses,
Job, and the Apostles themselves, and not to have gathered it into the Churches
Treasury, but suffered it to be lost by their ill husbandry.

The Satisfaction of Jesus Christ being sufficient for the sins of the whole
world, it is an outrage offered to him, when to his sufferings other
satisfactions are added; as those of Saints and Monks, to satisfy the justice
of God for the pain due to our sins. By this means they will have God to take
two payments for one debt. What need of a second payment when the first is
sufficient? But their second payment is unsufficient, seeing that no man can
satisfy for the sins of another; and we learn of the Apostle, Gal. 6.5. that
every man shall bear his own burden. Besides, those Saints and Monks whose
satisfactions the Pope will apply unto others, were sinners, and had need that
Christ should satisfy for them, so far they were from satisfying for others,
and for those for whom Jesus Christ has fully satisfied. Then those Saints
were above measure rewarded for their labors, when God raised them up unto his
Eternal Glory, yea though it were granted that their works were meritorious:
For if God has rewarded them above their merits, can one and the same work be
meritorious for him that has done it, and satisfactory for another? As if one
and the same sum of money served to buy a house, which is a thousand times
better then the money, and together to pay the ransom of another.

Certainly the Pope who lays up in his treasure the super-abounding
satisfactions of the Saints, and has constituted himself the keeper and
dispenser of them, ought to make his power to appear, and produce his
Commission. He ought to show when, and where God has entrusted him with that
distribution, and tell us what assurance we may have, that God accepts as a
payment for us the fastings and whippings of St. Dominick, This is seen in
their life, written by St. Antonin Archbishop of Florence.
and of Katherine of Siena, whom the Pope has made Saints; who whip themselves
with an Iron chain for the ease of the souls in Purgatory, One has need to be
of very easy belief, to believe that God will be paid with such light coin:
For those be the things which the Pope joins to the sufferings of the Son of
God, to make the total of the satisfaction for the pains due to the sins of
those that get these pardons.

I pass by the palpable Error, whereby it is pretended that the Saints have
suffered more pains then their sins deserved, since there is no man, be he
never so holy, but stands in need that God forgive him his sins; No man but
deserves eternal death, if God would deal with him according to the rigor of
his justice.

13. Other actions and laws of the same Pope Boniface the VIII. show by what
spirit he was led: Especially the Extravagant Vnam Sanctam, De Majoritate and
Obedientia, wherein the Pope attributes to himself the power over the spiritual
and the temporal of all the world. Which he proves by texts of Scripture
rarely applied. We are taught (says he) by the words of the Gospel, that unto
the power of the Church two Swords are belonging, the Spiritual and the
Temporal: For the Apostles having said, Here be two Swords, that is, here in
the Church; the Lord did not answer the Apostles, It is too much; but, It is
enough. Certainly he that denies the Temporal Sword to be in St. Peter's power,
does not regard well the Word of the Lord, who said, Put up thy sword into the
scabbard. And a little after, to prove that the temporal of Princes is subject
unto the Pope. He alleges Gods Word unto Jer. 1.10. See I have this day set
thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms. And he will have that Prophecy
to be fulfilled in the Ecclesiastical, that is, in the Papal power, which he
says cannot be judged by any, because St. Paul said, 1 Cor. 2. The spiritual
man judges of all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. Finally he
concludes thus; Whosoever then resists that power ordained by God, resists
the Ordinance of God, unless he will make two principles with the Manicheans;
which we judge to be false and heretical, seeing that Moses testifies that in
the beginning God created Heaven and Earth. Wherefore we declare, say, define,
and pronounce, that it is of necessity of Salvation to be subject to the Roman
Prelate. That venerable Pope has found a proof of his primacy in the first
words of the Bible, God in the beginning made Heaven and Earth. These are Laws
and Papal Ordinances, pronounced with all the forms, and inserted into the body
of the Pontificial decrees; Which to excuse from Error, one must want both
conscience and common sense.

14. In the year of Lord 1414. a Council was held at Constance to reform the
Church in capite and membris, as it was agreed in the precedent Council of
Pisa. In that Council, convocated by the authority of Pope John XXIII. three
contending Popes were deposed, this John XXIII. for one, Council. Constant.
Sess. XI.
for threescore and eleven crimes; among others for publicly and notoriously
denying the immortality of the soul, and maintaining that there was neither
Paradise nor Hell.

15. To that Council John Hus and Hierom of Prague were invited to defend their
cause: and because they made difficulty to come, a safe conduct of the Emperor
Sigismond was given them, and faith was sworn unto them that no harm should be
done unto them. But after some form of Disputation, they were seized on and
burnt alive: And because the Emperor made a scruple to break his faith, the
Council declared unto him, that he was not bound to keep faith unto Heretics:
For which purpose a Canon was made in this form; This holy Council declares
that the safe conduct given to Heretics, or defamed for heresy, by the
Emperor, Kings, and other secular Princes, thinking thereby to turn them from
their Errors, with what bond soever they be bound, brings no prejudice to the
Catholic Faith, or to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Neither can put any
hinderance, but that it may be lawful for a competent and Ecclesiastical Judge,
notwithstanding the foresaid safe conduct, to make inquisition of the Errors of
such persons, and duly to proceed against them as much as justice shall
require, if they obstinately refuse to renounce their Errors; although they be
come to the place of judgment, trusting to that safe conduct. Declaring that
he that made that promise, remains not obliged by it, after he has done that
which lies in him. Note that the safe conduct was granted to these two men by
the advice of the Council.

Here is perjury and disloyalty authorized by an Article of a Council;
conformably to the Decretal of Pope Innocent the III. in the second Book of the
Decretals, Titulo chap. 24. Sicut nostris, the Inscription whereof is,
Juramentum contra Eccclesiae utilitatem praestitum non tenet.
An Oath taken against the profit of the Church binds not. Where by the
profit of the Church, he means the rights and temporal profits of a Bishop.

16. The same Council in the XV. Session makes an enumeration of the Errors of
John Hus: The 19. Error for which he is condemned, is for saying, that the
Popes and the Bishops pardons avail nothing, unless God pardon. Dixerunt se
audivisse quod Joannes Hus dixisset quod indulgentiae Papae and Episcopi non
valent nisi Deus indulgeat.
That Council declares that the Popes pardons serve a sinner, although God
has not pardoned him, which is putting the Pope above God, since he pardons
those that have offended God, without Gods pardon, and since the Popes pardons
are in force, though God approve them not.

17. The same Council in the XX. Session depriveth Frederick Duke of Austria of
all his goods, and devesteth him of all his Dominions, because he had usurped
or wasted some part of the Patrimony of the Church about Trent. So the Prelates
of that Council declare themselves Temporal Lords of all the estates of the
earth, and that they may dispose of them at their pleasure: which is a
pernicious Error, authorized by many new Councils; for the ancient Councils
speak quite otherwise.

18. The same Council takes away from the people the Communion of the cup. That
order is found in the XIII. Session, where these Fathers confess that Jesus
Christ has instituted the Eucharist under two kinds, and that the ancient
Church did so administer it unto the people. Yet hear how these Fathers speak
of those that would have the people to enjoy the Communion of the Cup; Some
presume rashly to affirm that the Christian people ought to receive the
Sacrament under the two kinds of Bread and Wine. What? Is it a rash presumption
to obey Jesus Christ? to follow, his example? and to desire to enjoy that which
the Son of God has given us? They add that although Jesus Christ did after
Supper institute the Sacrament under the two kinds, yet the custom of giving to
the people one kind only, which is the bread, must be held for a law, and those
that say the contrary, must be driven away as Heretics, and grievously punished
by the Inquisitors of heretical perversity. Can one more directly condemn Jesus
Christ, and contradict his Word?

19. In the year 1423. Martin the V. held a Council at Siena, where the same
Indulgence was granted to them that would fall upon the Heretics, as to them
that go to defend the Holy Land. Thus remission of sins and salvation, is
proposed as a reward of cruelty and popular fury. As if the Pope said, Because
thou art a murderer, and a wicked man, thou shall have eternal life.

20. To the Acts of that Council are inserted the instructions which the same
Martin V. gives to his Ambassadors sent to the Emperor of Constantinople,
Sanctissimus and Beatissimus, qui habet coeleste arbitrium, qui est Dominus in
terris, Successor Petri, Christus Domini, Dominus Universi, Regum Pater, Orbis
lumen, Summus Pontifex.
wherein he gives these titles to himself, The most holy and the most hear [or
happy,] who has the heavenly government, who is Lord in Earth, Successor of
Peter, the Christ of the Lord, the Master of the Universe, the Father of Kings,
the Light of the World, the Sovereign Pontife Martin, commands his Ambassador,
etc. It wanted no more, but to call himself Creator of Heaven and Earth. Soon
after he commends the fidelity of that Ambassador, the Cardinal of St. Angelo,
Veniret non ut faceret voluntatem suam sed voluntatem Domini Papae qui misit
eum.
who (says he) is come not to do his own will, but the will of the Lord Pope
that sent him. Which are the words of the Son of God speaking of the obedience
which he yielded unto his Father, Joh. 6.38.

These impieties might be ascribed to Martins arrogance, and not reckoned among
the Errors of the Church of Rome, but that these things are inserted in a
Council where the Pope presided, and that they were done in the Council.

21. That which follows is no better. In the year 1440. the Council of Florence
assembled by the authority of Pope Eugenius the IV. defines and declares in
the last Session, that the Roman Church can add to the Symbol, and that the
Pope has the primacy over all the world.

22. And now we are upon Primacy, the last Lateran Council, which begun under
Julius the II. in the year 1511. and lasted 8. years, in my opinion carries
the primacy for impiety, above all other Councils of the Roman Church, yea
above all Assemblies that ever were.

Officiales ad pedes Sanctissimi Domini nostri, tactis sacrosanctis Scripturis,
praestiterunt corporale juramentum.
In the first Session, the Popes Officers take the Oath of allegiance and
fidelity to him, having touched the holy Scriptures, which were laid at his
feet, as it were to signify that the holy Scripture is subject unto him. In
the same Session the Pope is called Prince of all the world, not inferior in
authority to Saint Peter. In the same place Boniface the VIII. is commended,
and set forth as an example, for depriving Philip le Bell of the Kingdom of
France.

In the second Session the Pope is called a High Priest, and a King, that must
be adored by all people, and most like unto God.

In the V. Session the Council speaks thus of Pope Leo the X. before his face;
Weep not thou Daughter of Sion; for behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the
root of David, behold God has raised thee a Savior, etc. O thou Beatissime
[or most blessed] Leo, we wait on thee for our Savior: We have hoped that thou
should come to be our Deliverer.

In the IX. Session, the Council by the mouth of Puccius, Clark of the Chamber,
speaks thus unto the Pope, The aspect of thy divine Majesty, the bright
splendor whereof dazzleth our infirm eyes. And a little after, The Royal race
of the Roman Pontife. And in the same place, In thee alone, the true and lawful
Vicar of Christ, and of God, this sentence of the Prophet ought to be fulfilled
again: All the Kings of the Earth shall worship him, Psalm. 72.
and all Nations shall serve him. Which is a prophecy that concerns Jesus
Christ, which that Council applies unto the Pope. Here is more of the same
vein. We are not ignorant, that to thee alone the Lord has given all power in
Heaven and Earth. Then the Universal Church is personated, thus speaking unto
the Pope; Am I not, O my sweetest Bridegroom, thine only and well-beloved,
which now may exclaim, Look not upon me, because I am black! Cant. 1.6.

If these impieties were in some Decrees or Epistles of the Popes, one might
bring the ordinary excuse, that Popes may err as men, but not as Popes: But
being pronounced in a Council, which our Adversaries call Universal, the Acts
whereof have been carefully reveiwed by persons appointed thereunto, and
approved by the Pope himself, as it appears in the very beginning of the
Council; they may serve as an evident proof that the Roman Church can err,
since it is the voice of an Assembly representing the whole Roman Church.

23. In the same Council, in the III. Session held in the year 1512. Of the
Interdict, See Cardinal Tolet of the Institution of Priests, Book 1. chap. 15.
And Emanuel Sa in Aphorismis in Verbo Interdictum. Westmonast. and Matthew. Paris
in vita Johannis.
the Kingdom of France is put under interdict: which is a custom received in
the Roman Church for many ages, and often put in practice by the Popes; where
the impiety is horrible, and tyranny is raised to the highest degree. For when
the Pope puts a Country under interdict, he makes divine service to cease in
it, but only in some privileged places, in favor of those that adhere not to
the Sovereign Prince, for whose sake the interdict is put upon the Land; He
silenceth all the bells of the Kingdom: He shuts up the burying places, and
hinders burials in holy ground: He exposes the Country to the invasion of the
first Conqueror; whence wars and desolations arise, and great bloodshed. All
that die under the interdict, die out of the Communion of the Church of Rome,
and by consequent are deemed to be eternally damned. England under King John,
has been six years and a half in that case, in which time, above six hundred
thousand persons died. Of late date, Paul the V. having put the Commonwealth of
Venice under interdict, was advised to put up his sword into its scabbard.

Those interdicts were always thundered out for some disagreement between Kings
and Popes, by reason of investitures and collations of benefices, and other
temporal rights which the Popes pretend over Kingdoms: Or becuse of some
invasion of the Popes upon the territories of Kings and Princes. Against which,
if a King defends himself, the Pope puts his Kingdom in interdict; and the
Kings Subjects that had no hand in the quarrel suffer for it.

I ask then whether the Roman Church did not err, when in full Council, the
Pope put the Kingdom of France in interdict? Is it not a great error to believe
that the Pope can send all the French into perdition, make divine service to
cease in such a great country, and prohibit burials? All that for civil
causes. Wherefore the Clergy of France opposed the judgment of the Pope and
the Universal Council. And the good King, Lewis the XII. See Nicole Gyles in
the life of Lewis the XII. fol. 134. and 135.
assembled a Council at Pisa against the Pope, and beat him in a battle near
Ravenna; which beating wrought this effect, that the King was sued to and
received with as many spiritual graces as he was pleased to have, and that the
Kingdom of France was reconciled unto his Holiness.

24. Here is more work of that Council: In the end of it you have a thundering
Bull against Luther, who then began to preach: There thirty nine heresies are
reckoned; the seventh whereof is, That the best penitence of all is a new life:
Optima poenitentia nova vita.
Which yet is an excellent sentence of the Spirit of God, Rev. 2.4.

25. The six and twentieth heresy of Luther, mentioned in that Bull, Certum
est in in manu Ecclesiae aut Papae prorsus non esse statuere Articulos fidei.
is this assertion, It is certain, that it is not at all in the power of the
Church and the Pope, to make Articles of faith. If this be an heresy, we may
expect other Articles of faith from the Pope; and Christian Religion is not yet
perfected, since other Articles of the Christian faith may be added, such as we
know not, and such as the Apostles have never taught either by Word or Writing.

Finally, the Council of Trent came, which having begun in the year of our
Lord, 1545. lasted eighteen years. Of which, if one would examine the doctrine,
and show that it is contrary unto the word of God, he must go through all our
controversies; I will produce but some passages of it.

26. In the fourth Session, it is decreed and declared, that unwritten
Traditions must be received pari pietatis affectu and reverentia, with the same
affection of piety and reverence, as the holy Scripture: That is, That the
invocation of Saints, the distinction of meats, the adoration of relics, the
Popes power to give, and to take away Kingdoms, to fetch souls out of
Purgatory, and to canonize Saints, the honor yielded unto images, the divine
service in an unknown tongue, the consecration of Agnus Dei's, and of blessed
beads, and such unwritten traditions, must be received with the like piety,
faith, and reverence, as the Law of God, and the doctrine of our redemption in
Jesus Christ, contained in the holy Scriptures.

Romans 7.7. I had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust,
except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet.
27. The same Council cannot be excused of error, for declaring and pronouncing
in the fifth Session, that the concupiscence forbidden in the Law is no sin,
although the Apostle Romans 7.7. call it so: So that with those Fathers it is no
sin to transgress the Law of God; And by their Doctrine the Apostle spoke
amiss, when he said, that coveting forbidden in the Law is sin. These be the
words of the Council; This holy Synod declares, that the Catholic Church never
meant that this coveting, which sometimes the Apostle calls sin, is truly and
properly sin in the regenerate. Upon this account, if a regenerate man covets
his neighbors wife, he sins not, and so one may transgress the Law of God
without sin. And the Apostle (if we believe them) spoke neither truly nor
properly, when he called concupiscence a sin: Note that the Apostle speaks of
the concupiscence which he felt in himself, which he calls sin, and which he
says to be forbidden by the Law.

28. The same Council cannot be excused of error, when it decreed, that the
Latin vulgar version of the Bible should be the only authentical, thereby
authorizing a thousand depravations of the true original Text, which are Hebrew
and Greeek. This is freely confessed by the most learned of our adversaries: as
Sixtus Senensis, Bibliothecae lib. 7.
who speaks thus; Our vulgar Edition, which is said to be of Saint Hierom, is
in many things remote from the truth of the Greek Text. And truly two the most
learned Hebricians that the Roman Church ever had, Santes Pagninus a Monk of
Luca, and Arias Montanus a Spaniard of Sevil, have translated the Bible, and
made excellent versions, conformable to the French [and English] versions of
our Churches, and have altogether forsaken the Vulgar version of the Church of
Rome. Yea, since the time of the Council of Trent, several Popes have caused
that Vulgar version to be revised, and have altered many things in it. Whence
comes the diversity which is seen in the Bibles of our Adversaries.

Verum etsi ea quam diximus moderatione usi fuerimus, loca tamen ad octo millia
annotata atque emendata a nobis sunt.
Isidorus Clarius, a Monk of Montcassin has revised that Vulgar version
approved by the Council of Trent: To which he has prefixed a Preface, where he
says, that although he has winkt at many faults of that version for fear
offending the Church, yet he has corrected about eight thousand places.

Andradius in the fourth book of the defense of the Tridentine says, I will
show (says he) that some very inconsiderately have thought that more faith
must be given to the Latin edition then to the Hebrew Books. He adds Deus
voluit nonnulla in ejus lucubrationibus humanae imbecillitatis extare vestigia.
Voluit sancta Synodus ad hanc Latinam editionem amplectendam nos arctare, non
quidem simpliciter, sed dummodo esset a vitils quae in eam irrepserunt, and ab
omnibus mendis and erroribus emaculata atque repurgata.
that in the watchings [that is, in the labours] of the Latin Interpreter some
traces of humane infirmity are found.

The Jesuit Salmeron in the third Prolegomen, endeavors to excuse that Decree
of the Council of Trent, speaking thus; The holy Synod would oblige us to
embrace that Latin Edition, and follow it in all things, yet not absolutely,
but upon condition that it be cleansed and repurged from the vices and errors
which are crept into it. And he wishes that a sedulous care may be taken about
it; Which nevertheless was not done.

29. Who can excuse that version which to establish the adoration of the
creatures, says, Heb. 11.21. that Jacob adored the top of his staff? And Psalm.
98.5. Adore his footstool: whereas for the first, there is in the Original,
that Jacob worshipped on the top of his Staff; And for the second, Worship
toward his footstool.

Thus in the sixteenth verse of the fifteenth chapter of Ecclesiasticus, which
our Adversaries put among the Canonical Books, whereas the Greek Original
says, Every one shall find according to his works, the Latin Vulgar version of
the Roman Church, to defend merits, says, every one shall find according to
the merit of his works.

To prove the perpetual visibility of the Church, they commonly allege the
nineteen Psalm, v. 5. where there is according to the Vulgar version, he has
put his tabernacle in the Sun; But there is in the Hebrew, He has set in them
(that is, in the heavens) a tabernacle for the Sun, which true allegation,
Editionis Venetae, p. 240.
Sixtus Senensis sincerely acknowledges.

Genes. 3.15. God says, that the seed of the woman (which is Jesus Christ)
shall bruise the Serpents head: Instead of that, the vulgar version approved by
the Council of Trent, says, The woman shall bruise the Serpents head: to
attribute unto the Virgin Mary, that which belongs unto Jesus Christ.

We read, 1 Cor. 11.24. that our Savior said, This is my body which is broken
for you. The vulgar version translateth, This is my body which shall be
delivered for you. That one may perceive that the Lord spoke of his Sacramental
body, which was broken, when he spoke the word, not of his natural body which
is not broken in the Eucharist.

The remnants of Esther are held for Canonical by our Adversaries. Toward the
end of the fourth chapter, there is a prayer of Mordecai, in which he gives a
reason, why he would not kiss Hamans feet; viz. for fear of putting a man above
God, and adoring another besides God. Those words have been taken out of the
vulgar version, because they are contrary to the custom of kissing the Popes
feet.

Saint Peter says, Acts 2.24. That God has raised up Jesus from the dead,
having loosed the pains of death. The vulgar version says, the pains of Hell.
A corruption employed to prove the local descent of the Lord into hell.

Eccles. 49.17. There is according to the vulgar version, The bones of Joseph
have been visited, and they have prophesied after death. A place used for the
adoration of relics. But that Text is not found in the Greek, which is the
original.

The Apostle, Heb. 13.16. says, To do good and to communicate, forget not; for
with such sacrifices God is well-pleased. The vulgar version to defend merits,
says, for one merits with God by such sacrifices.

One might bring a thousand such faults, which the Council of Trent has
authorized, by establishing the only vulgar version, and rejecting all other
translations.

30. The same Council approves excommunications to find goods lost, but will
have none to use that way but the Bishop. A great abuse of the keys; Session
XXV.
for they are given to the Church to censure or reconcile sinners, not to find
an horse or an ass strayed.

31. The same Council of Trent has devised a crafty by way to prohibit the
reading of Scripture unto the people: Index librorum prohibitorum.

That Index has been often printed; Once at Collen, by Goswin Colin, an. 1618.


For of that prohibition there is no mention in the Council: But in that
Council, some Prelates and Doctors in good number were named and appointed to
make an Index or list of books, the reading whereof must be prohibited. Now the
very first of those prohibited Books, is the holy Scripture; of which they say,
in the fourth of those rules they have set before that Index; That the reading
of the Bible in the language of the Country, being indifferently permitted,
brings more harm then benefit.

32. The traffic of holy things so expressly forbidden in the word of God,
might be taken for a corruption in manners, not for an error, but that it is
established by Laws and public order. Printed at Paris, by Toussain Denis, in
Saint James-street near Saint Yues Chapel, an. 1521.
There is a Book made purposely for that by the Popes authority, with this
title, The tax of the Apostolical Chancery, and Roman Penitentiary; Where the
absolutions of all sorts of crimes, and the dispensations are taxed at a
certain rate. In the thirty sixth leaf this is found; The absolution for him
that has carnally known his Mother, or his Sister, or his Gossip, costs five
groats. And in the thirty eight leaf, The absolution for him that has killed
his Father or his Mother, costs five groats or seven: But if he that was killed
was a Clergyman, the murderer is obliged to visit in person the Apostolic
See. But the absolutions of offenses committed against the Pope, cost three
times more. For in the thirty seventh leaf, The absolution for him that has
falsified the Apostolical letters, costs seventeen or eighteen groats. And
these absolutions extend even to the dead. In the thirty seventh leaf, For a
dead man excommunicated, for whom his kindred supplicate, the letter of
absolution is sold for one ducat nine pence: These are the ancient taxes, but
now they are grown a hundred times dearer.

In the twenty third leaf these words are found, The dispensation of
contracting [marriage] in the spiritual kindred, costs 60. Groats. Nevertheless
(says the Datary) I have expedited one for 30 Groats, but by favor. The same
judgment is in the second Degree, for which one must compound with the Datary
for a very great sum, sometimes of three hundred, and sometimes of six hundred
groats, according to the quality of the persons. Et nota diligenter quod
ejusmodi gratiae and dispensationes non conceduntur pauperibus quia non sunt,
ideo non possunt consolari.
And note diligently that such graces are not given to the poor; because they
have not wherewith to pay, therefore they cannot be comforted.

And that none may be ignorant of this abuse, hear the verdict of Pope Pius II.
otherwise Aeneas Sylvius, Epist. 66. to John Peregal. Curia Romana sine pecunia
nihil dat; ipsae ma^uium impositiones and Spiritus S. dona venduntur, nec
remissio peccatorum nisi nummatis impenditur.
The Roman Court gives nothing without money; yea the imposition of hands, and
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the Remission of sins, are bestowed upon none
but such as have money.

To show that the Doctrine of the Roman Church is directly contrary to the Word
of God, and to follow all the particulars, would be a long work. Some of them I
will set down here.

33. God says in his Law, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take good heed unto your selves --
lest you corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, the similitude of
any figure, the likeness of male or female. In which Text it is spoken of the
Images whereby God is represented. The Roman Church does the clean contrary to
that command, making Images of the Trinity, and representing God in stone and
picture.

34. God says in his Law, Thou shall not commit adultery; but the Pope
permiteth whoredom at Rome, and sets up brothel-houses.

35. The Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3.2. A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of
one wife, -- having his children in subjection with all gravity. And 1 Cor.
7.2. Let every man have his own wife. And v. 9. If they cannot contain, let
them marry, for it is better to marry then to burn. But the Roman Church
suffers not a Bishop to have a wife: and if a Monk burn with incontinence, he
is not suffered to marry.

36. God says, 2 Chronicles. 6.30. That God only knows the hearts of the children
of men. But the Roman Church holds that the Saints know our hearts.

37. Jesus Christ, Matthew. 18.18. says to his Disciples, Whatsoever you shall
loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven. But the Pope loses under the earth,
and fetches souls out of Purgatory.

38. God in his Law commands us to love and serve him with all our heart, and
with all our strength. But the Roman Church teaches, that a man can do more
then the Law of God commands, even works of Supererogation; and by consequent
that he can serve God above all his strength; which is both absurd and
impossible.

39. God says in his Law, Six days shall thou labor. But the Pope prohibits
to labor six days, prescribing many holy days upon the week days, in which
one must not work.

40. Numb. 30.4. A daughters vow without her fathers consent is declared void.
But in the Roman Church, children enter into Monasteries against their fathers
will.

41. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.27. says, If any of them that believe not, bid you
to a feast, -- whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for
conscience sake. Where St. Paul forbids distinction of meats: and in the
same Epistle, Chap. 14. v. 19. he forbids speaking and praying in the Church in
an unknown language, saying, In the Church I had rather speak five words with
my understanding, -- then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. All that
against the ordinary practice of the Roman Church.

42. Cardinal Tolet. lib. 2. Institut. Sacerdotal. relates that Bull.
The Bull de Coena Domini, which is an Excommunication which the Pope thunders
out every year upon Thursday before Easter in the place of St. Peter, is one of
the most palpable abuses of the Roman Church. By that Bull the Pope
Excommunicates all those that have committed any of the cases reserved to the
Pope, of which the Pope only can give the absolution, excepting only upon the
point of death. Of which cases an enumeration is made in that Bull. These
crimes are not sodomy, nor incest, nor perjury, nor blasphemy against God, nor
parricide. But to appeal from the Pope to the future Council: To plunder the
lands of the Church; to raise tenths or taxes upon the Clergy; to carry arms to
Heretics; to molest those that go to Rome to get pardons, to stop the
victuallers that carry provision to the Papal Court: Of these so enormous
crimes, none but the Pope can give absolution; except only in the point of
death: But as for the crimes committed directly against the Law of God, Bishops
and Priests will commonly give the absolution: For to violate the Law of God is
not held such an enormous crime, as to imbezel the profits of his Holiness.

43. The Oath which Bishops take in their Consecration, is one of the most
express marks of the Mystery of Iniquity: For although the charge of a Bishop
be to feed his flock with heavenly food, which is the pure Doctrine of the
Gospel; yet in that Oath there is not one word concerning God, or his Word, or
the true Doctrine; only the Bishop swears allegiance and fealty to the Pope;
promises to defend the life, honor, and rights of the Pope; to receive his
Legates honorably, and to persecute the Heretics: To visit once in three years
the threshold of the Apostles at Rome, that he may give an account of his
actions: Not to sell or alienate any part of the Patrimony belonging to his
Bishopric without the Popes advice. In effect it is an Oath, not of a Pastor
of the Church, but of a Vassal to his Liege Lord, and of a Prince subject to
the temporal Monarchy of the Pope.

44. The Mass only will afford multitude of examples of contradiction to the
Word of God. 1. Jesus Christ instituting his Holy Supper, spoke in a language
understood of them before whom he spoke. But the Priest in the Mass speaks in
an unknown tongue. 2. Jesus Christ gives the Communion to all the assistants;
but the Priest often drinks and eats alone. 3. Christ says, Drink ye all of
this; but in the Roman Church the Priest drinks alone. 4. Christ offers
nothing to God; but the Priest in the Mass pretends to make an offering unto
God of his Son. 5. Jesus Christ made no elevation of the Host; as also the
Apostles deferred no adoration to it: but in the Roman Church the Priest lifts
up the Host, and causes it to be adored. 6. Christ sacrificed not, and made no
mention of sacrifice; but in the Mass they pretend to sacrifice the Body of
Jesus Christ. 7. Christ had no bones of the Saints under the Table, and did not
pray by their merits, as it is done in the Mass. 8. The Gospel tells us that
Jesus Christ took bread, and brake it, and gave it; but the Priest in the Mass,
says that he breaks no bread, and that he gives no bread. 9. Christ giving
the bread, said that it was his body. But the Roman Church teaches, that the
bread is not the body of Christ, but that it is transubstantiated into the body
of Christ. 10. Christ says that it was the fruit of the Vine which he drunk;
but the Priest denies it to be the fruit of the Vine.

45. One might observe a thousand of the like oppositions, which are all
comprehended and inwrapt in one; namely in that impiety whereby our Adversaries
maintain that the Pope can dispense against the Apostle, and alter the
Commandments of God contained in the Scriptures: Of which we have already
produced many examples, and will hereafter produce more.

I might here lay up a great heap of Romes immundicities, able to make the
Readers heart to ache; but these few proofs drawn out of the most authentical
rules of the Roman Church, will be a pattern more then sufficient, to show to
any man that is not resolved to lose himself, and that seeks instruction, that
the Roman Church can err.

CHAP. 15. OF THE ANTIQUITY OF THE ROMAN CHURCH. A Treatise wherein it is
showed that the Ceremonies of the Roman Church are descended from the ancient
Heretics, and that the Pagans and the Jews have contributed toward them.
IT is certain, that truth is more ancient then falsehood, since falsehood is a
corruption of truth. Nevertheless every ancient Doctrine is not therefore true:
For Untruth is almost from the beginning of the world, and is but few hours or
days later then Truth. Wherefore in matter of Salvation every Doctrine must be
accounted new which is not from the beginning, and has not God for Author,
although it boast of Antiquity, and make a show of many Ages; Yea, I say, that
the more an untruth is ancient, the more pernicious it is, because it is more
deeply rooted.

The Roman Church boasts of antiquity, which we do not gainsay; but freely
acknowledge that a good part of her Errors has been of a very long
continuance: For the Roman Religion is patcht up with several rags of ancient
Heresies. It is a Pandora of Errors, and a coat to which every old Error has
sowed up its piece. If each of them would take again what they have brought,
she would stand more naked then Horace his Crow. Of that the proofs are
numberless: Some of many I have here gathered.

I. Of Traditions and the unwritten Word.
Josephus in the 13. Book of Antiquities, Chap. 18. speaks thus of the
Pharisees: (...).
They have given many rules and observations by the succession of Fathers,
which are not written in the Laws of Moses. Wherefore also Jesus Christ, Matthew.
15.3, 9. taxes them to have transgressed the Commandment of God by their
Traditions. Which Traditions for the most part, were not Doctrines directly
contrary to the Law, but additions and superstitious observations, and
Doctrines not commanded; as to make long their Phylacteries, to fast twice a
week, to use many washings, etc.

The old Heretics have followed them: for where Scripture failed them, they
had recourse unto Tradition. Iraeneus chap. 2. of the third Book against
Heresies, shows it: Dicunt quod ex Scripturis non potest inveniri veritas. Non
enim per literas traditam illam sed per vivam vocem.
Heretics say, That the truth cannot be found out of the Scriptures, by them
that are ignorant of the Tradition, because it was not delivered by letters,
but viva voce. There you have the unwritten word. And Eusebius in the last
chapter of the third Book of his History, says, that Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis, Disciple of St. John, gave himself to unwritten Doctrines, and so
brought in strange and fabulous things.

That which is most to be noted, is, that they defended their Traditions and
the unwritten Word by the same reasons as the Roman Church in our days defends
unwritten Traditions: For Irenaeus says in the fore-alleadged place, that
those Heretics fenced themselves with St. Paul's words, 1 Cor. 2.6. We speak
wisdom among them that are perfect; Which Text Lib. de verbo Dei non scripto.
c. 8.. Accedat.
Bellarmin likewise uses for the defense of the unwritten Word.

Tertullian in his Book of Prescriptions against Heretics, written before he
turned Montanist, Chap. 25. says Non omnia volunt illos revelasse; quaedam
enim palam and universis, quaedam secreto and paucis demandasse.
the Heretics of his time would affirm, that the Apostles had not revealed all
things unto all, but that they had commanded some things publicly, some
privately unto a few persons. But himself being turned Heretic, defends his
heresy by the unwritten Tradition in the book of Monogamie, Chap. 2. affirming
that Christ sent us back to Tradition, when he says, I have many things to say
unto you, but you cannot bear them yet, And Austin in the 97. Treatise upon St.
John. Omnes insipientissimi haeretici qui se Christianos vocant, audacias
figmentorum suorum quas maxim exhorret sensus humanus, hac occasion
Evangelicae sententiae colorare solent, Adhuc habeo multa vobis dicere.
All the unwise Heretics that bear themselves for Christians, will color the
boldness of their inventions, which humane sense abhors, with the pretense
of this sentence of the Gospel, I have many things to say unto you: Which are
the same reasons and Texts which Bellarmine uses to under prop Traditions and
the unwritten Word. See Bellarm lib. de verbo Dei non scripto. c. 5.. Ad
primum; and cap. 11.. hora.
Bellarmine in his Book of the unwritten word, Chap. 5. and 11.

Ireneus says in the 3. Book, chap. 2. That Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, in
accusationem vertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum, quasi non posset inveniri veritas
ab his qui nesciunt traditionem.
the Valentinians and other Heretics when they are confuted by the Scriptures,
will accuse the very Scriptures. And they say that the Truth cannot be found
out by such as are ignorant of the Tradition. This is the language of our
Adversaries, who being pressed by the Scriptures, will say, that Scripture is
obscure and ambiguous, and contains not all that is necessary to salvation, and
so send us to the unwritten word.

II. Of the Images of God.
THe Heretics called Vadiani or Audiani, would represent God in an humane
shape, as Austin Vadiani cogitatio te carnali fingebant Deum ad similitudinem
corruptibilis hominis.
attesteth, chap. 50. ad quod vult Deum. Nicephorus speaking of the Armenians
and Jacobites in chap. 53. of the 18. Book, says, They represented the Images
of the Father, and of the Holy Ghost, which is a most absurd thing. An Error
condemned by Pope Gregory the II. in an Epistle inserted in Baronius, an. 726.
But Baronius notes in the margent, that the Church observes that rule no more:
For the Roman Church chose rather to follow the ancient Heretics, then to obey
Deuteronomy. 4.15. and 16.
Gods command, who forbids to represent God in the likeness of male or female.

III. Of the Images of Jesus Christ and the Saints.
IReneus, Book 1. chap. 24. speaks thus of the Gnostics, Habent imagines
quasdam depictas, quasdam de reliqua materia fabricatas, dicentes esse formam
factam a Pilato.
They have some painted Images, and some other formed with other matter, saying
that they are the figure of Christ, made by Pilate. The like is in the Roman
Church where they have Images of Jesus Christ, which they say to have been made
by St. Luke. Austin in the first book of Heresies, Ad quod vult Deum, says
that Simon Magus Imaginesque and suam and ejusdem meretricis Discipulis suis
praebebat adorandam.
made his Disciples to worship Images, his own and his Harlot's. And in the
Chap. 7. Sectae Carpocratis traditur fuisse socia quaedam Marcellina quae
colebat imagines Jesu, and Pauli, and Pythagorae, eas adorando incensumque
ponendo.
Marcellina of the Sect of Carpocrates, served the Images of Jesus, and Paul,
and Pythagoras, worshipping them, and giving them Incense. Epiphanius says the
same in the 27. Heresy. And in the first Book of the manners of the Catholic
Church, Chap. 34. Novi multos esse Sepulchrorum and Picturarum adoratores.
I know many worshippers of Sepulchers and Pictures: I know many that will
drink with excess over the dead. And in the first Book of the consent of the
Evangelists in the 10. chapter. Sic omnino errare meruerunt qui Christum and
Apostolos, non in Sanctis Codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt; nec
mirum fi a pingentibus fingentes decepti sunt.
So they deserve to fall into error, that have sought Jesus Christ and the
Apostles, not in the holy Scriptures, but in painted walls. Eusebius in the
seventh Book of his History, chap. 17. speaking of the Statue of Jesus Christ
at Paneas, which is Cesarea Philippi, and of the images of the Apostles, says,
that it was done by some (...), by an heathenish custom, thus to honor those
whom they think to be their Saviors. Wherefore the Eliberin Synod, Canon
thirty six, Placuit in Ecclesiis picturas esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut
adoratur, in parietibus pingatur.
forbids to to put any image in the Churches, for fear that the thing that is
adored be painted on the walls. Saint Epiphanius in great anger tore a vail in
the Church of Anablata, wherein the Image of Jesus Christ, or some Saint was
painted, as himself says in his Epistle to John of Jerusalem, which Apud
Hieron. Tom. 2.
Saint Hierom has translated.

But that which is most to be noted, is, that the Pagans and the makers of
images defended the images of their Gods with the same reasons, as the Roman
Church uses for the images of the Saints. Tertullian of the Book of idolatry,
chap. 5. says, that the Cur ergo Moses in cremo simulachrum ex aere fecit?
Image-makers alleged the example of Moses, who made the brazen Serpent.
Arnobius in the sixth Book against the Gentiles, says, that the Pagans called
images the Books of idiots.

Eusebius in the third Book of Evangelical Preparation, chap. 7. alleges
Porphyrius the sworn enemy of Jesus Christ, saying, that men have represented
divine virtues to the sense by familiar images, (...).
having figured things not appearing by visible works, to them that by statues
as by books have learned to know divine doctrine. So spoke the mortal enemies
of Christ.

Athanasius in his oration against the Gentiles, says, that they excused
themselves, saying, (...).
the images were unto men like the Scriptures, upon which fixing their sight,
they may comprehend something of Gods knowledge. And a little after, (...).
If those images be unto you as Scriptures to contemplate God, as you falsely
say, All that is the language of the Roman Church.

Also the excuse of Image-worshippers is borrowed from the Pagans; for Austin
makes one of them speaks thus, August. in Psalm. 113.
Nec simulacrum, nec daemonium colo, sed per effigiem corporalem ejus rei
signum intueor quam colere debeo. I serve not the image nor the devil; but in
this bodily representation, I see the sign of the thing which I must worship.

IV. Of the Service of Angels, and of their mediation with God.
THe Roman Church serves Angels contrary to the Apostles prohibition, Col.
2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and service
of Angels, etc.

Tertullian in the Book of Prescriptions, chap. 33. Simonianae disciplinae
Magia Angelis serviens.
The Magic of the Simonian discipline which serves Angels. Austin ad Quod
vult Deum, puts the Angelicks among the Heretics, who in Angelorum cultu
fuerunt inclinati, bowed themselves in the service of Angels. They have been
condemned by the Council of Laodicea, Can. 35. (...), etc.
Christians must not leave the Church of God, go away, call upon Angels, and
make Assemblies: and if any be found serving to that secret idolatry, let him
be accursed; because he has left our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of which order and the cause thereof, Theodoret speaks thus in his Comment
upon Col. 2. That vice of serving Angels, has long been used in Phrygia and
Pisidia: Wherefore the Synod of Laodicea, which is the Mother-City of Phrygia,
expressly forbids praying to Angels: and yet to this day they have among them
Oratories of Saint Michael: which last words are remarkable; for in the Roman
Church, there are many Oratories of Saint Michael: Note that he says expressly,
that the Council forbids praying to Angels: And that one may not say, that
those ancient Heretics adored Angels as Gods, and bestowed Divine worship upon
them, which the Church of Rome does not; Theodoret adds, that they served
Angels out of humility, pretending to go to God by the intercession of Angels.
They said, that the God of the Universe is invisible, but that he is accessible
by his Angels: And this is the same thing that Saint Paul says, by humility
and service of Angels: Wherefore Cardinal Baronius an. 60.. 20. is displeased
with Theodoret, and taunts him. Ex his videas Theodoretum haud feliciter (ejus
pace dictum sit) assecutum esse Pauli verborum sensum.
Theodoret (says he) by his leave, has not well understood the sense of Saint
Paul's words.

The Pagans would allege the same reason, saying, that they addressed themselves
unto Demons and inferior Spirits, that they might present their prayers to the
Gods, and help them with their intercession. Austin in the eighth Book of the
City of God, Frilstra eis [daemonibus] hunc detulit honorem, ut quoniam nullus
Deus miscetur homini (quod Platonem dixisse perhibent) isti ad Deos perserant
preces nostras.
In vain (says he) Apulenis has deferred that honor to the Demons, that they
should make a report unto the Gods of our prayers, because no God is mingled
with man. And in the twenty second chapter, he says, that they accounted them
inter Deos and homines internuncios, and beneficiorum impetratores, to be
mediators between God and men, and obtainers of benefits. In the twenty sixth
chapter, he alleges Hermes saying to Aesculapius, that Avus tuus O Asclepi,
medicinae primus inventor, omnia nunc hominibus adjumenta praestans numine suo
quae antea solebat medicinae art praebere.
his Grandfather having invented medicine on earth, was esteemed to heal the
sick even after his death. In that manner the Roman Church speaks unto the
Saints, employing Angels for intercessors, and addressing her self unto certain
Saints in certain sicknesses.

And Epiphanius in the heresy of the Simonians, which is the twenty one,
relates, that Simonians would say, that (...).
by the [Angelical] principalities and powers, sacrifices must be offered to
the Father of the Universe.

V. Of the adoration of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of the title of Queen of
Heaven attributed to her in the Roman Church.
IN the forty fourth chapter of Jeremy, v. 17. the Idolaters make profession of
worshipping the Queen of heaven, saying, We will burn incense to the Queen of
heaven. And Apuleius in his eleventh Book calls the Moon Apud Miles. 11. Regina
coeli, sive tu Ceres.
the Queen of heaven. That profane name has been transported to the holy and
blessed Virgin Mary, by some old Heretics named Collyridians, against whom
Epiphanius writes in the seventy nine heresy, where after a long discourse, he
condemns the women that worshipped the Virgin Mary, saying, that such an
honor belongs not to a woman, no not to the Angels. He adds, (...).
Let such women be represt by Jeremiah, and let them trouble the earth no more,
and say no more, We honor the Queen of Heaven. He had said a little before, If
God will not have the Angels to be adored, much less her that was born of Anna.

VI. Of the Adoration of Inanimate things.
THe Pagans worshipped some inanimate, some irrational things; the Sun, the
Moon, the Ox, etc. The Roman Church worshippeth the ashes, the bones, and the
rags of the dead. The second Council of Nice, which is reckoned as the seventh
Universal, in the IV. Action, says, We worship the ashes, the rags, the blood,
and the Sepulchers of Martyrs. Bellarmine by an express Book maintains the
adoration of relics. All the Romanists speak the same language, and it is a
common practice. The Jesuit Vasquez in his 2. Book of the Adoration, in the 4.
Disputation, and the 4. Chapter, says that Res inanimata jure naturae adorari
potest.
by right of nature a thing inanimate may be worshipped: Yea he comes so far as
to say, that Vasquez lib. 3. de Adoratione, Disp. 1. cap. 2.
It is lawful to worship the earth, yea to adore a straw.

VII. That the Papists imitate the Pharisees and Jews in many things.
1. THe Pharisees did study to make works of supererogation, and works not
commanded, as to fast twice a week, and to give the tithes of all their goods,
Luke 18.12.

2. They had Traditions, and an unwritten word, as we showed before.

3. They boasted of Moses Chair, as the Roman Church of that of St. Peter, and
of an imaginary succession.

4. They taught that concupiscence was no sin, as one may see in (...).
Josephus 13. chapter of the 12. Book of Antiquities. And Jesus Christ, Matthew.
5.28. rebukes the Scribes and Pharisees for misinterpreting the Law; holding
that he that had looked upon his neighbors wife with a lustful eye, was not
guilty of adultery. The Council of Trent in the 5. Session, declares that the
coveting prohibited in the Law, which St. Paul speaks of, Romans 7.7. is no sin,
although the Law of God forbid it, and St. Paul call it sin.

5. The Pharisees used vain repetitions in their prayers, and for that were
condemned by Jesus Christ, Matthew. 6.7. The Roman Church does the same,
repeating the same prayers while they turn their beads, and binding themselves
to a certain number of reiterated words.

6. The Priests and Pharisees had brought the traffic and the market into the
Temple. Wherefore Jesus Christ, Joh. 2. accuses them to have turned the House
of God, which is a house of prayer, into an house of merchandise. Likewise the
Pope and the Clergy of Rome have brought into the Church the traffic of
absolutions, dispensations, annates, benefices, etc. Of which the Popes
themselves and the Doctors of the Roman Church complain.

7. The Pharisees and Scribes to exempt themselves from giving account of the
corruption of the doctrine which they had brought into the Church of the Jews,
stopped Christ and his Apostles with questions about their Mission or Vocation,
saying to the Lord Jesus, With what authority do thou these things? and who
has given thee this authority? Matthew. 21.23. And Act. 4.7. By what power, or
by what name have ye done this? The Roman Church follows that example; and
that she may not be obliged to defend her Doctrine against our Objections,
stops us about our mission, and asks us reason of our calling.

8. The Pharisees demanded miracles of Jesus Christ, and that he would show
them some sign: The same demand our Adversaries press upon us.

9. The Pharisees were nice in small Observations and Ceremonies, but left the
principal, and the Essence of Piety. They washed pots, they tithed mint,
annise, and cummin, but left the principal, even judgment and mercy, Mat.
23.23. The Roman Church does the like, exactly observing distinction of meats,
and Rogation weeks, and amusing the people about a thousand petty Ceremonies of
Candles, Pilgrimages, Holy days, etc. but instructing not the people in the
Redemption by Jesus Christ, and justification by Faith, and hiding holy
Scripture from them.

10. The Pharisees preached justification by the works of the Law, and the Jews
were forestalled with that Doctrine; which made the Apostle St. Paul so
carefully and thoroughly to confute that Error in the Epistles to the Romans and
to the Galatians, establishing justification by faith without the works of the
Law. This is also one of our principal quarrels against the Roman Church, which
takes part with the Pharisees, by teaching justification by works.

11. The Scribes and Pharisees were taxed by Jesus Christ for adorning and
beautifying the Sepulchers of the Prophets, while they persecuted those that
followed the Doctrine of the Prophets, Matthew. 23.29. The like they do in the
Roman Church: they reverence the relics of the Apostles, but persecute them
that follow the Doctrine of the Apostles.

12. The Jews did boast of the Temple of God, crying up, The Temple of the
Lord, The Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7. and in the mean while profaned that
Temple by their life. So does the Roman Church, making a great noise with the
title of the Church; a name used for a shelter of Errors, and to set up
tyranny: For the Pope has changed the Church, which is a spiritual Kingdom,
into a temporal Monarchy.

13. The Jews being enemies of the Prophets, yet boasted that their Prophets
and Priests could not err, saying, Jer. 18.18. The Law shall not perish from
the Priest, nor the counsel from the wise, nor the Word from the Prophet. But
God contradicts that presumption, saying, Ezekiel. 7.26. The Law shall perish
from the Priest, and the counsel from the ancient. This is also the boasting of
the Roman Church, that the Pope, as Pope, cannot fall into Error, and that the
Church of Rome cannot err.

VIII. Of the Fulfilling of the Law, and of the Perfection of Justice.
THe Pelagian Heretics taught that man can fulfill the Law of God, saying that
God should be unjust, if he enjoined us to do things which we cannot do, and
gave us a Law which is above our strength to obey. Austin is diligent in
confuting that doctrine, in the Book of Perfection of Righteousness. In the
sixth Reason, Celestius a Pelagian argues thus; Iterum quaerendum est utrum
praeceptum homini sit sine peccato esse. Aut enim non potest and praeceptum non
est; aut quia praeceptum est potest. Nam cur praeciperetur quod fieri omnino
non potest?
It must be asked again, whether it be commanded to man to be without sin: For
either man cannot be without sin, and by consequent, that is not commanded; or
he can, because it is commanded: For why should an impossible thing be
commanded? And in the eleventh reason, In vain should that be forbidden, or
commanded, which cannot be avoided, or which cannot be fulfilled. This is
directly the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and the objections of our
Adversaries, whereby they go about to make our Doctrine odious; saying, that as
much as in us lies we make God unrighteous, when we say, that he has given us
Commandments which we cannot fulfill. To which we answer with Austin, August.
lib. de corruptione and gratia, cap. 3. O homo in praeceptione cognosce quid
debeas agere, in corruptione cognosce tuo te nitio non habere, in oratione
cognosce unde accipias quod vis habere.
in the same place, That it is no injustice to ask of a man what he owes,
although he be unable to pay, especially when his unableness comes by his
fault: And that God requiring of us more then we can do, teaches us what we
must ask of him, and what he will do in us by his grace.

IX. Of Semipelagianism.
IN this the Semipelagians differed from the Pelagians, that they acknowledged
Original sin, and distinguished between Nature and Grace. Yet they had a secret
Intelligence with the Pelagians, in that they made Grace to be always joined
with Nature, saying that to the end that men may be saved, God gives to all
men an universal and sufficient grace; the use whereof depends from man's free
will. This their Doctrine is set down in the Epistle of Prosper to Austin, and
in the Epistle of Hilary to the same, inserted in the VII. Tome of St. Austin.
It is the Doctrine of the Roman Church of this time. A doctrine confuted by
Austin in his Answer to these Epistles, with the same reasons as we use this
day.

X. Of the Limbus of little Children.
THe Pelagians put the little children dead without Baptism, in a middle
condition between Hell and the Kingdom of Heaven, in which they were exempt
from pain, as it is attested by Austin in the Book of Heresies, ad quod vult
Deum, Chap. 88. An opinion which that holy Doctor opposes with all his
strength in many places, especially in the first Book of the origin of the
soul; and in the 107. Epistle, and in the 14. Sermon De verbis Apostoli: Also
in the Book of the good of Perseverance, Chap. 10.12. and in many other places,
where he stiffly maintains that between Paradise and Hell there is no third
place. Upon that opinion of the Pelagians the Limbus was built, wherein the
Roman Church shuts up little children dead without Baptism, where they feel no
pain, but are excluded from the sight of God, and the Heavenly glory. Only that
our Adversaries may seem in something to disagree from the Pelagians, they will
not give to the condition of those children the title of beatitude or
blessedness.

XI. Of Swearing by the Creatures.
THe Heretics whom Epiphanius calls Ossenians, did teach to swear by the
creatures, as the same Epiphanius witnesses. They swore by the salt, by the
water, by the bread, by the heaven, and by the wind. Austin in the 19. Book
against Faustus the Manichean, in the 22. chap. upbraideth the Manicheans, that
they swore by the light, and by the flies, and by Manicheus; contrary to the
rule of Gods Law, which says Deuteronomy. 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
and shall swear by his Name. The Catechism of the Council of Trent, expounding
the Commandment of the Law, which forbids to take the Name of God in vain,
teaches to swear by the cross, by the relics, and by the Name of God. The
Jesuit Vasquez in the third Book of the Adoration, Disp. 1. cap. 2. says, The
unreasonable and the inanimate creature may be the matter of an Oath, which is
an Act of Religion. Which none needs to wonder at, since he maintains that one
can adore things inanimatte, even a straw, with the cult of Latria. The excuse
of those Heretics was, that by swearing by those creatures, they swore by him
that made them, which is the excuse that the same Council of Trent brings: For
our Adversaries bind themselves Prentices to the ancient Heretics. Whereas
Jesus Christ, Matthew. 5.34. forbids us to swear by Heaven, because Heaven is the
Throne of God. The Jews swearing by Heaven, could bring the same excuse, and
say they intended to swear by him that made Heaven, and has placed his Throne
in it.

XII. Of Perjury.
THe Heretics called They used to say Jura, perjura; secretum prodere noli.
Priscillianists taught perjury, as Austin says in the 70. Chap. ad quod vult
Deum. The Roman Church also is a School of perjury; for the Pope dispenses
from the Oaths made unto God, and dispenses the Subjects from the Oath of
Allegiance to a Sovereign Prince Licet judici competenti de hujusmodi
personarum erroribus inquirere, and alias contra eos debite procedere,
eosdemque punire, quantum justitia suadebit, si suos errores revocare
pertinaciter recusaverint, etiamsi de salvo conductu consisi ad locum venerint
judicii, alias non venturi.
. The Council of Constance has made an express Canon about it, in the XIX.
Session, whereby it is declared, that a Prince who has given a safe conduct to
Heretics, without which they would not have come, may proceed against them,
and put them to death, contrary to the Faith given them. The inscription of the
chapter Sicut nostris, in the 2. of the Decretals, in the IV. Title, is such,
Juramentum contra Ecclesiasticam utilitatem praestitum non tenet. The Oath made
against the profit of the Church binds not. Where by the profit of the
Church, they understand the temporal profit and commodity: That Decretal is of
Pope Innocent the III. See the Canon Alius, in the 15. Cause, Quest. 6. and the
Gloss upon that Canon, where it is disputed, whether a debtor be obliged to pay
a sum due to an Excommunicate person. Hence come the equivocations in justice
taught by the Jesuits, whereby a man may with a good conscience deny Christian
Religion before an unrighteous Judge, saying, I am no Christian, with this
mental reservation, to tell it you, or since three days.

XIII. Of Believing without Knowing.
THe Valentinian Heretics would have their people to believe them without
enquiring. Tertullian in the first Book against the Valentinians, chap. 1.
says, Ne discipulis quidem propriis ante committunt quam suos fecerint. Habent
artificium quo prius persuadent quam edoceant. Veritas autem docendo persuadet
and suadendo docet.
They discover not [their doctrine] to their own Disciples, before they have
made them their own. That Art they have, to persuade before they teach. Now the
Truth persuades by teaching, and teaches by counselling. That is the very
implicit faith of the People of the Roman Church, which believes without
knowing what the Church must believe; and believes what the Roman Church
believes, not knowing whether that Church teach conformably to the Word of God.

XIV. Of forbidding the people to read Scripture.
HOly Athanasius in his 2. Tome disputes against some Heretics that dissuaded
the people from reading the Holy Scripture, pretending that it is too high and
difficult for the people; but the real cause why they did so, was, because
Scripture was contrary to them. Page 241. (...).
They turn the people away (says he) from the Scriptures, pretending that they
dare not undertake [to come near them] as unaccessible; but the truth is, that
they fly the Scriptures for fear of being convinced by them.

XV. Of Purgatory and Satisfaction after this life.
EPiphanius in the 21. Heresy, relates that the Simonians taught (...).
the purgation of souls. Austin in his Book of Heresies, ad quod vult Deum,
chap. 43. ascribes the same Error to the Originists, saying, There are also
other opinions of the same Origines, which the Catholic Church does not
receive at all; Those especially that concern purgation and deliverance. Such
was the opinion of Plato in the Phedon or Dialogue of the Soul, as Eusebius
has observed in the last chapter of the 11. Book of the Evangelical
Preparation. (...).
Those (says he) that have lived indifferently well, come to that lake, and
there dwell, and being purged, and having born the pain of their iniquities,
they are released. Virgil has followed him, speaking thus of the souls of
Purgatory, Aeneid. 6.

-- Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos, aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.
Out of that source Purgatory is sprung. As for the purgation of souls at the
wind or in the water, Pope Gregory the I. teaches it, in the 4. Book of his
Dialogues; where there are many apparitions of souls, saying that they are in
Purgatory, in the wind, or in the water, or in hot Bathes: For the Purgatory in
a subterranean fire was not yet invented.

XVI. Of Prayer and Service in an Unknown Tongue.
THe Ossenians (as Epiphanius relates in the 19. Heresy) made prayers in an
unknown tongue, being unwilling to be understood by the people. Austin chap.
16. ad quod vult Deum, says the same of the Heracleonites; And Hierome in the
Epitaph of Lucinius Andalusian, says that they amazed the people with a
barbarous tone, so that they admired that most which they understood least. Of
that the reason is given by Clemens Alexandrinus in the first Book of the
Stromates, namely that Page 146. (...).
men hold prayers pronounced in an unknown tongue to be most effectual.

That abuse is past into the Roman Church which blindfoldeth the people, and
keeps them in a stupid awe by a service in a barbarous tongue; using Laymen
to pray to God, not understanding what they say to him. We shall hear in the
progress of this work the Cardinal saying to us, Du Perron Book 6. chap. 1. p.
1080.
that the merit of Faith is there greater, where there is less intelligence.
Conformably to Bellarmin. lib. 1. de justificatione c. 7.. judicium. Fides
distinguitur contra scientiam, and melius per ignorantiam quam per notitiam
definitur.
Bellarmines saying, that Faith is opposite to science, and is better defined
by ignorance then by knowledge,

XVII. Of distinction of Meats.
IT cannot be denied but that many ancient Christians have abstained from
certain meats upon fasting days. Yet if the matter be searched at the spring,
it will be found that Heretics were the first authors of distinction of meats.
Tertullian who writ two hundred years after the nativity of Christ, was a
sectator of the heretic Montanus, of whom Eusebius after Apollinaris speaks
thus, in the 17. Chapter of the first Book of his History; (...).
Montanus has set Laws about fasting. The same Tertullian has written a Book
Contra Psychicos, that is, against the natural men, [to expound the word (...),
as our English version translates it, 1 Cor. 2.15.] So he calls the Orthodox in
contempt, as men given to please their nature, and serve their belly; because
they did not fast enough to his mind. In the 1. chapter, he says of the
Orthodox, that Arguunt nos quod stationes plerumque in vesperam producamus,
quod etiam xerophagias observemus si^cantes cibum ab omni carne and omni
jurulentia.
they found fault with the Montanists, because they extended their fast till
the Evening, ate nothing but dry meats, abstaining from flesh, and all things
that had juice and moisture. Whereupon it will be expedient to see in the
following Chapter, how the true Christians of that time disputed against those
Heretics. Lex and Prophetae usque ad Johannem; Itaque de caetero jejunandum ex
arbitrio, non ex imperio novae disciplinae pro temporibus and edusis
uniuscujusque. Sic and Apostolos observass nullum aliud imponentes jugum
certorum and in commune omnibus obeundorum jejuniorum.
The Law and the Prophets (say they) have lasted until John; since that time
fast is to be observed indifferently, and according to the will of every one,
according to the time and the causes that every one has, not according to the
Ordinance of this new Discipline. So the Apostles have observed it, having not
imposed any yoke of certain fastings, which must be observed by all in common.
They add, that Jesus Christ said, that which enters into a man defiles not a
man; and that St. Paul has foretold, that there should come Doctors teaching
to abstain from meats, etc.

As that language of the ancient Christians is the same, and those very reasons
which we use against the Church of Rome: So the answer of Tertullian, in the
defense of the Montanists, is the very same which the Roman Church uses in our
days. The Apostle (says that Heretic) Praedamnans jam haereti os perpetuam
abstinentiam praecepturos ad destruenda and despicienda opera creatoris.
condemns beforehand the Heretics that should impose a perpetual
abstinence, to destroy and despise the works of the Creator. And a little
after; We abstain from the meats, which [non rejicimus, sed differimus] we do
not reject, but only put off the use of them. And a little after again; The
Apostle accuses certain chastisers, and forbidders of meats, who abstained
from them [ex fastidio, non ex officio] out of disdain, not out of office. It
was also the excuse of Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, who having
established many such observations, was condemned in the Council of Gangra. His
excuse was, that he had not brought in those abstinences out of pride, but by a
pious exercise, and according to God, as Sozomenus says in the 13. Chapter of
the 3. Book.

The Manicheans also were very scrupulous in their Fasts; of them Austin says
in the 13. chap. of the 2. Book of the manners of the Manicheans, that they ate
no flesh-meat. To which rules the Monks of St. Benedict bind themselves; as the
Carthusians, Celestins, etc. He says also that among the Manicheans a man was
not thought to have violated the rule of Holiness, that should burst his belly
with Mushromes, Ryce, and Cakes; but he that should have to his supper a few
herbs with a bit of rusty Bacon. The Roman Church following those Heretics in
that distinction of meats, is gone far beyond them; taking it for a violation
of fast to eat a bit of flesh, but to stretch ones stomach upon Wine, Fish, and
Sweetmeats, breaks no fast with them.

XVIII. Of overthrowing the humane nature of Christ.
THe Valentinians and Marcionites forged an imaginary body unto Jesus Christ,
and the Eutychians would clothe the humane nature of Christ with the
perfections of the divine.

The Roman Church does the same, attributing a body unto Christ, which is in an
hundred thousand several places, and upon an hundred thousand several Altars at
the same time; A body which is really present both in heaven and in earth, but
is not in the space between both, and is by consequent remote from it self; A
body which in the Mass has no distinction of parts, and no diverse situation
of Limbs, since all the parts of his body are in the host under one and the
same point; A body without place, and taking no room, and therefore more
spiritual then the spirits; For a Spirit cannot be in many separated places,
nor be far from it self; And that not only since the glorification of Christ's
body, but also when he was yet mortal and infirm, celebrating the Sacrament
with his Disciples. Each of which assertions overthrows and abolisheth the
humane nature of Jesus Christ, and none of them is compatible with an humane
body.

XIX. Of Baptism conferred by women.
IN the Roman Church, not only a man of the people, but also a woman may confer
Baptism. The Marcionites did the same, as Epiphanius witnesses in the forty
second Heresy: (...).
Marcion indifferently permits, even to women to give Baptism. The same he
says in the seventy ninth Heresy: Where also he maintains, that it would not
have been lawful for the Virgin Mary. Tertullian in the book Of the Virgins
that must be veiled, chap. 9. says, Non permittitur mulieri in Ecclesia loqui;
sed nec tingere, nec offerre.
It is not permitted to a woman to speak in the Church, nor to baptize, nor to
offer. And in the forty first chapter of the book of the Prescriptions, he
says, that Ipsae mulieres haereticae quam procaces, quae audeant docere,
forsitan and tingere!
heretical women are so impudent, as to offer to teach and to baptize. See
Clements constitutions in the third book, chap. 9. whereof the Title is, Quod
non oportet mulieres baptizare, impium est enim and a Christi doctrina alienum:
That women must not baptize; for it is an impious thing, and remote from the
doctrine of Christ. Basil in the Epistle to Amphilochius, rejects the Baptism
conferred by Laymen.

XX. Of the Baptism of inanimate things.
Page 90.
THe second Book of Sacred Ceremonies, in the seventh Section relates, how the
Pope baptizeth Agnus Dei's: It is ordinary to baptize bells in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: And they have a Godfather and a
Godmother that give them their name. All which is an imitation of the error of
the Armenians and Jacobites, of whom Nicephorus writes thus, in the eighteenth
book, chap. 53. They will not yield the due honor unto the cross, before they
have baptized it, as if it were a man. The Pagans did much the like to that;
for before bells were invented, they used trumpets, which they consecrated by
washings and purifications; and the day of that Ceremony was called
Tubilustrium, as it may be seen in the fifth book of the Fasti of Ovid, and in
Festus.

XXI. Of Transubstantiation.
THe Capernaits Joh. 6.52. did imagine a real manducation of the body of Jesus
Christ with the mouth, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? The
Eurychians taught the transubstantiation of the bread into the body of Christ
in the Eucharist; using that example to persuade that in the same manner the
flesh of Christ by virtue of the union with the Verb [or the essential Word]
was become spiritual and divine. In the second Dialogue of Theodoret,
entitled, the Inconfuse, the Eutychian Heretic speaks thus: (...).
The signs of the body and blood of Jesus Christ are others before the
invocation of the Priest, but after the said invocation they are changed and
become others. To that Heretic teaching transubstantiation, the Orthodox
answers in these words; (...).
Thou art taken in the net which thou have woven; for the mystical signs after
the consecration, do not change nature; for they remain in their first
substance, figure, and form, etc. For which cause, the Jesuit Gregorius de
Valentia, in the book of the Transubstantiation, chap. 7.. Quod si, blames
Theodoret, saying, that Theodoret has been taxed of other errors in the
Council of Ephesus. The Roman Edition of the Greek Dialogues of Theodoret has
pre-fixed this warning in the beginning of the book; That Theodoret being
carried too far by the desire of defending the truth, sometimes hangs too much
on the other side. Vigilius in the fourth book against Eutyches, disputes
against the Eutychians, in the same manner as we do against the Roman Church,
in the second book against Eutyches, who said, that the Word and the Flesh of
Christ were but one nature. Si verbi and carnis una natura est, quomodo cum
verbum ubique sit, non ubique invenitur and caro? Nam quando in terra fuit, non
erat utique in coelo, and nunc quia in coelo est, non est utique in terra.
If (says Vigilius) the Word and the flesh of Christ have but one nature, how
comes it to pass that the Verb being everywhere, the Flesh is not found also
everywhere? For when it was in earth, it was not in heaven; and now because it
is in heaven, it is not in earth. Which are very remarkable words.

The Marcosian Heretics (as Epiphanius witnesses, in the thirty fourth
heresy) would make the world believe, that in the cup the wine was turned into
blood. Cardinal du Perron in his book of the Eucharist against M. du Plessis,
page 191. says, that the Valentinians believed that in the Eucharist, the
bread and the wine became truly the body and blood of Christ.

XXII. Of Communion under one kind.
THe Synod of Constance, in the thirteenth Session, establishes the Communion
under one kind, and takes the cup from the people: Yet in the same Canon, these
Venerable Fathers confess, that Jesus Christ instituted this Sacrament under
the two kinds, and that the ancient Church did so celebrate it.

The same did the Manicheans, and thereby a Manichean was discovered, when he
made difficulty to receive the Cup in the Sacrament; as Pope Ore indigno
Christi corpus accipiunt, sanguinem autem nostrae redemptionis, etc.
Leo the I. said in the first Sermon of Lent. Of them, Pope Gelasius speaks in
the Canon Comperimus, in the second distinction of the Consecration, We have
learned (says he) that some having taken one portion only of the sacred body,
abstain from the cup of the sacred blood. And a little after, The division of
the same Sacrament cannot be done without a great Sacrilege. The ordinary
answer is, that Gelasius speaks of Priests that abstained from the cup, not of
the people. But Nulla ibi de Sacerdote sacrificante mentio habetur, ut plane
quod generaliter dictum esse apparet, ad Sacerdotes restringi minime debere
satis intelligi possit.
Cardinal Baronius an. 496.. 20. confuteth that shift, and with good reason
maintains (as also the whole Text of the Canon shows it) that he condemns
those of the people that abstained from the cup, calling that a sacrilege. As
indeed in the same Canon, Gelasius decrees, that such as make difficulty to
receive the cup, be no more admitted to the communion of the bread, and be cut
off from the whole Sacrament, which cannot be said but of the people presenting
themselves to the Communion.

XXIII. Of the Titles and Honors which the Pope usurpeth.
THe Pagan Emperors caused themselves to be called Gods. Caligula gave his feet
to Pompeius Pennus to kiss, as Seneca testifies in the twelfth chapter of the
book of benefits. Julius Capitolinus says the same of the young Maximinus
Emperor. Pomponius Laetus says the same of Dioclesian. The same Emperors made
themselves adored, and the Roman Senate had the right of Apotheoses or
Canonizations. The Pope having usurped the place of the ancient Emperors of
Rome, has also usurped these honors, and is called by his flatterers, Glossa
Extravagantes Cum inter. Papa vocatur Dominus Deus noster and saepe alibi:
Council. Later. ult. Sess. 9. Majestatis tuae divine conspectus.
God in earth, and the divine Majesty, gives his feet to kiss, and causes
himself to be adored: Which is done with an especial solemnity upon the This
ceremony is described in the book of sacred Ceremonies, Sect. 1. chap. 6. The
practice of it is to be seen in an Epistle of Cardinal de Joyeuse inserted
among those of Cardinal du Perron, where it is related, how after the election
they came to the adoration.
day of his election: Then is he set upon the Altar by the Cardinals who all
one after another come to the adoration. The Senate of Cardinals has the right
of Apotheoses or Canonizations, and to admit whom they please into the list of
the Saints of Paradise. The Preface of the second book of the sacred
Ceremonies, calls the Canonization of Saints of the Papacy, Divorum nostrorum
Apotheosis, The Deification, or Apotheose of our Saints: This is foretold by
the Spirit of God, Rev. 13. that the second Beast should erect the image of the
first Beast: for the Papal Hierachy has set up an empire after the likeness
and imitation of the Roman Empire.

XXIV. Of the dissolution of Marriages.
THe Pope separateth and dissolveth marriages lawfully contracted, upon
pretense of a greater perfection, and to enter into the Monastical life,
against the express prohibition of Jesus Christ, Mat. 19.6. What God has
joined together, let no man put asunder; and 1 Cor. 7.5. Defraud you not one
the other; and in the verse before, The Husband has no power of his own body,
but the wife. The Priscillianists Heretics did the same; of whom, Austin to
Quod vult Deus, Chapter 70. Disjungunt viros a nol^ntibus faeminis.
says, that they separated marriages, and dis-joyned Husbands from their
Wives, against their will. If marriage be made a Sacrament by the faith
mutually given, or by the blessing in the Church, as they hold in the Roman
Church, how dares the Pope dissolve a Sacrament? Or if the Sacrament be not
entire nor fulfilled without the consummation of matrimony, does it not follow
that the Priests conferring the Sacrament of matrimony, confer but half a
Sacrament?

XXV. Of the Titles and Offices given to the Saints.
THe Pagans or Heathens did give particular Offices to each of their Gods: One
governed the Sea, another bore sway in Hell; one had care of the wheat, another
over women in child bed, etc. And every Land or Country had his Tutelary God.
Juno was the Patroness of Carthage, Venus of Paphos, and Pallas of Athens, etc.

The Roman Chuch has transported these titles to the deceased Saints, and has
given to every one of them their office. Saint Margaret Patroness of childbed
women, did succeed the Goddess Lucina. Saint Nicolas which is called upon by
Navigators, did succeed Castor and Pollux. Saint Eustache has taken the place
or room of the hunting Diana; Saint Christopher that of Hercules; and Saint
Eloy of Vulcan; and every Town, City, or Kingdom has its Tutelary Saint. Saint
Mark is the Patron and Protector of Venice; Saint James of Spain; and Saint
Denis of France, etc. And those offices have been given to those Saints which
are in Heaven, by men which are on earth, without knowing whether the Saints
did accept of them, or whether God does approve or allow of such boldness, that
Men, Ignorants and sinners, dare distribute or bestow offices to the Saints
which are in Heaven.

XXVI. Of the Equipage or setting forth of Saints Images and Adornments.
THe Roman Church has borrowed from the Pagans, the equipage and ornament of
her images. They gave a key to Janus, as the Church of Rome gives one to Saint
Peter. They represented Jupiter Ammon with horns, as Moses is now figured.
Ovid. Fastor.
The Genii or Household Gods had a dog with them, as now Saint Hubert, and Saint
Eloy: who also has an hammer, as Vulcan in old time. Hercules had a Club; and
so has Saint Christopher: Apollo had an harp in his hand, and Saint Genest the
Patron of the Fiddlers has a Violon.

Before the Pagans images, Ovid. Epist. Med. Ardet ut ad magnos pinea taeda
Deos. Cicero Offic. 3. Omnibus vicis statuae and ad eas thus and cerci. Tertul.
Apol. c. 42. Thura non emimus; Si Arabiae quaerantur, sciant Sabaei, etc.
wax-lights were lighted, and incense was burnt, which is done still to the
images of Saints in the Roman Church; A custom much derided by Tertullian,
Arnobius, and Lactantius. Tertullian in his book of Idolatry, chap. 15. Let
those (says he) light Lamps that have no light: And Arnobius asks, whether
the Gods have the sense of smelling: And Lactantius in the sixth book, chap. 2.
Number mentis suae compos putandus est qui authori and datori luminis candelarum
ac cercorum munus offert pro-munere?
Is that man in his right sense, that offers candles to him that is the
author and giver of light?

XXVII. Of Relicts applied to women with child.
TErtullian in a Book of the soul, chap. 39. says, that the Pagan women used
to gird their belly about with rollers, made before the idols: Much like the
custom of women in the Abbey of Saint German, in the suburb of Saint German of
Paris, girding themselves with the girdle of Saint Margaret. See in the first
chapter of Fenestella, [otherwise Andr. Dominicus Floceus] how women would come
to the Luperci, who smote the palm of their hands with Goats-skins to make them
conceive.

XXVIII. Of Unshod Monks.
PHilastrius Bishop of Bress, who writ about the year of our Lord, 38^. has
made a Catalogue of ancient heresies, among the which he puts the Heresy of
Excalceatorum est haeresis quae excalceatos ambulare debere hominos asserit,
etc.
the Unshod, who went barefoot, because God said to Moses, Put off thy shoes
from off thy feet; which he calls a vain superstition. Yet many of our Monks
have followed it, placing merit in going barefoot. The superstitious Jews had a
holy day in which they went barefoot, which Hierom in his first book against
Jovinian, calls nudipedalia, of which, Juvenal speaks.

Observant ubi festa mero pede sabbata reges. XXIX. Of Mendicant Friars.
MEndicity, which before was an affliction, now is a profession, yea a work of
supererogation. All is full of begging Friars, whose idle mendicity is fatter
then the plenty of many of the people. The same was among the Pagans, among
whom, the Priests of the Syrian Goddess, and those of Cybele, went about
begging from Town to Town, bearing sacks, where they put the provision that was
given them. This is very exactly described in the eighth book of the Milesia of
Apuleius, and in the fourth book of Fasti of Ovid. Tertullian Circuit cauponas
religio mendicans.
in the thirteenth chapter of his Apologeticus, says of it, The mendicant
Religion goes about the Taverns. The Heretics Massalians (...).
did forsake the world, clad with sacks, begging about, as Epiphanius describes
it in the eightieth heresy.

XXX. Diverse customs of Paganism borrowed by the Papism.
HE that would specify all the ceremonies and customs of the Pagans, which the
Roman Church has borrowed, should undertake an endless task.

The Lacedaemonians would whip themselves, as the Penitents at Rome do now. See
Tertullian in the end of the Apolegetick, and in the fourth chapter of his book
to Martyrs: Apud Lacedaemonas solemnitas maxima est (...).
Upon which, Rhenanus makes this annotation; Istius veteris (...) vestigium
videas apud Italos in Litaniis: Of that old fashion of whipping ones self, a
trace may be seen among the Italians in the Letanies. Thus the Priests of Baal
did cut themselves, 1 Kings 18.28. And the Priests of Cybele called See Ovid.
Fast. 4.
Curetes.

The Pagans Ovid. Fast. 5. Mense malum Maio nubere vulgus ait.
made difficulty of marrying in March and May, as now our Adversaries in Lent.
Ovid. Fast. 2. Festus and Varro de lingua Latina.
Ashwednesday falls much upon the same time, as the day of Purifications and
Propitiations for the dead in the Pagan Rome, which was upon the eighteenth of
February.

Rhenanus upon the fifth book of Tertullian against Marcion, acknowledges,
that Candlemas is an imitation of the Februal ceremonies of the Romans.

The Pagans had sacrifices for the rain, which were called Aquilicia: For the
same use as the shrine of Saint Genovefa, is taken down at Paris.

Pliny in the sixteenth book, chap. 44. says, that the Vestal Virgins hanged
their hair at a Tree; for they shaved themselves, as our Nuns do.

The Pagans had their Convents of sacred Virgins, as the Vestals and the
Faustinian Virgins instituted by Marcus Antoninus Pius, as Julius Capitolinus
says in his life.

They used holy water, wax-lights, and incense.

They clothed their images. The history is known of Dionysius the Tyrant, who
eased the images of the gods of their golden heavy cloaks, and gave them other
cloaks of cloth, saying, th^se of does were both warmer and lighter.

The Fenestella. c. 2. V^ber. Max. lib. 1.
Pagans had the great Altar consecrated to Hercules.

Twelftide, The French call it the day of Kings. The Lord of misrule in
Christmas is also a trace of the Saturnals at that time of the year. Horat.
Sat 7. lib. 2. Age liberate Decembri.
in which the meanest of the house (if it happen so) is King, is an imitation
of the Saturnales, in which the servants were Masters.

The Rogations and Processions about the fields of corn, have succeeded to the
Processions called Ambarvalia.

As the Pagans suffered not any male to enter into the Temple of Bona Dea, so
there are Chapels in the Roman Church where women enter not, as the Chapel of
St. Laurence at Rome out of the walls, as the book of the Roman Indulgences
shows it; And the quire of the Lateran Church at Rome.

Pope Boniface the VIII. has instituted the Jubilee every hundredth year, after
the imitation of the Roman secular games, As Onuphrius acknowledges it, lib.
de ludis secularibus.

The spittle used in Baptism by the Roman Church, is derived from the Pagans,
who made use of spittle for preservative and expiation. Persius Sat. 2.

Infami digito and lustralibus ante salivis Expiat. XXXI. Confession of our
Adversaries.
OUr Adversaries themselves do not dissemble it, and are not ashamed to boast
that they have borrowed many things from Paganism.

Cardinal Baronius upon the year of our Lord 200.. 5. Consulto introductum
videtur ut quae erant Gentilitiae superstitionis officia, eadem very Dei cultui
sanctificata in verae Religionis cultum impenderentur.
After that (says he) it was purposely introduced that the offices of Pagan
superstition, being consecrated to the service of the true God, should be
employed to the service of true Religion.

The same Baronius upon the year 58.. 76. says that the Agnus Dei's hanged
about the neck, have been instituted after the imitation of those brooches
called bullae, which the Pagan boys wore about their necks to avert charms.

On the year 183.. 11. he says that the insolences of Shrove-tyde, come from
the Bacchanales. Which is more, on the year 324. he makes no difficulty to say,
that the Popes have succeeded in the habits, the apparel, and the privileges
of the Pagan Pontifes.

The Jesuit Cotton, in the second book of his Institution, chap. 57. says,
that as the Temples dedicated unto Idols, were turned into Churches dedicated
unto God; So the ceremonies which of themselves are indifferent, have been with
good reason transported to Gods service.

The Gloss of the Canon Consecrationem. Did. 1. de consecratione, speaking of
the Pagan customs and ceremonies, says, Si Gentiles faciebant, multo magis
facere debemus, etc.
If the Pagans did that, we much more ought to do it. And so it is an argument
whereby we draw inferences out of the examples of Infidels.

CHAP. 16. Reasons why Cardinal du Perron, making little account of the three
first ages, confines himself to the time of the four first Councils. And that
he sets down unjust rules, and such as himself observes not.
OVer all the book of Cardinal du Perron, against his Majesty of great
Britain, he makes very little use of Gods Word, as of a tool which does not
fit his hand. But he In the 4. chap. of the 4. observation of the 2. book, p.
726 and in many other places.
takes the Fathers of the time of the four first Councils for his Judges; The
first whereof, which is the Council of Nice, was held in the year of our Lord,
325. and the last, which is that of Chalcedon, was held 126. after. Within
these limits he confines himself, making little account of the time before. He
brings for his reasons, the rarity of the writers of that time, and that they
had no occasion to write of such matters, or that the books were lost. Yet have
we many Authors more ancient then the Council of Nice; Justin Martyr, Ignatius,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Cyprian, Arnobius,
Lactantius; To which I add Eusebius and Athanasius, who were present at the
first Council. From whose writings we may learn, what was the belief of the
Church of their time, as much as from any else that lived since. But the true
cause is, that in the antienter Authors no mention is found of those chief
points, about which we dispute against the Roman Church, as the Primacy of the
Pope over all the world, the invocation of Saints, the service of images, and
many the like things, the seeds whereof were sown, and the occasions did rise
many years after.

The Cardinal alleges another reason why he restrains himself to the time of
the four first Councils; That his Majesty of Great Britain, has taken the
Fathers of that age for his Judges: Which is an untruth, for the King never
chose other Judges then the Word of God; And in his search of Antiquity, he
never meant to exclude or undervalue the Fathers, that writ before the sitting
of these four Councils. So the Kings words are related by the Cardinal, in the
4. observation of the second book.
For these are his words, The King with the Anglican Church admitting the first
four Ecumenical Councils, shows enough that he includes not the State of the
true and lawful Church within one age or two, but goes much beyond that. By
these words, his Majesty shows evidently, that he confines not himself within
the space of 126. years, which is the time of the four first Councils,
reckoning from the first to the last.

For example, we find that the first Father that called upon the Saints
departed, was Gregory Nazianzen, about the year of our Lord 370. Before him, no
mention is found of the invocation of Saints; But all the Fathers antienter
then he, say unanimously, that none but God alone must be invocated. Shall we
think that the Cardinal has sufficiently proved, that the ancient Church has
prayed to the Saints, because in the fourth age (in which those four Councils
began) some examples are found of that invocation? Yet to that the Cardinal, in
the fore-alledged place, declares himself not to be obliged; And says, that
to offer to bind him to search the ages before, is harsh and unjust dealing;
For he holds, that if something be found to have been universally observed by
the Church, in one of the four first ages, it must be presupposed, that the
same thing was observend in all the other ages, so that there be no proof to
the contrary.

The Reader may here observe, that M. du Perron not only acknowledges that
some doctrines are held by the Roman Church, which have no precedent in the
three first ages; but also that he sets Laws which he breaks all over his book,
fixing bounds to himself, within which he does not keep. For he maintains many
doctrines, of which not only no mention is made in the Doctors of the first
ages, but which also are condemned by those Doctors; Such is the exclusion of
the people from the cup, the service of images, the invocation of Saints, the
fire of Purgatory immediately after death, the Popes power over the temporal of
Kings, and over their crowns, praying to God when one understands not himself,
and many other things.

Besides, to show that a doctrine has been received in the ancient Church, The
Cardinal will have no more required, but to show that it was universally
received in one of the four first ages. Now this he does not show; for all the
proofs which he brings about the principal controversies, and chiefly about the
dignity of the Roman Church, and the power of the Pope, are enclosed within the
compass of the Roman Empire; and serve only to show that the Roman Church and
her Bishop, had some pre-eminence above the Churches and Bishops of the Roman
Empire, but not over those Churches that were without the Roman Empire; for
with them the Bishop of Rome had no communication, neither did he for many ages
pretend any pre-eminence over them. And truly the Cardinal, as nimble as he is
to invent things that are not, and magnify small things, could never in all
his book produce any one appeal from the Church of Persia, or Ethiopia, or
Assyria to Rome, nor any law given in that time by the Church of Rome to the
Churches of all the world.

CHAP. 17. Of the authority of the Church, And whether she must have more
authority with us then the holy Scripture. Opinion of the parties.
THis dispute is an especial spot of these last times, in which the spirit of
blasphemy, which before did but whisper in corners, has made bold to get into
the pulpit, and set forth his impiety in public. For who so shall look
neerhand into the nature of that question, whether the Church must have more
authority with us then Scripture, shall acknowledge, that the plain issue of
the question is, Whether of the two is the greatest and most to be believed,
God or men?

Indeed the Roman Church acknowledges that the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles are divine, and that they are the Word of God. But in that she says
that Bellar. lib. 5. de verbo Dei, c. 9. initio capitis. Judex difficultatum
non potest esse Scriptura.
Scripture cannot be Judge of the doubts about faith, that the Church gives
authority to Scripture, and that Scripture has neither strength nor authority,
but so far as the Church declares it: In that (I say) she overthrows the
authority of Scripture, whilst she feigneth to establish it. For the way to
shake a certain truth, is to ground it upon uncertain proofs. The way to bring
in Atheism without noise, is to ground the divine Oracles upon humane
testimonies, and to command that credit be given to the Word of God; because
the Pope and the Roman Church have commanded it. He that proves clear things
by obscure proofs, does like him that shows the full Moon with his finger, or
that believes that the Sun is bright, because his neighbor told him so. By
this means men are esteemed more credible then God, and if God will have
servants and some persons that believe his Word, he must be obliged for it to
the Pope.

To bring down the Authority of Scripture and raise that of the Church (that is
their own) they charge Scripture with imperfection, saying, that all that is
necessary to salvation is not contained therein; and thereupon setting up
another [but unwritten] Word of God, which is found in the mouth of the Church,
that is, in their own mouth.

They call the Church a speaking Judge, but the Scripture a The Jesuit Arnova,
that writ against this Author about the French Confession of Faith, says. 19.
That the Protestants will abuse a dumb rule, shaking off the yoke of
Interpreters.
dumb rule; and yet not a whole rule, but a piece and a part of one. They
accuse Scripture of obscurity, and wish that it were more obscure yet, that it
might have less strength to condemn them. Whereupon they bear themselves as
infallible Interpreters of Scripture, thereby making themselves Lawgivers
under the title of Interpreters.

The Cardinal in the seventh Chapter of the second observation of the second
Book, maintains, that one must not have recourse to the age of the Apostles,
that is, to the example and doctrine of the Apostles to repurge the Church.
Bellarmin Bellar. lib. 4. de Verbo Dei Scripto. c. 12.. Dico secundo,
Scripturam etsi non est facta praecipue ut sit regula fidei, esse tamen regulam
non totalem, sed partialem.
says that Scripture is a piece of a rule, and that it was not written to rule
our faith, but only for a wholesome counsel, equalizing the authority of
Scripture, bearing witness to her self, to the authority of the Alcoran of
Mahomet.

The Jesuit Bail in the first Treatise of the Catechism, says, that without
the authority of the Church he would believe the Gospel of St. Matthew no more
then Titus Livius. Charron in his third Verity, says, that he that is
instructed by Scripture is no Christian; and many times over-pronounceth this
maxim, that the Church and the Scripture are Judges, but the Church
principally, and with great pre-eminence. The Jesuit Salmeron, in the 13. Tome,
8. Disput. upon St. Paul's Epistles, gives to the Scripture a nose of wax.
Gregorius de Valentia in the 4. Book of the Analysis, 3. Chap. calls the
Scripture a rock of offense. And always these Doctors by the Church understand
the Roman, not the Greek, more ancient then the Roman, nor the Syrian, more
ancient then the Greek; And by the Roman Church they understand the Pope, in
whom alone all that authority resideth. For (if we stand to their judgment)
that man should be very wide of the truth, that would take the word Church in
this question, in the same sense as in the Symbol. They have given to that
word a new signification.

After they have so vilified Scripture, it was easy for them to forbid the
reading of it. Yet because it would be a thing of ill savor, if in the public
service the Scripture should have no place, they read a few texts of it, but in
a tongue which the people understand not. By these means they shelter
themselves against Scripture, and take an order that their doctrine may not be
Judged by the Word of God, for they have made themselves Judges of the Word of
God.

For our part, we reverence the authority of the Church which teaches us
according to the Word of God, and receive with respect those that speak in Gods
name; Of whom the Lord Jesus says, Matthew. 10.40.
He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him
that sent me. We know also that though they have no power to add or change any
thing in the doctrine, yet the Pastors of the Church being assembled, can make
Laws concerning Ecclesiastical policy, use reprehensions, censures, and
excommunications against vices, and declare the doctrines, which Scripture has
condemned, erroneous.

But five things ought to be observed, about the limitation of that authority.

I. That this authority belongs to none but the Orthodox Church, which retains
the true ground of the faith, and by consequent that one has need to know well
which is the Orthodox Church, that teaches the true doctrine, before he
attributes any authority to her.

II. That this authority is subject unto the Word of God, and that no man ought
to presume beyond that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.

III. That the authority of the Church in the Apostles time, is far greater
then that of other ages. For these holy lights had the continual assistance of
Gods Spirit, and are still sitting upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel.

IV. That we have no law, and no order established by the Universal Church, but
the laws and rules that were established by the Apostles, who governed the
Universal Church, and did represent it. But all the Ecclesiastical laws made
since [that are worth keeping] were made by Councils assembled, not out of the
Universal Church, but out of the universal Roman Empire.

V. That although the Church of the whole world were met together, yet it can
never have so much authority as the holy Scripture, since it is subject unto
Scripture, that is, unto God, speaking by his Prophets and Apostles, as St.
Paul says, Romans 3. that the oracles of God were committed unto the Jews. The
Orthodox Church is a witness unto Scripture; and subjecting her self to the
authority of Scripture, does not presume to give her authority; For by
Scripture we understand not the paper and the characters, but the divine
doctrine contained in it.

That none may think that we impose upon our Adversaries that which they
believe not, or that others among them speak with more respect of Scripture
then Cardinal du Perron does, it is expedient to hear what their other Doctors
say of it.

Bellarmin in the 3. Book of the unwritten word, Chap. 9.. Probatur. Debuit
D^us judicem aliquem Ecclesiae providere, at iste judex non potest esse
Scriptura.
says, God ought to have provided a Judge for the Church; Now that Judge
cannot be Scripture. And soon after, It appears that Scripture is not a Judge.

Lindanus in his Panoplia, In the Index of the Chapters of the 5. Book.
Ecclesiam non esse ex Christi voluntate Scripturis alligatam, sed vivo ac
perpetuo Spiritus Sancti testimonio.
The Church has not been limited to the Scriptures by the will of God, but to
the living and perpetual testimony of the Holy Ghost.

The Jesuit Costerus, in the first Chapter of his Manual Christus Ecclesiam
suam a chartaceis scriptis pendere noluit.
Christ would not have his Church to depend upon writings in paper.

In the same place speaking of the Traditions of the Roman Church, and calling
them a more excellent kind of Scripture, he says, The excellency of that
Scripture exceeds much the holy Scriptures which the Apostles have left us in
parchment.

Salmeron in the first Prolegomen,. Nunc de Etsi Ecclesiae ac Scripturae
authoritas a Deo sit, illa tamen Ecclesiae antiquior est atque adeo dignior,
siquidem Scriptura propter Ecclesiam contexta est.
Although the authority of the Church and of Scripture be from God, yet the
authority of the Church is more ancient and of more worth, seeing that
Scripture was made for the Church. If that reason hold, the authority of the
people shall be above the laws and edicts of Kings, for those laws were made
for the people.

And in the second Prolegomen,. Septimo. Non mirum si Scriptura Ecclesiae Dei
quae Spiritum habet subjiciatur.
It is no wonder if Scripture be subject to the Church of God, which has the
Spirit. By that means the Law of God is subject unto men.

The Jesuit Serarius in the tenth Prolegomen. qu. 2. Huius Scripturae
praestantia, multis partibus superat scripturas quas nobis in membranis
Apostoli reliquerunt.
Scriptura ad causarum auditionem surda, ad examen stupida, ad proprie dictae
sententiae dictionem vicaria Dei judicis perinepta est.
Scripture is deaf to hear causes, and stupid to examine them, and is a most
unfit Vicar of God (the Judge) to pronounce a sentence properly so called.

Gregorius de Valentia Jesuit, in the 4. Book of the Analysis, Chap. 4.
Scripture by a secret judgment of God is as a rock of offense and a temptation
to the feet of the unwise, that those that will ground themselves upon it
alone, may most easily stumble at it, and go out of the way.

Stapleton in the 2. book of the authority of Scripture, Chap. 11. Dixi and
dico, non tam ipsius fidei regulam in se esse Scripturam, quam ipsarum
Scripturarum regulam esse fidem Ecclesiae.
I have said and say, that Scripture in it self is not so much the rule of
faith, as the faith of the Church is the rule of Scripture. Scripturam arcano
Dei judicio esse velut lapidem offensionis and in tentationem pedibus
insipientium; ut qui velint ea solae niti, facillime impingant and errent.


So a course is taken that Gods subjects shall rule his Law, and that God shall
become subject unto men. It is Charron's doctrine in his 3. Verity, 2. chap. We
acknowledge the Church to have, in our regard, more authority then Scripture.
Yea Scripture cannot be the last rule and the sovereign Judge of doctrine.

Truly the Roman Church must needs be acknowledged to have more authority then
Scripture, that is, then God speaking by his Prophets and Apostles, if it be so
that she have power to change that which God has commanded in the Scripture,
as M. du Perron will tell us hereafter.

By the way observe how little these men understand what they say. For
Bellarmin in the fore-alledged place, says that God ought to have provided a
Judge for his Church; And yet our Adversaries will have the Church to be Judge.
And the same men that ground the authotity of Scripture upon that of the
Church, will allege Scripture, when they are asked upon what ground the
authority of the Church is founded.

CHAP. 18. Proofs that the Word of God contained in the holy Scriptures, is
above the Church, and ought to be of greater authority with us then the Church.
I. THat unto which the Church is subject, is of greater authority then the
Church: and the Laws of a Sovereign Prince, are above the men subject unto hi
Laws. Now the Church is subject unto the Word of God, contained in the holy
Scriptures, for they contain the laws of the Sovereign God. Then they have more
authority then the Church which is subject to these Laws. Should that man have
been suffered in Moses his time, that would have said that the people of Israel
was above the Law of God given by Moses? or that the Priests and Levites gave
authority to that Law, whereas that Law did establish the Priests and gave them
authority?

II. The authority of God commanding, is always greater then the authority of
men to whom God gives commandments in his Word. If God in Scripture gave
authority to the Church above Scripture, he would give her also authority above
her self. For it is God that speaks in the holy Scriptures.

III. If we do not believe God speaking in the Scriptures, but because the
Church commands it, men should be more credible then God.

IV. That which is subject to error, and is guided by Pastors subject to be
led away by evil affections of pride, covetousness and hatred, must needs have
less authority then that which is exempt from those vices. Now we have proved
before, that the Church is subject to these inconveniences, and that she can
err. And the Pastors may be led away by perverse affections. She must then have
less authority then Scripture which is exempt from all that.

V. If the authority of the Church be grounded upon Scripture, it is certain,
that the authority of Scripture is greater then that of the Church; For it is
Scripture that says, Tell it unto the Church. If he hear not the Church, let
him be unto thee as a Pagan and a Publican: And without the authority of
Scripture we should not so much as know that there must be a Church in the
world. Our adversaries go about to prove the authority of the Roman Church by
texts of Scripture; They do then acknowledge that Scripture has more authority
then their Church.

VI. The same is evident, in that the holy Scripture commands the Church and
gives her Laws. But the Church does not command Scripture; only she declares
that such a book is Scripture, and is a witness and keeper of his truth. And by
making that declaration, she does nothing but what she is bound to do. Thereby
she makes profession of the obedience which she owes unto Scripture. Now to
command, is a thing of far greater worth and authority then to be a witness
only.

VII. The Apostle St. Paul, Ephesians. 2.20. foundeth the Church upon the Prophets
and Apostles. You are built (says he) upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets. He means not that the Church is built upon the persons of the
Apostles and Prophets, who were dead, or mortal, but upon their doctrine
contained in the holy Scriptures.

VIII. If this proposition be well examined, that the authority of the Church
over Us, is greater then that of Sccipture, it will be found void of common
sense; For this word Us signifies no other thing but the Church: So the sense
of that proposition will be, That the authority of the Church over the Church,
is of greater authority then that of Scripture. And if by that word Us the
people only be understood, then that proposition is false in respect of the
Pastors.

IX. Every Judge between two parties, must be acknowledged by both the parties.
Now Scripture is acknowledged both by us and by our Adversaries to be the true
word of God; But we acknowledge not the Roman Church to be the true Church.
Wherefore the Roman Church cannot be Judge of our controversies: Otherwise she
should be both Judge and Party, and should be Judge in her own cause.

X. There is but one holy Scripture, but there be many dissenting Churches,
which should be made friends before we can know which must judge us, if so be
that the Church must be our Judge: For the Greek and the Syrian will pretend to
be Judges as well as the Roman, as being more ancient.

XI. If the Roman Church be not grounded upon the Word of God contained in the
Scriptures, our Adversaries must produce some other ground, and divine proof
upon which it is grounded; which they can never do.

XII. We desire also to know whether in the Controversy concerning the
authority of the Church, or in the question, whether the Church be Judge, the
Church must be Judge; and whether she be Judge of her own duty, and of the Laws
to which God has subjected her. Shall the Church judge without erring, whether
the Church can err? Also we should be told before, whether the Pope be subject
unto Scripture? for if he be subject to Scripture, he is not a Sovereign Judge
in the points of Faith; and the power of altering that which God commands in
Scripture is falsely attributed unto him; if he be not subject to Scripture, he
is then above God, and exempted from his obedience.

XIII. But what Decrees of the Church can be brought which give authority to
Scripture? Shall they bring the Canons of the Councils? But Scripture had her
full authority before these Councils. And if these Canons give authority to the
holy Scripture, then these Canons are the holy Scripture with more reason then
that which we call so: For that which makes a thing to be holy and authentical,
has need to be more holy and authentical. Why then are they not inserted in
the holy Scripture? But that is altogether impossible, seeing that the Canons
of the Councils which define what Books of Scripture must be Canonical, are
contrary to one another: For the Canons of the Councils of Laodicea, and
Carthage, and Trent, dissent about the Catalogue of the Canonical Books.

XIV. Should that man have been suffered in the Church of Israel, who had said
that the High Priest had more authority then the Law of God? and that the
authority of the Law was grounded upon that of the High Priest? whereas the
authority of the High Priest was grounded upon the Law of God, whereby he had
been established in his charge. Without question such a man should have been
stoned, unless he had been held for a mad man. If then the authority of the Law
did not depend from the lawful High Priests, is it like that in our days it
depends from the Roman Popes, whose Office is but imaginary, and invented by
men?

XV. Now if the authority of the Church be brought in question, must the Church
her self be Judge in that cause? Or if that cause be judged by Scripture, shall
then Scripture be Judge of the Church?

XVI. And though it were granted that the authority of the Church is greater
over us then that of Scripture, yet it must be presupposed that such an
authority is not proper, but to a Church which is not heretical, and retains
the true doctrine. Now one cannot know whether a Church have the true doctrine
conformable unto Gods Word, but by examining her Doctrine by the Word of God
contained in the holy Scripture. And so we must still return to Scripture, and
acknowledge it for the Judge of the Church, before we can ascribe any authority
to the Church.

St. Austin is very express upon that question. In the XI. Book against Faustus
the Manichean, chap. 5. Tanquam in sublimi sede constituta est, cui serviat
omnis intellectus.
The Holy Scripture is set up in a certain high seat, to which every faithful
and pious understanding must serve. And in the Book of the Unity of the Church,
chap. 2. Puto quod in Christi verbis potius Ecclesiam quaerere debemus qui
veritas est and optime novit corpus suum.
We must seek the Church in the words of Christ, who is the Truth, who knows
very well his own body: And a little after, I will have the Church showed to
me, not by humane Precepts, but by divine Oracles. And chap. 3. Ergo in
Scripturis Canonicis quaeramus Ecclesiam, Let us then seek the Church in the
Canonical Scriptures. Let M. du Perron expound Austin as he will, saying, that
Austin will have us to learn of Scripture, that the Church must be always
eminent and in greater number; For always this remains, that St. Austin will
have those marks of eminency and multitude to be learned out of Scripture, and
by consequent that we must address our selves to Scripture before we know the
Church, and that Scripture in that point is Judge of the Church. And if in one
point, why not also in other points. Basil in the 80. Epistle to Eustathius,
(...).
Let the divinely inspired Scripture judge us. Clemens Alexandrinus in the
third of the Stromates, (...).
In the search of things we make use of Scripture to judge. And Austin 18.
chapter of Grace and Free Will, Sedeat inter nos judex Apostolus Johannes, Let
the Apostle John sit Judge between us.

CHAP. 19. Reasons of our Adversaries to the contrary.
NOw let us see what reasons our Adversaries can have to set man above God, and
make the authority of the Word of God to depend from the authority of men.

1. They say that without the authority of the Church, one should not know that
this is the Scripture, and that such and such Books are Canonical; Whence they
conclude that the Church has more authority then Scripture.

I could make an argument like that, and with better reason, saying, that
without the authority of holy Scripture, one should not know that there is a
Church in the world, and that by the Scripture one discerns which Church is
the best, and therefore that Scripture has more authority. But to answer
directly, I maintain that it is not by the authority of the Church, that one
knows that this is Scripture, but by the testimony of the Church. The Church
neither ordains nor commands, nor makes that these Books be the holy
Scripture, but only testifies and declares that these Books are the holy
Scripture. The Churches authority does not make us become bound to receive
Scripture, since her self is bound to receive it. It does not belong to
subjects to ordain what Laws they must obey. And all that the Councils declare
upon that, is but a profession, and a declaration of their obedience, and an
acknowledgement of the perfection of the Word of God contained in the holy
Scriptures.

That by this declaration the Church cannot pretend any authority above
Scripture, it appears, because heretical Churches make the same Declaration,
and bear the like testimony unto Scripture: Yea it may happen that he who has
received the holy Scripture from the Church, will by that Scripture justly
reprove the Errors of that very Church. As if one has showed me the Kings
Edicts, it does not follow that he is above those Edicts. Likewise if the
Church testify unto me that this is Scripture, it does not follow that the
Church is above the Scripture; else the Stationers should be above all the Laws
of the Kingdom.

Besides, the testimony of the Church is not to be received, unless she be pure
in the faith. Now whether she be pure in the Faith, one cannot know but by the
holy Scripture, which in that question is not only a Witness, but a Judge and
speaks with authority.

I say more, That the testimony which a Church pure in the faith delivers to
an ignorant person, that such Books are Divine and Canonical, is in regard of
that ignorant person a doubtful and weak testimony, because he knows not
whether that Church be Orthodox and worthy to be credited. He shall never have
a certain belief that these Books are Divine, until by the hearing or reading
of the Doctrine contained in them, God illuminate his understanding, and touch
his heart. For the trust which we ought to have in the Word of God contained in
the holy Scriptures, is an effect of Gods Spirit, and cannot be grounded upon
the only testimony of men. It is by Faith that we believe Scripture: Now the
Church does not give that Faith, but it is an effect of God Spirit.

As the Samaritans, Joh. 4. having believed with a light belief to a woman's
testimony, who had told them that Jesus was the Christ, having since heard
Jesus Christ himself, said to the woman, It is no more for thy word that we
believe, but our selves have heard and known that this is truly the Christ the
Savior of the world; So it happens that an ignorant man who has received
Scripture by the probable testimony of the Church where he lives, when
afterward he has got instruction by Scripture, does not ground himself upon
the testimony of men, but is himself touched with the effectual power of that
Word, and is instructed by experience.

It is an Error to say, that one cannot prove by Scripture, that Scripture is
holy and divine: For as the Sun is seen by his own light, and needs no other
witness; Likewise the Word of God, more piercing then any two-edged sword,
makes the faithful that have received it, sufficiently to feel that it is a
divine Word; neither is there any need of any other proof, or to have it
authorized by men. Besides, one part of Scripture is confirmed by the other.
The New Testament alleges the Old, and the Old foretells the New. Moses and
Elias appear to Jesus Christ in the Mountain. Peter bears testimony to the
Epistles of Paul.

Then the same reason may be retorted against our Adversaries; and we may say
that the Church cannot bear testimony to her self that she is the true Church;
and that another witness, and that infallible, must be had, and some other then
her self must give her authority. Now that other, without doubt, is God
speaking in his Word.

Our Adversaries insist, and say, that such and such Books are not Canonical,
but by the authority of the Church. But we have said already, that the Churches
declaration that such and such Books must be held for the Rule and Canon of the
Faith, does not make those Books to be sacred and divine, and to be the Rule of
Faith. And that by such a Declaration the Church gives no authority to
Scripture, but professes her subjection to Scripture.

By the way, we must know that the knowledge that such and such Books are
Canonical, is not a Proposition of Divinity, but of History: For to be
Canonical, signifies not to be holy or divine, but to have been received in the
Church as Divine, and as a Canon or rule of Faith. Wherefore some Books have
been Canonical at one time, and not at another; some are received as Canonical
in some Churches, not in another. But before any Council had made a Canon or
Catalogue of the holy Scriptures, these Books were divine, and of Sovereign
authority.

But let us hear their further Objections. That which is more ancient (say
they) has more authority. Now the Church is more ancient then Scripture; Ergo,
It has more authority then Scripture. Of this argument both the Propositions
are false: It is false, that whatsoever is more ancient, has more authority:
The people is more ancient then either the Laws, or the Kings that govern the
People; and yet the People is subject to the Law and the King. Now Scripture is
the Law of the Church. Likewise that the Church is more ancient then Scripture,
is a Proposition liable to exceptions: For that which Scripture says of the
Nature of God, of his Counsels, of the works of Creation, and of the Election
of the faithful, is more ancient then the Church.

This Objection they press very much. That which speaks not, cannot be a Judge:
Now Scripture speaks not; It is a dumb Rule says the Jesuit In his Book
against the Confession of Faith of the French Churches upon the 5. Article.
Arnoux. Then there is need of a speaking Judge, and that Judge is the Church,
that is, the Pope and his Prelates. The Jesuit Salmeron 2. Prolegom.. Altera.
Add mysticorum and spiritualium sensuum varietates quod est nutibus and signis
obscurius loqui, perinde atque muti faciunt and histriones.
Salmeron goes so far, as to say that Scripture is like dumb men, or like
Jack-Puddings and Players who make themselves to be understood with signs; so
horrible a hatred have these men conceived against the holy Scripture.

Indeed Paper and Ink speak not; but it is enough that God has spoken, and
pronounced the things contained in that Book, and inspired those that have
written it. It is enough, that it is a rule according to which they that are
called Judges must speak: Thus Isai. 8.20. sends the Church to the Law, and to
the Testimony, and if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no light in them. It would be a Capital crime, if the authority of the
Kings Edicts should be despised, because the Paper upon which the Edicts are
written does not speak. By speaking thus, they perceive not that by the same
reason they reject the Councils, the Fathers, and the Decrees of the Popes, who
are dead long since, and declare that they will not have them for Judges: For
the Tomes of the Councils, and the Fathers, and the Roman Decree speak no more
then the Paper and Ink of Scripture. And if the Word Judge displeases our
Adversaries, at least they should not take from Scripture the title of a
perfect Rule to rule our Faith, which is the title that Chrysostom gives to
Scripture in the 13. Homily upon the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, where he
calls it, (...).
an exact balance, a square and a rule of all things. But that does not suit
with our Adversaries humor; for Bellar. lib. 4. de Verbo Dei. cap. 12.
Scripturae finem proprium and praecipuum non fuisse ut esset regula fidei.
Bellarmine says, that the proper and principal end of Scripture was not to be
the Rule of Faith. And Stapleton; Stapl. lib. 2. de Authoritate Scripturae Dixi
and dico non tam ipsius sidei regulam in se esse Scripturam quam ipsarum
Scripturarum regulam esse fidem Ecclesiae.
Scripture is not so much the Rule of Faith, as the Faith of the Church is the
rule of Scripture. And Charron in the 3. verity, The Scripture is not, and
cannot be the last Rule and the Sovereign Judge of the Doctrine.

They add, that the Church is sooner known then Scripture; and that which is
more known, must have more authority. By that reason we should honor men more
then God, because we know them sooner, and more clearly then God. Besides, it
is false, that the Church is sooner known with a distinct knowledge then
Scripture, with such a knowledge as makes one truly know which is the true
Church. Without knowing the doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures, one may
see the Church as a society of men. But thereby one cannot know whether it be
the true and Orthodox Church: For so much cannot be known, but after one has
been instituted in the Doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures.

But, say they, the Church has changed some Laws contained in the Scripture,
as the prohibition of eating blood and strangled things, Act. 15. I answer,
that this Law ought to be kept, but that Scripture teaches us that it was
altered. That alteration is found 1 Cor. 10.27. which was written since that
order made Act. 15. for the Apostle Paul speaks thus, If any of them that
believe not, bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set
before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake. Now it might easily
happen that on the tables of the Infidels some blood was served, or some
strangled thing. Should the Church which is subject unto God, and to his Laws,
have authority to abolish Gods Laws? Must the Laws depend from the authority of
Subjects? By this means the Church shall have no other laws but such as she
will like and authorize.

One of the ordinariest reasons which our Adversaries use, to depress the
dignity of holy Scripture, and bring it under unwritten Tradition, is to say,
that God has commanded the Prophets and Apostles to speak and preach, not to
write. If the Priests had as carefully perused Scripture as they do their
Missal, they would not speak so; for they should have found Exodus 17.14. that
God said to Moses, Write this for a memorial in a Book. And Deuteronomy. 17.18. God
will have the King of Israel to keep a copy of the Book of the Law. God himself
writ his ten Commandments with his finger in the stone. And Isai. 30.8. God
says to his Prophet, Now go, write it before them in a Table, and note it in a
Book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever. And Jer. 36.2.
Take thee a Roll of a Book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken
unto thee. The same Commandment is given to Hab. 2.2. Write the Vision. And to
St. John, Rev. 1.11. What thou see write in a Book. The Apostle 2 Timothy 3.16.
says, that All Scripture is given by inspiration of God. Now the Inspiration
of God is stronger then a Commandment; for Commandments strike the cars, but
Inspiration changes the heart: Many disobey the Commandment of God; but one
cannot have a will to resist his Inspiration when it is once come. When God
inspires one to speak and to write, not only he commands him to speak or to
write, but also he speaks and writes by him: His Inspirations are not only
imperative, but operative. Wherefore Austin in the first Book of the consent of
Evangelists in the 7. chap. says, that Quicquid ille de suis sactis and dictis
nos legere voluit, hoc scribendum illis tanquam suis manibus imperavit.
Whatsoever God would have us to read of his deeds and sayings, he commanded
them to write it, as if they had been his own hands.

Finally, they go about to prove the authority of the Church above Scripture,
because the Church can add to Scripture, and give Laws not contained in
Scripture. This they call Traditions, and the unwritten word. Of which
Traditions (with Gods help) we will treat hereafter.

CHAP. 20. Examination of the places of the Ancients which M. du Perron
objecteth to this purpose.
BEing beaten out of all their reasons, they have recourse (as it is their
manner) to the Fathers. For it can hardly be but that in such an infinite
number of Books of the Ancients something may be found, which they may draw to
their advantage.

They say that the Fathers confute by the authority of the Church those
Heretics that rejected some part of Scripture, and that Tertullian in the Book
of Prescriptions would convince them by the authority of the Apostolical
Churches; That St. Austin against the Epistle of the Foundation, disputes thus
against the Manicheans; It is necessary for me to believe that Book if I
believe the Gospel, since the authority of the Catholic Church commends both
the one and the other Scripture.

We answer, that against those that reject Scripture or part of it, we must
indeed, out of necessity make use of some other proof or authority then that of
Scripture, which they reject. So when we dispute against Pagans that reject all
the holy Scripture, we employ humane reason to endeavor to make them receive
the Scripture. But hence it follows not, that we give authority to humane
reason over the Scripture.

Secondly, we must consider that Tertullian lived about an hundred and twenty
years after the Apostles, when it was easy enough to prove, that all the
Churches founded by the Apostles, had always kept the same Doctrine; but now
after so many ages and revolutions, that argument has no more place. Already
in Austins time the Orthodox Churches dissented about the number of the
Canonical Books, as he testifies in the 8. chapter of the 2. Book of the
Christian Doctrine, where he advises the faithful Reader In Canonicis
Scripturis Ecclesiarum Catholicarum quam plurium authoritatem sequatur. In eis
quae non recipiuntur ab omn^bus praeponat eas quas plures gravioresque
accipiunt.
to receive those Books for Canonical, which most Churches receive; and where
the Churches do not agree, to follow those which have the greater authority.

They object also this place of Austin against Cresconius in the 1. Book, chapter
33. The truth of Scripture is kept by us when we do that which the Universal
Church likes; which the very authority of Scripture does recommend. But it is
clear, that this text sets Scripture above the Church, since it groundeth the
authority of the Church upon Scripture. Besides, in that place Austin does not
speak of matters necessary to salvation, but of some customs of an indifferent
nature, wherein we willingly yield to the authority of a Church which is
Orthodox and sound in the Faith. But that soundness in the faith is not known
but by Scripture. And it is very considerable, that by the Universal Church
Austin meant the Churches of Asia, Africa, and Europe, which at that time
agreed, but now they are divided, and excommunicate one another. So that if
Austin lived now, he could speak so no more.

But the place which they most brag of, is, that of the same Austin in the 5.
chapter of the Book against the Epistle of the Foundation, where speaking of
himself before he was a Christian, he says, As for me, I had not believed the
Gospel, had not the authority of the Church moved me. But I see not how they
can thence infer that the Church has more authority over us then the Gospel. A
son may say, I should not fear God, nor believe his Gospel, had not my Fathers
authority brought me to it. Does it follow therefore that such a son
acknowledges his Fathers authority greater then that of God, or his Word? Only
he says, that God made use of that means to draw him to his fear. In the
beginnings God many times makes use of weak means, and probable reasons to draw
us to himself: But after, he gives us stronger reasons, and by his Spirit
gives us a Faith which is not grounded upon the testimony of men, but upon his
Word.

Observe by the way St. Austins style, crederem for credidissem, and commoveret
for commovisset. It is the custom of this Author, and of the Africans: as in
the 2. Book of the City of God, chap. 22. Collis Capitolinus ipse caperetur,
nisi saltem anseres Diis dormientibus vigilarent. And in the 2. Book of
Perseverance, chapter 9. Tyr and Sydon crederent si viderent haec signa: And in a
thousand other places he says, crederent for credidissent, as among others in
this place, which is thus alleged by Gerson Tom. 1. page 523.
Gerson, Evangelio non crederem nisi me authoritas Ecclesiae commovisset. And
which is more, Pope Leo the X. in the Bull Exurge, which is in the end of the
last Council of Lateran, alleges the same place in this manner, Vt dixerit
Augustinus se Evangelio non fuisse crediturum nisi Ecclesiae Catholicae
intervenisset authoritas. Andradius in the 2. book of the defense of the
Tridentine Faith, picks a quarrel with Durandus, because in that text of St.
Austin, by the Church, he understands only the Church of the time of the
Apostles. Wherein Durandus speaks not without reason.

CHAP. 21. Of the Authority of the Church to interpret Scripture infallibly.
THis question is one of those where impiety and tyranny are most open. The
Roman Church boasts that she cannot err, and that she is the infallible Judge
of all doubts and Controversies in Religion. Now the most part of the questions
of Religion is about the duty which the Church owes unto God. Must then the
Church be Judge of that duty which she owes unto God? And when the dispute is
about the authority of the Church, must the Church be Judge of her own
authority? The assuming of that power gives fair play to the Prelates to be
their own carvers, and to deal unto themselves such a game as they like best,
yea so far as to subject the Word of God unto their authority.

And indeed the Roman Church with the same pride attributes unto her self the
right and authority of judging of the sense of Scripture, and giving an
infallible interpretation of the same, of the like force and authority as the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles: For (say their Doctors) the Spouse only
knows the intention of her Bridegroom. And St. Peter says in his second
Epistle, that the There is in the Text no prophecy, etc. 2. Pet. 1.20.
Prophets are not of private interpretation.

And here they bestow calumnies upon us with a liberal hand, saying, that every
private man among us expounds Scripture after his own fancy, as being inspired
of God. But we take no such thing upon us: Rather we maintain that in things
necessary to salvation, Scripture is so clear, that it needs no Interpreter;
and the Interpretations that we use in our Sermons, and Books, are not ours,
but are drawn from Scripture, which expounds her self. And what
interpretation soever we bring, the sense of private men is never given among
us as a law.

For as there are two ways of judging, the one which is no more but
discerning, as when one judges of meats by the taste; the other which is
pronouncing Decrees and Judgments with authority: so there are two sorts of
interpretation of Gods Word; the one whereby each one says his opinion about
the sense of a Text of Scripture, as our Preachers and Commentators do; who
give not their interpretations for laws; neither does any hold himself of
necessity obliged to follow their opinion, but so far as it is grounded upon
Scripture. But there is an Interpretation which has the force of a law, as
when the King himself interprets his own Proclamation, or when a man clears
his Will by a Codicil: For that kind of intepretation, we use none but such as
God himself uses, when one text of Scripture does expound another. It is
proper to the Roman Church to ascribe to her self to be an infallible
Interpreter of Scripture, and to bring interpretations of equal authority with
the Word of God; and those interpretations taken for the most part, not from
the Word of God, but from the unwritten word.

The worst is, that such Interpretations are of greater authority with the
ignorant people then the Holy Scripture, since the people is not obliged to
follow the words of Scripture, but is subjected unto the interpretation of the
Roman Church.

I have much to do to persuade my self, that our Adversaries speak in good
earnest when they speak thus; For they plead for an Interpretation which is not
to be found, since there is no such thing in being, as an Interpretation or
Exposition of Scripture approved by the Universal Church. There is no Book of
which one may say, Behold the Ecclesiastical Exposition of Scripture allowed by
the Universal Church: Only diverse Comments and Sermons are found of Authors,
some old, some late, that dissent in their Interpretations; upon none of which
the Roman Church does pin her Faith.

How unjust is that claim of the Roman Church! to be an infallible Interpreter,
and Judge of those Texts which concern the authority of the Roman Church: for
so she will be Judge in her own cause, and in the question, Whether the Church
must be Judge, the Church her self shall be Judge.

Nothing is further from reason, then to require that men sinful and guilty
before God, such as we are all, be infallible Judges of the sense of that Law
by which their sin must be judged: As if Fellons in the Jayl would be Judges of
the sense of that Law which concerns their crime.

That Master to whom his servants take the liberty to say, You have commanded
us such a thing, but we give you to your command such an interpretation, must
not expect much obedience from such servants. By such interpretations servants
might turn their Master out of doors. The Glossaries of the Decretals, Cause.
25. qu. 1. Canon. Sunt quidam, are so bold as to say, That Papa dispensat in
Evangelio interpretando ipsum.
the Pope dispenses in matter of the Gospel, by giving interpretation to it.
And we shall see hereafter that the Church of Rome contradicts Scripture
under that color of Interpretation.

Pride and Ambition have hatched that Monster, and entangled the spirits of men
with violent interpretations, fitted to the profit of those jolly men, who
triumph over the ignorance of the people. But things necessary to salvation are
so clearly set down in Scripture, that they need no Interpreter: as St. Austin
says in his fiftieth Treatise upon St. John, Quaedam in Scripturis tam
manifesta sunt, ut potius auditorem quam expositorem desiderent.
There are things so clear in Scripture, that they require rather a Hearer then
an Interpreter. And in the Book of the Unity of the Church, chap. 16. These
words, In thy seed shall all Nations be blessed, need no Interpreter. And a
little after, These words, Christ must have suffered and risen the third day,
need no Interpreter, etc. As these words, This Gospel of the Kindom shall be
preached over all the world, etc. need no Interpreter, etc. Sicut non eget
interpret Sinite utraque crescere usque ad messem, quia cum egeret interpret,
ipse Dominus interpretatus est.
As these words, Let both grow until the harvest, need no Interpreter, because
when they needed interpretation, Christ himself did interpret them. And if some
hard Text be found in Scripture, it is better to be ignorant of the sense of
it, then to presume to be infallible Judge of the Word of God. Take me that
Text, the sense whereof is most controverted, even these words, This is my
Body. The way is easy to end the difference, by keeping close to the form of
the Institution, that is, by speaking and doing as Jesus Christ spoke and did
with his Disciples, without any more dispute; believing that Jesus Christ brake
and gave bread to his Disciples, and that the bread which he gave is his body,
and that it is the remembrance of him; that he drunk the fruit of the Vine, and
that we eat bread: For all these are words of Scripture, in which no command is
found to worship that which we eat, or to sacrifice the body of Jesus Christ.

Here any man that has not put his own reason under interdict, will easily
judge what clearing of Scripture can be expected from the Pope, and the
Prelates, and Doctors of his Church: For is it credible that those that hide
the Scripture from the people, would seriously go about to clear it? or that
they would have Scripture to be understood, when they will not have it seen?

Let any man of sound judgment, consider whether the High Priests which in the
time of King Manasseh had suffered the Book of the Law to be lost, or those
Priests to whom the Prophet Malachy makes that reproach, that they had
corrupted the Law, should have been good Intepreters of the Law, which they had
lost or corrupted?

Should the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair have been chosen to be
Interpreters of the Law, seeing that the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 5. repurged the Law
from their false interpretations? and Matthew. 15. reproacheth them, that they
had transgressed the Law of God by their Tradition?

Had Pope John XXIII. who denied the immortality of the soul, been a good
Interpreter of the Texts that speak of eternal life? Should the Popes, who set
up Brothel-houses at Rome, and make a sale of Dispensations and Absolutions, be
good Interpreters of those Texts that prohibit Fornication, and the traffic
of spiritual things? Should the Pope, who forbids the marriage of Bishops, and
Priests, be a good Interpreter of the Text of the Apostle? Let the Bishop be
blameless, the husband of one wife, -- having his children in subjection with
all gravity? 1 Timothy 2. Should the Roman Church (which has cut off from the
Offices and Breviaries the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, or any likeness, etc.) be a faithful Interpreter of that
Commandment which she has suppressed?

In a word, it is certain, that if Felons be Judges of the sense and
interpretation of Laws, they will be sure always to bring favorable
Interpretations to their crimes. Neither is there any thing so unjust as this
Doctrine, that makes sinners infallible Interpreters of the sense of Gods Laws,
whereby their sin is condemned. But they much deceive themselves, if they
believe that God in the last day will judge them, not according to the words of
his Law, but according to their interpretation.

And whosoever will sift narrowly that Proposition, That the Pope with his
Roman Church is a Sovereign and infallible Interpreter of Gods Law, and of the
holy Scriptures, shall find that the Pope under the name of an Interpreter
makes himself a Lawgiver, yea that he lifts up himself above God; since by
that rule the people is no more subject and bound to the words of the Law which
God has pronounced, but to the Interpretations of that Sovereign and
infallible Interpreter; who will not fail to give such Interpretations as will
be lucrative to himself, and will exalt his Empire. It is certain, that if
there were in France such a Sovereign and infallible Interpreter of the Kings
Edicts, he could give Interpretations which would strip the King of all
authority. It is by those Interpretations that the Pope was raised to such a
high Throne.

CHAP. XXII. Seven differences between our Interpretations of Scripture, and
those of the Roman Church.
COmparing our way of interpreting the Scripture with that of the Roman Church,
I find seven differences between them.

I. The first is, that our interpretations are taken from Scripture it self;
but the interpretations of the Roman Church, are not fetched from Scripture, but
from the unwritten word. The Council of Trent interprets these words of the
Lord, Do this in remembrance of me; as if thereby he instituted an unbloody
sacrifice of his body in the Eucharist: But of that unbloody sacrifice of the
Lords body, Scripture makes no mention.

Scripture says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Mark 4.10.
and him only shall thou serve. The interpretation of our Adversaries, is, that
the Lord will have the cult of latria deferred unto God alone; for (say they)
the cult of dulia is for the Saints: But that distinction is not found in
Scripture, which will have the cult of dulia deferred unto God; as Romans 12.11.
(...), yielding dulia unto God: And Mat. 6.24. You cannot (...), yield dulia
unto God and to Mammon.

Jesus Christ said to Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not.
Luke 22.31.
They interpret it as a promise made to Peter and to the Popes his successors,
that they cannot err in the faith: But of Popes and of a succession in the
Apostleship of Saint Peter, there is not one single word in the whole Scripture.

Austin in his book of the unity of the Church, chap. 5. acknowledges no other
way to interpret Scripture but by Scripture it self. Quae si in Scripturis non
invenirentur, nullo modo esset unde aperirentur clausa, and illustrarentur
obscura.
If (says he) those things were not found in the Scriptures, there would be no
way to lay open those things that are hid, and to clear those that are dark.
And in the second book of Christian Doctrine, chap. 6. None almost of those
obscurities are brought forth, but are found very clearly delivered in other
places. And in the ninth chapter, Ad obscuriores locutiones illustrandas de
manifestioribus sumantur exempla.
To clear the darker expressions, let examples be taken from the clearer
places. And Basil in his Asceticks, in the Answer to the two hundred sixty
seventh interrogation: The things which seem obscurely said in some places of
Scripture, are expounded in other places, and clearly set down.

II. The second difference is, that when we have expounded Scripture out of
Scripture, we exhort the people to read and consult the places; But the Roman
Church removes Scripture from the eyes of the people: Their Preachers allege
Scripture in Sermons; but they will not suffer the people to go and see whether
they have faithfully alleged it. The interpreters of the Imperial Laws, Note.
put the Text of the Laws before their interpretation; But the Pope and the
Roman Church give an interpretation without a Text; and while they interpret
the Text of Scripture unto the people, they forbid the people to see the Text
of Scripture, thereby giving to themselves license of deceiving, and
insinuating their contradictions unto Scripture under color of interpretation.

III. We say that Scripture needs no interpreter in things necessary to
salvation, and that it is clear enough of it self: But our Adversaries find it
obscure; And they have some reason for it: Fot one with Argus eyes cannot find
in Scripture the invocation of Saints, nor the sacrifice of the Mass, nor the
succession of the Pope in the place of Saint Peter. We say then with Saint
Austin in the second book of the Christian Doctrine, in the ninth chapter, That
In his quae aperte posita sunt in Scripturis, inveniuntur illa omnia quae
continent fidem moresque vivendi.
in the things that are clearly set down in Scripture, all things are found
which concern faith and manners to live well: And that so much as is clear in
Scripture, is sufficient unto salvation.

IV. We give not our interpretations for Laws; but the Roman Church attributes
that perfection to her self, to judge infallibly of the sense of Scripture.

V. We do not wrest Scripture by violent interpretations, and put it not upon
the wrack to make it serve ambition or covetousness. Pope Nicolas the I. in the
Epistle to the Greek Emperor Michael, proves the Papal power, Porro
specialiter ost^nsum est ut ea mactaret and manducaret. Illi soli jussum est ut
rete plenum piscibus-ad littus traheret. 1 Cor. 2.
because it was said to Saint Peter, Kill and eat; and because that privilege
was granted to Peter alone to draw a net full of fishes to Land. And Pope
Boniface the VIII. Extravagante Vnam sanctam, proves his sovereignty and
primacy, because it is written, In principio creavit Deus coelum and terram. In
the beginning God created heaven and earth. And because Saint Paul says,
Spiritualis homo judicat omnia; The Spiritual man discerns all things: Whence
he infers in the same place, that the Pope must judge of all things. And
because Saint Peter having said, Here is two Swords, Jesus Christ answered, It
is enough, he gathers that the two swords, the spiritual and the temporal,
belong unto the Pope: With such interpretations brought by the Popes and their
Councils, one might fill many pages. The last Council of Lateran, in the IX
Session, alleges these words of Psalm 72. All the Kings of the earth shall
worship him; and will have that understood of the Pope. Bellarmin in the fifth
book de Pontifice, chap. 8. and in his book against Barchlay, chap. 25.
proves, that the Pope may dispose of the life and crown of Kings;. Praetere^
and. Item.
because the Lord said unto Peter, Feed my Lambs: And in the first book de
Clericis, chap. 19. he proves that Priests must abstain from women, because
the Priests were commanded to have their loins girt about, and to wear drawers.
The same thing is proved by Pope Innocent the I. Did. 82. Can. Proposuisti.
because it is written, They that are in the flesh, cannot please God.

VI. Also that reproach cannot be objected unto us, that we bring
interpretations which are rather evident contradictions and corruptions of
Scripture, as the Roman Church does. As when Jesus Christ said to the thief,
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise; the interpretation of the Roman
Church, by Paradise, understands Hell: And when the Law says, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy strength; they understand that God contents
himself with part of our strength; for if he would have all our strength, it
should be impossible to make works of overplus. And when Christ says, Drink ye
all of this; they expound it, that this Commandment obliges none but
Clergymen; so that the word all must signify not all. And when Saint Paul
says, Let the Bishop be the Husband of one Wife; by the word be, they
understand have been, but be no more. And when Saint Paul 1 Cor. 10.16. says,
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? by the
bread, they understand not bread but flesh; and by breaking, they understand
not breaking; for the body of the Lord can no more be broken; and by the
communion of the body of Christ, they understand not the communion with that
body, but the very body of Christ.

VII. Finally, our interpretations of Scripture are not ridiculous, and done
purposely to bring the word of God into contempt, such as many interpretations
used by the Roman Church; those especially which the second Council of Nice
brings for the adoration of images. There these Texts are alleged, Show me thy
face, and make me hear thy voice, Cant. 2. God created man after his image and
likeness. And None having lighted the candle, lays it under a bushel. Whence
the Council infers that images must be worshipped. And these goodly proofs
are praised and defended by Pope Adrian, That book of Adrian is found in the
third Tome of the Councils.
who has written a book purposely for the defense of that Council.

I will add one Text more, which alone for all, may show the horrible
profanation, and intolerable license of the Adversaries, to corrupt Scripture
under color of interpretation. Christ, Mat. 16. said to Peter, Whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. 1. First, our Adversaries will have these
words to be spoken not only to Saint Peter, but also to the Popes which bear
themselves as Successors of the Primacy and Apostleship of Saint Peter;
although Scripture give no successor to Saint Peter in his Apostleship, nor in
the conduct of the Universal Church, no more then to the other Apostles. 2.
Secondly, by virtue of these words, Whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, the
Pope loses also under the earth, and draws souls out of Purgatory. 3.
Thirdly, The power of loosing the pains of sins, being given to the Apostles,
the Pope extends that power so far as to dissolve contracts, and separate
lawful marriages, contracted and blessed in the Church: Also by virtue of these
words, Whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. the Pope loses oaths and vows, and
loses Subjects from the bonds of subjection and fealty to their sovereign
Prince, and gives license to Christians to break their faith; and violate their
Oath. 4. Fourthly, the Pope has reserved some cases unto himself, and certain
sins in great number, which are called reserved cases, of whom, none but he can
give the absolution but at the point of death: And yet Christ, Mat. 18. said to
all the Apostles, and by consequence to all their successors, Whatsoever you
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose,
etc. And Joh. 20.23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they shall be remitted; without
reserving any case to Saint Peter. 5. Fifthly, by that Text, the power of
binding, and that of loosing, are equally given to Peter; and one of those two
powers reaches no further then the other: Yet by virtue of that Text, the Pope
pretends to loose in Purgatory; but there he never binds, and never made use of
that power toward the souls in Purgatory. 6. Finally, the judicial power of
binding and loosing, given unto Peter and the Apostles, reaching but to
Ecclesiastical pains, the Pope extends that power even to the judicial seat of
God, as if those that are absolved by men, were no more accountable before God.
Thus upon one only Text, they commit six notable depravations mingled with
impiety, under color of interpretation.

CHAP. XXIII. Examination of the Reasons which Cardinal du Perron brings in the
fifth chapter, for the authority of the Church, to interpret Scripture
infallibly.
THe Cardinal in the fifth chapter of his first book against his Majesty of
Great Britain, alleges Hierom, saying, that Hier. contra Lucifer.
the Scriptures consist not in the reading, but in the intelligence. That is
true; but is it of any force to attribute that perfection to the Church to
interpret Scripture infallibly? Especially, of what force is that to authorize
the interpretations of the Roman Church, rather then those of the Greek or the
Ethiopian Church? And after all, where shall we find the interpretations of the
Roman Church? For they are nowhere extant; for none of the interpretations that
go about, are generally approved by public authority.

He adds that it is necessary to be first certain of the interpretation of
Scripture, Page 21.
and that by an infallible way: But it is an error to think, that in matters
necessary to salvation, Scripture stands in need of interpretation. Chrysostom
upon 2 These. 2. speaks thus, (...).
All things that are in the divine Scriptures, are clear and right; All that is
necessary, is clear in them. Austin in the second book of Christian Doctrine,
chap. 9. In his quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia
quae continent fidem moresque vivendi.
In the things that are openly set down in the Scripture, all things are found
that concern faith and manners to live well: And in the sixteenth chapter of
the book of the unity of the Church, he brings many Texts of Scripture which he
says have need of no interpretation.

Another reason of M. du Perron, is, that all the conclusions of Faith, which
are not found in express terms, and incapable of ambiguity in Scripture, that
they may be conclusions of faith; and infallible decisions must be inferred one
of these three ways; by humane reasoning, or by private inspiration, or by the
authority of an outward mean interposed by God, between the Scripture and us,
etc. Now that mean he says to be the Church, to which he gives infallible
authority to interpret Scripture. But still he stumbleth at that stone,
presupposing against truth, that in points necessary to salvation, Scripture
has need of an interprter.

It will not be found in express terms in Scripture, that God governs the
world by his providence: Yet that we believe, not by humane reasoning, nor by
revelation, nor by the authority of any Interpreters, but by Scripture, which
says the same thing in equivalent terms, Ephesians. 1. Matthew. 10.
when it teaches us, that God does all things according to the pleasure of his
will: That a Sparrow falls not without his will, and that the hairs of our head
are numbered. Then the Cardinals argument halteth, because his enumeration is
imperfect; For besides these three means there is a fourth, sufficient to
establish a doctrine, when a proposition which is not foud in express terms,
and in so many syllables in Scripture, is found there in equivalent terms,
which comes all to one.

CHAP. 24. Of the authority of the Church, to alter that which God commands
in Scripture. Confutation of the Cardinal.
AMong the impious doctrines, whereby the enemies of the heavenly truth spit
against Heaven, this is one of the prime and boldest, to say, that it is in the
power of the Church, to alter that which God commands in Scripture, that is,
to make commandments contrary to Gods Commandments. This M. du Perron teaches,
Page 674.
in the 3. observation of the second book, in the 3. chap. the title whereof
is, Of the authority of the Church, in the alteration as well of the things
contained in Scripture, as of those that are delivered to the Church by
Apostolical tradition. This is exalting men above God, and subjecting the Word
of God unto the will of man. And in the 675. page he says, There are some
things written which the Church has altered and changed in the practice, as
the ordinance of abstaining from blood and things strangled, which is set down
in express terms in Scripture, Acts 15.

I answer, that the Church should be obliged to keep that Commandment to this
day, and could by no means be dispensed from it, but that the alteration of
that Commandment is found in Scripture it self. For the Apostle St. Paul has
writ the first Epistle to the Corinthians many years after the prohibition of
eating blood and strangled things. Now in that Epistle the Apostle teaches,
that all such Commandments, and all distinctions of meats are abolished, when
he says in the 10. chap. v. 27. If any of them that believe not, bid you to a
feast, and you are disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you eat, asking no
question for conscience sake. Observe also, that the Church in the Apostles
time, had an authority which the Churches of the following ages had not; For
the Apostles which governed the Universal Church, had the Spirit of God in
greater measure. If they then moved by Gods Spirit, have altered something in
their own constitutions about the discipline of the Church, it follows not
that the Churches of posterior ages have authority to alter the constitutions
of the Apostles.

The Cardinal brings another example of altering by the authority of the
Church, that which is contained in Scripture; namely, the changing of the
immersion, or dipping which was usual in Baptism, into aspersion. But it is
false that there is any command in Scripture of baptizing with immersion: And
therefore it cannot be truly said, that herein the Church has made any
alteration in Gods Ordinance. Neither is it found, that the Roman Church has
constituted any thing about that, or made any law to alter the institution of
Jesus Christ in that point.

The Cardinal makes bold to add to these, the removing of the cup from the
Eucharist; for he confesses that Last chapter of the Communion under the two
kinds. p. 1109, and 1115.
it is Christ's institution that we should take the Sacrament under the two
kinds, but he says, that the Church has dispensed from that Commandment. For
(says he) to the Church it belongs to judge what mysteries of Christ are
dispensable, and acknowledges that the Church had the power to use both
dispensation and alteration in this: Words able to make any man's hair to stand,
if he loves God; For thereby the Cardinal declares that the Roman Church is
not subject to Gods Commandment, since she can dispense from it; yea that the
Roman Church is above God, since she can change his laws and correct his
command.

Now that none think that herein M. du Perron is singular, and has followed
his own ordinary inclination to despise the holy Scripture, it will be to good
purpose, to show that it is the ordinary language of the most famous Doctors of
the Roman Church.

Vasquez Tom. 3. Disput. 260. number. 60. Licet concederemus hoc suisse
Apostolicum praeceptum, nibilominus Ecclesia and summus Pontifex potuerunt
illud justis de causis abrogare. Neque enim major fuit potestas Apostolorum
quam Ecclesiae and Pontificis in ferendis praeceptis.
The Jesuit Vasquez, speaking of the Lords Commandment, Drink ye all of this,
says, Though we should grant that it was a Commandment of the Apostles, yet
the Church and the sovereign Prelate had the power to abolish it for just
causes; For the power of the Apostles in making ordinances, was no greater then
that of the Church and the Pope.

Andradius in the 2. Book of the Tridentine faith, Minime vero majores nostri
religione, and pietate praestantes haec Apostolorum; and quam plurima alia
decreta refigere in animum induxissent, nisi intellexissent, etc.
Our ancestors, men excellent in religion and piety, would never have
disanulled those decrees of the Apostles and many more, but that, etc. Whence
he infers, that Liquet minime illos errasse qui dixerunt Romanos Pontifices
posse nonnunquam in legibus dispensare a Paulo, and quatuor Conciliis.
those have not erred, who said that the Popes of Rome may sometimes dispense
from obeying the Apostle Paul, and the four first Councils.

The Council of Trent in the V. Session, was so bold, as to pronounce that the
concupiscence forbidden by the law is no sin; And that although the Apostle
Paul calls it sin, yet to speak truly and properly, it is no sin. The words of
the Council are, Hanc concupiscentiam quam aliquando Apostolus peccatum
appellat, sancta Synodus declarat Ecclesiam Catholicam nunquam intellexisse
peccatum appellari, quod vere and proprie in renatis peccatum sit.
The holy Council declares, that the Catholic Church never understood that
concupiscence, which in some places the Apostle calls sin, be truly and
properly sin in the regenerate, that is, in the baptized. That venerable
Council declares, that if a baptized man covet his neighbors wife, he sins
not, although God forbid it in his Law, and St. Paul call that concupiscence
sin: And that the Apostle has neither truly nor properly spoken.

The Council of Constance in the XIII. Session, acknowledges that Jesus Christ
has instituted, that the people in the Eucharist should receive the two kinds,
and that the ancient Church has so practiced it, and yet decrees, that the
custom of giving the bread only to the people, be held for a law, which it is
not lawful to reject or to change, declaring them heretics which hold the
contrary; and commanding them to be punished by the Inquisition, that is, to be
burnt.

James Almain, a Sorbonist, in the book of the Ecclesiastical power, chap. 12.
seems to incline to that opinion, that the Pope cannot dispense from the divine
right: Nevertheless he alleges Panormitanus and Angelus, which say the
contrary; In the end, after some examples of permissions given by Popes, to
marry two sisters against the Word of God, he pronounces (as overcome by
experience) this goodly sentence; Ergo Papa potest dispensare in illis quae
sunt lege divina prohibita: Then the Pope can give dispensation in those things
that are forbidden by Gods Law.

Thomas Aquinas goes so far, as to say, that Thomas 2a 2^ qu. 1. Art. 13. Ad
solam authoritatem summi Pontificis pertinet nova edito Symboli.
the Pope can make a new edition of the Symbol, that is, to make a new
Christian Religion. Wherefore in the last Session of the Council of Florence,
the power is attributed unto the Pope, to add to the Symbol.

Cardinal Tolet, in the 1. book of the Sacerdotal institution, chap. 68.
excuses the Pope for not receiving the bigames [that is, those that have been
twice maried] unto the Priesthood, against the commandment of the Apostle: His
reason is, that Cum certum sit non omniae: quae Apostoli instituerunt, jure
divino esse instituta.
all that the Apostles have instituted, is not of divine right. It belongs then
to the Pope to judge and discern what is of divine right among the writings of
the Apostles, from that which is not. By which means, all that displeases him,
will be of humane right.

Bellarmin in the 2. chap. of the book against Barcklay, Pontifex potest
dispensare in vocis and juramentis quae Deus ipse jussit reddi, and quorum
solutio est de jure divino.
The Pope can give dispensations from vows and oaths which God has commanded
to be fulfilled, and the keeping whereof is of divine right. And in the 4. book
de Pontifice, chap. 5. Si Papa erraret in praecipiendo vitia, and prohibendo
virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes malas, nisi
vellet contra conscientiam peccare.
If the Pope did err, commanding vices and prohibiting virtues, the Church
should be obliged to believe, that vices are good, and virtues evil, unless she
would sin against conscience.

A thousand such passages of our Adversaries might be produced. The Canons and
Decrees of the Popes are full of those goodly sentences, That the Pope can
dispense against the Apostle and against the old Testament; Yea that he
dispenses against the Gospel by giving an interpretation to it. Also that the
Pope can of wrong make right, and of evil good; Of which I have given several
examples in the Preface of this Book.

To which I will add this corollary out of the Roman Decree, in the first
question of the 31. Cause. It is a Canon ascribed to Chrysostom, against second
marriages. It speaks thus Can. Hac ratione. Secundam quidem accipere secundum
praeceptum Apostli licitum est; secundum autem veritatis rationem vera
fornicatio est; sed cum permittente Deo public and licenter committitur, fit
honesta fornicatio.
To marry a second wife according to the Apostles command, is a lawful thing;
but according to the reason of truth, it is true fornication; Which being done
publicly and with license, God permitting it, an honest fornication is
committed. In the Roman Decree that Canon is suffered, in which the Apostle St.
Paul is accused to have commanded fornication, and authorized it by his
permission, and God himself is accused to have permitted it.

CHAP. 25. Which and of what nature must the marks of the Church be.
WE look not for the marks of the Church of the elect; She has no marks. God
alone knows them that are his, and marks them with the Spirit of adoption: 2 Timothy 2.19.
Nor for the marks of the Universal Church, which comprehends all them that
make profession to be Christians; That profession is her mark, about which
there is no dispute. The question is, touching the whole body of the Orthodox
Church joined in communion. It is demanded, by what external marks she may be
discerned from idolatrous, heretical, and schismatical Churches.

Those marks must be proper to that true Church, and perpetual. Also they must
be sensible, and more known then the Church, since by them the Church is
discerned. Wherefore if any marks of the Church be set forth, which be as much
or more proper to Pagans or Jews, or societies of impure Christians, as to the
true Church, or which be not always proper to the Church, or that be less
known then the Church, it is not a good mark; and we must look for other marks.
So much the Jesuit Salmeron teaches, in the XIII. Tome, in the 2. dispute upon
St. Paul's Epistles, saying, that Page 191. Ad idoneum signum tria necessaria
esse videntur. Vt sit verum, ut sit manifestum, ut alteri non quadret.
to be a mark three things are requisite. 1. That it be true. 2. That it be
evident. 3. That it be proper to none else. In 2am 2a Disp. 1. Quaest. 5.
Punct. 7.
Gregorius de Valentia says the same.

CHAP. 26. Of the true Mark to discern the true Church.
THe Word of God, without which we should not know that it is Gods will that
there be a Church in the world, teaches us also to know her, and to difference
her from other societies which err from the right way. That same word which
gives Laws to the Church, gives also the evidence to know her.

Our Lord Jesus, John 8. hereby knows them that are his, if they keep his
word. If you abide in my word, you shall be my Disciples indeed: And John 10.4,
and 7. The sheep hear the voice of the Shepherd, for they know his voice, but a
stranger they will not follow. Hereby then the true Church is known, which is
the flock of Jesus Christ, and the assembly of his Disciples, if she conform
herself unto the word of Jesus Christ, and follows the voice of the Son of God.
Thus the true mark of the true Church shall be conformity unto the Word of God,
and purity in the faith and true doctrine: Under which we comprehend also the
good and lawful administration of the Sacraments, and the legitimate order of
the Ministry; for these things are prescribed in the Word of God. That purity
in doctrine, and conformity to the Word of God is requisite, at the least in
the foundation, and in things necessary to salvation. Upon which foundation, if
any builds hay and stubble, that is, light and superfluous doctrines, yet not
impious, nor subverting the fundamental truth, the Apostle excludes not such a
one from the hope of salvation, 1 Cor. 3.15.

To this purpose serve the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.6. You shall keep these
Commandments and do them, for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the
sight of the nations which shall hear all these statutes, and say, This great
nation is a wise and understanding People. There God declares that the wisdom
of the Church is known by her doctrine.

The word Symbol is a proof in this question, for it signifies a mark and
livery. Then the Articles of our Creed are called the Symbol of the Christian
Church, because it is the mark of the true Church; and because by the
profession of that doctrine, and those doctrines that depend upon it, the
Church is known.

Wherein reason is evident. For to discern a pure Church from an impure, there
is no other way but to look whether it agrees with the rule of purity: It
being impossible to discern that Church which is pure in the faith, but by the
rule of the faith, which is the Word of God. The right rule is the only mark to
discern whether a thing be right; and the true Church is not discerned but by
the knowledge of the truth.

And since the true Church is opposed to heretics and schismatics, it is
certain, that as heretical Churches have no other marks to be known by, but the
false doctrine, likewise the true Church is known only by the true doctrine.

That is the true Church, which is joined together by the profession of the
true faith and Communion of the Sacraments. This definition of the Church is
received by the Adversaries. Whence it follows, that the true Church is
discerned by that profession of the true faith; For the definitions of things
are purposely made to know and discern them, and must be more easy to know
then the thing defined.

Now because the marks to know a thing, must be more known then that thing;
upon that a dispute is moved between us and our Adversaries, which of the two
is the easier to discern, the true Church, or the true doctrine. They affirm
that the Church is more known, and more easy to know then the true faith and
doctrine. We on the contrary maintain, that the true faith and doctrine is more
easy to be known then the true Church, yea that it is impossible to have any
certain knowledge of the true Church, but by the true faith and doctrine.

One only demonstrative reason decides that difference. It is a rule without
exception, that definitions must be more known then the thing defined. As if I
said, that expositions must be clearer then the things expounded, and that the
candle must be lighter then the book that is read by it. If then true faith and
doctrine enters into the definition of the Church, and makes part of the
definition, it follows of necessity, that true doctrine ought to be more known
then the Church. Now this is the definition of the Church, according to
Cardinal Bellarmine. Lib. 3. de Ecclesia militante. c. 2.. Nostra.
The true Church is a society of men joined together by the profession of the
same Christian faith, etc. We must then know that Christian faith, before we
know the true Church, since that faith is part of the definition of the Church.
Mr. du Perron defines the true Church in this manner, Book 1. chap. 8. The
Church is the society of those whom God has called to salvation by the
profession of the true faith, etc. And Salmeron, XIII. Tome, in the first
dispute upon St. Paul's Epistles, defines the Church coetum vocatorum a Deo per
fidem, the assembly of those whom God has called by faith, page 172. Since
then the Church is defined by the profession of the true faith, the true faith
must be known before we can know the true Church.

If the people ought to know the true Church before they know the true
doctrine, it would follow, that they know the Christian Church before they know
Jesus Christ; which is a proposition that contradicts it self; for one cannot
know the Church of Christ, unless he know Christ, nor join with the Church of
Christ, but after he has known Christ; Now knowing Christ is knowing his
nature and office, in which things the whole doctrine of the Gospel consists.

And whereas God draws men to the Church by the preaching of the Gospel, as
may be seen, Acts 2.47. where by Peter's preaching many persons are added unto
the Church, that they may be saved, it is clear that those persons had heard
and comprehended the Word of God, before they would join with the Church, and
that the Word of God was known to them before the Church was, since the
knowledge of the Word is the means that God had used to bring them to the
Church; for the means always go before the end.

Our Adversaries themselves presuppose, that the Word of God ought to be more
known then the Church, every time that they allege any text of Scripture to
defend the authority of their Church; For the proofs must be more known and
more clear then the thing proved; Salmer. in Epist. Paul. Disput. 4.. Inter.
Hoc signum verbo Dei ac ratione fulciendum.
else one should prove a clear thing by a dark. Thus we see, that our
Adversaries handling this question of the marks of the Church, labor to prove
her marks by Scripture, presupposing that Scripture is more known then those
marks.

Wherefore the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 2.10. groundeth the Church upon the
Prophets and Apostles, that is, upon their doctrine. Now in matter of knowledge
the grounds go before and are better known then the consequences that are built
upon them.

For these causes the Apostles never exhorted any persons to aggregate
themselves with the Church, before they had instructed them in the faith in
Jesus Christ. They preached the doctrine of salvation, which whosoever believed,
thereby made himself one of the Church, without any other search of the Church
and her marks.

If any meeting with the true Church, joined himself with her without knowledge
of the true faith and doctrine, that is, not knowing Jesus Christ and his
grace, such a man should be a Christian in name only and by chance, owing his
religion to his birth, or to custom and the course of civil affairs, and would
be of another religion, if public business, or his private interest steered
his course another way.

And whereas there are many dissenting Churches, and in all those Churches one
holy Scripture received; it must be Scripture that makes us know the true
Church, and be the Judge to decide that difference. But the Church is not the
Judge of holy Scripture, but only the witness and the keeper of the same, as we
proved before.

CHAP. 27. Testimonies of the Fathers. Confutation of the Cardinals answer.
Austin in the book of the Unity of the Church, chap. 16. speaks thus,
Ecclesiam suam demonstrent, si possunt, non in sermonibus and rumoribus
Afrorum, etc. sed in praescripto Legis, in Prophetarum paerdictis, in Psalmorum
cantibus, etc. in ipsius Pastoris vocibus, etc. hoc est, in omnibus canonicis
sanctorum librorum authoritatibus.
Let them show us their Church if they can, not by the words and rumors of the
Africans, nor by the Councils of their Bishops, nor by the writings of
disputers whosoever they be, nor by false signs and miracles, for the Word of
the Lord has warned us, and made us circumspect against that: But by the Law,
by the predictions of the Prophets, by the songs of the Psalms, by the sermons
of the Gospels, that is, by the Canonical books. And in his Epistle to
Bonifacius, In the holy books wherein the Lord is manifested, there also the
Church is manifested. And a little after, The Church is not counterfeited by
contentious opinions, but is proved by divine testimonies. And in the 166.
Epistle, We have learned Christ in the Scriptures, there we have learned the
Church. And chap. 2. of the Unity of the Church, Between us and the Donatists,
the question is, Where the Church is? What shall we do then? Shall we seek her
in our words, or in the words of our head the Lord Jesus Christ? I think that
we ought rather to seek her in his words. And a little after, I will not have
any to show me the Church by humane documents, but by divine oracles. And chap.
3. Let us then seek the Church in Canonical books. Again, There are books of
the Lord, about whose authority we both consent; we believe them, we serve
them. There let us seek the Church, there let us decide our cause. But above
all, these words of the 16. chap. are express: Vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant
nonnisi divinarum Scripturarum canonicis libris ostendant.
Let them show us whether they have the Church, Only by the Canonical books of
the divine Scriptures. He receives no other proof of the Church but by the
Scriptures. Hierom upon the 133. Psalm says all in two words, Ecclesia ibi
est, ubi sides vera est. The Church is there where true faith is.

To these M. du Perron, in the 71. chap. of his first book against his Majesty,
answers, that Austin means not that we must judge of the doctrine of the
Church by the Scriptures, but only that we must seek the marks of the Church in
the Scriptures. This is already a great point granted; for thereby he
confesses, that in the question concerning the marks of the Church, Scripture
must be Judge. If then Scripture be Judge in that question, why not in other
questions? But whosoever shall converse a little with Austin's writings, shall
find, that in all points of Religion he takes Scripture for his Judge, and
that there is hardly one leaf in all his works, where he does not allege some
text of Scripture for that end. For indeed that means of judging of the
Doctrine of the Church being removed, what does remain, but that the Church be
judge in her own cause, and that about the doctrine of the Church the only
verdict of the Church be credited. Whereupon the Cardinals words are very
notable; That in the question about the body of the Church, Austin will have
the matter decided by Scripture, because that in the controversy where the
debate was, which of the two societies was the Church, the voice of the true
Church could not be discerned. The like, or rather stronger reason will be
found in all the points of controversy, where is question of the duty of the
Church, or of her authority; For there the Church cannot be Judge; else she
should be Judge in her own cause. If in the contention between two contrary
Churches, to know which of them is the true Church, Scripture must be Judge, as
the Cardinal does acknowledge; In the dispute between us and the Church of Rome
upon that point, why shall not Scripture be Judge of our difference? And what
will become of that fine maxim of the Cardinal in the 7. chap. of the 4 part
of his first book, where he affirms, that to cleanse the Church from her
pretended corruptions, one must not have recourse to the time of the Apostles;
that is, Scripture must not be received for Judge, neither must we in our
controversies look upon the primitive pure time, or that doctrine of the
Apostles, which themselves have set down in writing.

The same words of the Cardinal, overthrow that thredbare objection of our
Adversaries, that one cannot know that such a book is Scripture but by the
Church. For behold one of the most eminent Cardinals of the Roman Church, who
confesses with Austin, that one cannot know the Church but by the Scripture.

Now that not only in the question of the marks of the Church, but in other
questions Austin will have the Scripture to be judge, it is easy to prove it.
In the book of grace and free will, chap. 18. he chooses the Apostle Saint
John for Judge in that matter, Sedeat internos judex Apostolus Johannes, etc.
Let the Apostle John sit Judge betwixt us. Upon which he alleges a Text of
that Apostle. And in the second book of marriage and concupiscence, before he
alleges the words of the Apostle, he uses this preface, Judicet cum Christo
Apostolus, quia and in Apostolo ipse loquitur Christus.
Let the Apostle judge with Christ, for Christ himself also speaks by the
Apostle. And in the second book against Faustus the Manichean, chap. 5. he
says, that Excellentiae Canonicae authoritas tanquam in sede quadam sublimiter
constituta, cui serviat omnis fidelis and quivis intellectus.
the authority of the Canonical excellency, is set on high, as on a certain
throne, to which every faithful person, and every understanding must subject
himself. Chrysostom in the thirty third Homily upon the Acts, asks, how a
Pagan that sees Christians quarrelling among themselves about Religion, may
know to what Church he must aggregate himself? Then he answers, If we say
that we believe the Scriptures, they are both simple and true: If any conform
himself to these, he is a Christian.

The same Fathers words are most express in his forty ninth Homily of the
imperfect work upon Saint Matthew, Antea multis modis ostendebant quae esset
Ecclesia Christi, and quae Gentilitas; nunc autem nullo modo cogn^scitur nisi
tantummodo per Scripturam.
Heretofore they showed many ways what the Church of Christ was, and what the
society of Pagans: But now this is known no other way, but by the Scriptures
only. And soon after, He then that will know which is the true Church of
Christ, how shall he know it but by the Scriptures?

CHAP. 28. Reasons of the Cardinal and others, to prove that the true Doctrine
and conformity to the word of God, is no mark of the true Church.
AMong the marks of the true Church, our Adversaries use to put the conformity
with the ancient Church, that is, with the doctrine of the Fathers: Whereupon
one may with great reason wonder, why they will not do unto holy Scripture the
like honor, as to the writings of the Fathers; and why they will not have the
conformity with the word of God, to be also a mark whereby the true Church must
be known? Who sees not, that they put conformity with the Fathers for a mark
of the Church, because they know that the people cannot perceive that mark, and
sees nothing in the writings of the Fathers, which are Greek and Latin, and of
an endless length? And that they will not have conformity with the holy
Scripture to be a mark to know the Church by, because that mark is easy to be
known, and for fear that the people should be obliged to read Scripture, which
they fear as much as Felons do Laws?

Yet let us see what reason they can give for their avoiding of that
touchstone, and denying, that their Church should be known by the Word of God,
to be the true Church.

They say (and M. Du Perron with the rest) that this mark is both obscure and
controverted, because all Churches, how corrupt soever they be, say that they
have the true doctrine, and conformity with the Word of God.

By speaking thus, they overthrow all the marks which themselves attribute unto
the true Church, as antiquity, holiness of doctrine, multitude, the name of
Catholic, etc. for there is none of those marks but is controverted and
challenged by other Churches besides the Roman. Besides we maintain, that those
marks for the most part are not proper to the Roman Church. If we give to the
Church no other marks but such as are not controverted, she shall have none at
all. Thus giving Laws, sending Ambassadors, judging ultimately of all causes,
coining money, etc. are marks of Sovereignty, although an usurper assume them
unjustly.

This may serve to answer the Cardinal, who argues thus; If the Doctrine be
the mark of the Church, it must be either a controverted or an uncontroverted
Doctrine: Not the controverted, for it is the thing in dispute: Not the
uncontroverted, for it is a Doctrine common to the two contending parties. I
answer, that the whole and entire Doctrine of salvation, is a mark of the true
Church: Of which Doctrine, if some part be controverted, ye the truth is on
the one side, and may be discerned by those that will subject themselves unto
the Word of God.

M. du Perron says in the fourth chapter; that the examination of the Church
is easy and certain, but the examination of the says is perilous and hard,
and that the most learned are often deceived in it: For which he gives this
reason; that he that has the Church, is sure to have the true faith, although
he knows not distinctly all the Articles thereof, and to be in the way of
salvation; whereas he that has faith, and is not in the Church cannot hope for
any salvation. The Reader may observe an affected ambiguity in these words, He
that has the Church: For one knows not whether he understands thereby he that
is in the true Church, or he that has a true knowledge that such a Church is
the true and the good. For in the first sense it is false, that every man that
is in the true Church has the true faith. There are many hypocrites in the
Church, that believe not what they profess: There are many profane persons in
the true Church, which know nor what belongs to true Doctrine, and in their
heart laugh at Christian Religion. Many are in the true Church by their birth,
and by custom, or by the public stream, not caring for Religion: But if by him
that has the Church, he understands him that has a true knowledge of the true
Church, then it is certain, that such an one has also the knowledge of the
true faith, because it is the knowledge of the true faith that makes him to
know the true Church. And thus he must know the true faith, before he can know
the true Church: The Church is the Assembly of the faithful: Those are faithful
that have the true faith: It is then impossible to know that one belongs to the
Assembly of the faithful, not knowing what is the true faith.

The same ambiguity he uses in the fifth chapter, saying, that to know the
whole Doctrine in all the points or instances thereof, is a thing harder to
know then the society of the Church. The ambiguity is in these words, to know
the society of the Church: For either he speaks of that superficial knowledge
whereby Pagans and Infidels see the Christian Church, as one sees a society of
men that call themselves Christians, who yet care not for Christian Religion:
In that sense I grant, that it is easier to know the Church, then to be
instructed in the Christian Doctrine; But that Doctrine is useless; and is not
that which is in question in this place: Or else he speaks of a certain
knowledge, that such a Church is the true Church, to which they must join that
will be saved. Of that knowledge, I say that it cannot be acquired but by the
knowledge of the true faith and doctrine, which therefore is more known then
the true Church.

He goes on, and to prove how difficult it is, to know the true Church by the
true Doctrine, he says, that to know the true Church by the Doctrine, it is
not enough to know the right of the Church in some particular difference with
one Sect or another; but that it is necessary to know the truth of the Doctrine
of the Church in all the particulars controverted by heresies both past and
present, before one can judge (by virtue of that examination of the Doctrine)
where the true Church is. For (says he) if that Church be in the wrong but in
one controversy, it is enough for her to forfeit the title of true Church.

Upon the whole matter, to fright men away from examining the Doctrine of the
Roman Church, the Cardinal makes the way so long, that a thousand years of
study would not be enough: For he will have one to know all the Objections and
Answers that ever were made upon every point of Divinity; And yet in the end,
if one be deficient in one point, he holds that all is lost, All that, to the
end that no body may busy his mind about Scripture, and that all be afraid of
the Doctrine of Salvation, as of a laborious and perilous study, and so take
the shorter way, which is to believe the Church; never enquiring what the
Church ought to believe; and to be persuaded that the Roman Church is the true
Church, without troubling themselves to get instruction in the Faith.

But it is easy to show that the way which our Adversaries trace to the world
by sending men to the Church, without examining the doctrine, is much the way
about; yea that it is infinite, and has no end. For they will have us to know
the true Church by the antiquity and the succession of Chairs. A knowledge not
to be attained but by getting information upon every point of controversy of
that which was believed in every age, and in every Country. There, besides the
infinite length, many dark intervals will be found, and a labyrinth of
inextricable perplexities.

Whereas he that rules his faith by the holy Scripture, takes a short and
certain way, avoiding curiosities and useless questions, and contenting himself
with that which is clear in Scripture, for there he shall find all that is
necessary to salvation.

If by Scripture he believes that God has created the world, he needs not
know all the Objections of Philosophers against Creation. If by Scripture he
believes that Jesus Christ is a true man, the simplicity of that belief will
be sufficient for him, although he never heard of the Objections of the
Eutychians or Marcionites. What needs a Husbandman or a Tradesman to know how
Austin confuted the Donatists? seeing that it is not necessary for him to know
so much as that Austin or Donatus ever were in the world. Neither does a
necessity lie upon him to undertake the examination of the whole doctrine
either of the Roman Church or ours. Let him but stand firm in that resolution,
not to receive any Doctrine as necessary to Salvation, unless he that teaches
it, show it in the Word of God. By this means the most heavy and slow
understandings come out of all difficulty. If any tell him, that to have Gods
favor he must call upon Saints, and venerate Images or Relics, or that Jesus
Christ is sacrificed in the Mass, he will go to the Doctors of the Roman
Church, and tell them; My Masters, you will have me to believe these things, I
beseech you to let me see them in Scripture; If these things be showed him in
express or equivalent terms, he will acquiesce: If they be not showed him in
Scripture, he will not believe them, and he needs no other examination of the
doctrine.

In one point appears the great advantage of our cause over that of our
Adversaries; That whereas they object unto us, that by seeking to make the true
Church known by the true Doctrine, we take a long and difficult way; We object
unto them, that by enjoining the people to know the true Church, without
knowing and examining the Scripture, they take an impossible way: For how can
one know which is the true Christian Church, without knowing Jesus Christ
before, and the Redemption by Jesus Christ? How can one know whether a Church
be pure, and no Heretic, but by the rule of purity? And since the true Church
is a Society united together by the profession of the true Faith, (for so our
Adversaries define it) how can one know whether such a Society be the true
Church, without knowing the true Faith?

The Cardinal adds, that the marks of the Church must be outward and sensible,
and therefore other then the Doctrine. Note, that when we say, that the true
Doctrine is the mark of the true Church, we understand, that to know whether a
Church be true, pure, and Orthodox, we must know whether she holds a doctrine
conformable with the Word of God. Now that conformity as well as the difformity
is a thing sensible and discerned by the eye and ear. Do we not see with our
eyes, that in the Roman Church the people is denied the Communion of the cup?
Do we not see pictures of the Trinity, and the people bowing the knee before
Images? Do we not hear public Service and Prayers in an unknown tongue? And if
these things be formally prohibited in the holy Scripture, are they not unto us
sensible marks of a false and erroneous Church?

Some will use this argument, That Society that teaches the true Doctrine, is
more known then the true Doctrine.

I answer, that by that reason all those marks fall to the ground, which our
Adversaries give unto true Doctrine; For does the people of the Roman Church
learn these marks from the Roman Church? It follows then, that the Roman Church
which teaches these marks, is more known then these marks; and by consequent,
that they are no marks, since they are less known. In effect, although the
Church be easier to be known then the Doctrine by a superficial, and many times
unprofitable knowledge, whereby Pagans know the Church without knowing whether
it be good and sound in the Faith; yet to know that such a Church is the true,
and not an heretical Church, we must first know the true Doctrine: So is a
Mathematician known as he is ^ man, before he that knows him in that notion
know what belongs to the Mathematics. But one cannot know whether he be a good
Mathematician without some previous knowledge of the Mathematics. Thus the
Keeper of a treasure is known before the treasure; but none can know whether he
be keeper of a good treasure, but he that knows that it is a good treasure,
and wherein the goodness of it consists. By that superficial knowledge the
Church may be known before the Scripture, when the Church testifies to a Pagan
that such a Book is the holy Scripture: But that Pagan shall never certainly
know that such a Church is the true Church, before he has comprehended and
believed the Doctrine contained in the Scripture.

But (say some of them) if true Doctrine were the mark of the true Church,
every Church that has the true Doctrine, should be a true Church, which
nevertheless is not; for the Churches that are merely Schismatical have the
true Doctrine, and yet are not the true Church. This Objection is frequent with
the Cardinal.

I answer, That never any Church was Schismatical that maintained the true
Doctrine: For under the true Doctrine, I comprehend that of Manners and
Charity, which is violated by the Schismatical Churches: Neither do I find any
Schismatical Church, but has presently added unto the Schism some Error in the
Faith, as when the inflammation comes presently after the wound given.

But (say they) if the Church show which is the Scripture, the Scripture cannot
show which is the Church; for two things cannot show one another.

I answer, that this is a false assertion: Many times two several things
evidence one another mutually. The causes are demonstrated by the effects, and
the same effects by the causes. The Church may testify that these Books are
Divine and Sacred, and the same Books show which is the true Church. But
Scripture shows the Church in a far more excellent manner then the Church
shows Scripture: For the Church is a witness unto Scripture; but Scripture is
a rule unto the Church. The Church makes not these Books to be divine; but the
rules of Scripture being practiced formally, make a Society of Christians to be
the true Church; Herein this difference is evident, that a false Church can
yield that true testimony to Scripture, and yet makes it not to be Scripture.

CHAP. 29. That the word Catholic cannot be a mark of the true Church.
AMong the marks of the Church, the word Catholic, that is, Universal, is set
in the first rank of our Adversaries. In that title the Roman Church does
especially triumph: Being a particular Church, and a corrupt one, she assumes
the name of Universal Church; as if a rotten finger were called a man.

That the word Catholic cannot be the mark of the true Church, it is evident:
For the natural and infallible marks of a thing are not words, but things. The
marks of a good Horse are not words, but natural things: For men will often
give false titles, and contrary names, and the same title may be usurped by
dissenting Churches. The names proper to a thing arise from the essential form
thereof, but words and titles are given by the will of men.

Also it is necessary that the names and titles attributed unto the Church be
given to her, either by her self, or by her enemies. If by her self, that has
no force; for she is not a competent Judge in her own cause, and every one will
take titles to his own advantage. But if those titles be given her by her
enemies, there is yet less reason to stand upon them, whether the enemies
dishonor the Church with odious titles, or extol her in derision. It is not
just that the marks of the true Church be left to the discretion of her
Adversaries.

Besides, the marks of the right and good Church must show her goodness; but
that word Catholic or Universal imports no goodness, and designs no virtue,
but only signifies her extent.

The same appears, in that the most false and corrupt Churches will put on also
the title of Catholic, and will be called so. Lactantius in the last chapter
of the 4. Book, speaks thus; Singuli quique coetus haereticorum se potissimum
Christianos and suam esse Catholicam Ecclesiam putat.
Each Congregation of Heretics holds her self above all to be Christian, and
her Church Catholic. Salvianus in the 5. Book of Providence; In tantum se
Catholicos esse judicant ut nos ipsos titulo haereticae appellationis infament.
So much they hold themselves Catholics, that they defame us with the title of
Heretics. Cyprian to Jubaian; Cypr. Ep. 37. Novatianus sibi vult Ecclesiae
Catholicae authoritatem and veritatem vindicare.
Novatianus will attribute unto himself the authority and the truth of the
Catholic Church. Austin in the Book of the utility of believing, chap. 7.
says, that Christianorum cum sint haereses plures atque omnes se Catholicos
videri velint.
all the Heretics affect the name of Catholics. Even the Donatists against
whom the name of Catholics has been especially used, and the Rogatists which
were but a branch of the Donatists, would be so called, as Austin says in the
48. Epistle to Vincentius. And the Greek Church, which is an enemy to the
Roman, retains that name still, and her Patriarch is still called Ecumenical
Bishop, as if he governed the whole habitable earth. In one point chiefly it is
evident how that mark of Universal or Catholic is wide of all likelihood of
reason; that the dispute between diverse particular Churches is, which of them
must be called Universal, as if Africa and Europe were contending which of them
two must be called the whole earth.

Here truth is so evident, that a distinction between the Catholic Church, and
the Roman will slip sometimes from our Adversaries, as acknowledging that they
are different things. Bellarmine in the 2. Book of the Sacraments in general,
chap. 27. goes about to persuade that Baptism does not leave to be a true
Baptism, although he that baptizeth have no intention to do that which the
Roman Church does. It is enough (says he) to have intention to do that which
the Universal or Catholic Church does. It is ordinary with our Adversaries to
call the Roman Church the Mother of all the Churches; speaking so, is, saying,
that the Roman Church is not the Universal or Catholic Church: For the Mother
and the Daughters are not the same thing. Themselves would not say, that the
Roman Church is universally everywhere, seeing that there are so many great
Churches more ancient then the Roman, which are separate in Communion from the
Roman. Could the Universal Christian Church be called Roman, when Christianity
had not yet reached to Rome?

CHAP. 30. Of the word Catholic, and in what sense the Church is called
Catholic by the Ancients. That Cardinal du Perron has not at all understood
what Catholic signifies, nor the sense of Vincentius Lirinensis.
THe Church of the Elect is called Catholic or Universal in the Symbol,
because she comprehends all the Elect; both them that triumph in Heaven, and
them that are or shall be militant here on earth. And if that Church mentioned
in the Symbol, comprehends also the visible Church upon earth (which we would
not deny) then that visible Church is called Catholic or Universal, to
distinguish it from the Jewish Church, which was affected and restrained to one
particular Nation, as his Majesty of Great Britain says, and Bellarmine
acknowledges it in his Book of the marks of the Church, chap. 7.. Sunt omnes.
Ut Ecclesia sit Catholica, inprimis requiritur ut non excludat ulla tempora,
loca, vel hominum genera, in quo distinguitur a Synagoga.
That the Church (says he) may be Catholic, it is requisite in the first
place, that she exclude no time, no place, and no sort of men, whereby she is
distinguished from the Synagogue, which was a particular, not a Catholic
Church. The Jesuit Salmeron says the same. Salmer. Tom. XIII. Disp. 1. in
Epist. Pauli.. Tertio. Dicitur Catholica, ^oc est universalis, in quo primum
differt a Synagoga.
The Church (says he) is called Catholic, that is, Universal; wherein she is
different from the Synagogue, in that she is not circumscribed with certain
limits of people or place. But Cardinal du Perron being wiser then they all, in
his first chapter against the King, is of another opinion; for he says, that
the word Catholic is rather added in the Symbol to discern the true Church,
which is pure, and neither heretical nor schismatical, from the heretical and
schismatical Churches. But the evident reason is on the Kings side; for since
the word Catholic signifies Universal, it is fitter to distinguish the
Universal Church from the particular, then to distinguish the Orthodox Church
from the Heretical; between Church Universal, and Church Heretical, there is no
opposition.

The Fathers take that word Catholic two ways: Sometimes by the Catholic
Church they understand merely the Universal, distinguishing her by that word
from the particular Churches. Optatus Milevitanus in the 2. Book; The Church is
called Catholic, because she is spread everywhere. Austin in the 152. Epistle,
The Catholic Church is spread over all the Earth. And in the 170. Epistle,
Ipsa est Ecclesia Catholica, unde (...) Graece appellatur, quod per totum
terrarum orbem diffunditur.
The Church is called Catholic, because she is spread over all the world. He
says the same in the 2. Book against Petilianus, chap. 38.

But sometimes the Fathers abusing the word, by the Catholic Church,
understand the Orthodox Church, that is, the Church pure and sound in the
Faith, joined in her parts by Communion: Quod totum veraciter teneat, says
Austin; Because she holds the whole truth, of which Heresies hold but part.
Sozomenus in his 7. Book, chap. 4. says, it was constituted, That (...).
that only Church should be called Catholic which serves the Trinity with
equal honor. In which sense there might be many Catholic Churches. Every
particular Orthodox Church is Catholic in that sense. Austin in the 152.
Epistle, Non solum Catholicae transmarinae, verum etiam Catholicae Africanae.
Not only (says he) the Catholic Churches beyond the Sea, but also the
African Catholic Churches; Where the word Catholic cannot signify Universal.
See the Subscriptions of the Bishops set to the will of Gregory Nazianzen.
There every Bishop calls himself Catholic Bishop of such or such a Town.
Austin in the 166. Epistle calls the Emperors Catholics, that is, Orthodox
and sound in the Faith. The Roman Synod under Hilary Bishop of Rome, begins
thus, Hilary Bishop of the Catholic Church of the City of Rome. There it is
clear, that Hilary calls not himself Bishop of the Universal Church, since he
restrains his Episcopacy over the Catholic Church unto the City of Rome.

The reason why true Faith is called Catholic, or Universal, is not because it
is received everywhere; for that never was, and never shall be; but because all
without exception must receive it; as Pope Pius II. says in the Acts of the
Council of Basil; Lib. 1. fol. 9. Catholica fides, id est, universalis fides,
non universalis dicitur quod universi eam teneant, sed quod universi eam habere
teneantur.
Faith is not called Catholic, that is, Universal, because all receive it, but
because all ought to receive it.

That in these two significations the Church is called Catholic, Austin
expressly says it in the Book De Genesi ad literam, chap. 1. Ecclesia Catholica
dicitur ex eo quia universaliter perfecta est, and in nullo claudicat.
The Church our Mother is called Catholic, both because she is universally
perfect, and halteth not in any thing, and because she is spread over all the
world.

The like Cyrillus of Jerusalem says in the 18. Catechesis; (...).
The Church is called Catholic, because she is spread over all the habitable
Earth from one end to the other, and because she teaches universally, and
without deficiency all the Doctrines that must come to the knowledge of men.

And Optatus Milevitanus in the 2. book aginst Parmenianus, Ecclesia inde
Catholica, quod sit rationalis and ubique diffusa, The Church is called
Catholic, because she is conformable to reason, and because she is spread
everywhere.

Which if M. du Perron had observed, he would not have spent his labor to
devise absurd and unreasonable reasons, why he will have the true Church to be
called Catholic. The first, because it is larger and in greater number. The
second, because heretical Churches have been plucked off from her like branches
from the stock, which stock in respect of the branches, is an habitual whole,
and that the Catholic Church toward heretical Churches, is not an actual but
an habitual whole. His first reason shall be hereafter confuted, and we hope to
show that multitude is not always on the side of the true Church.

The Chap. 19. and 61. of M. du Perrons book.
second reason is but and extravagant conceit, of which he is the first
inventor. For there is no such thing as an habitual whole, which words are but
a Chimera. The branches are no part of the stock in any respect, whether they
be joined to it, or cut from; especially when they are cut off. The stock is
not a whole that contains, or can contain the branches, or that can be called
an habitual or an actual whole. So then a Church from which other Churches were
separated, is not a whole, containing in any respect the said separated
Churches, especially since she did not contain them before the separation, but
only they were joined with her: much less then does she contain them, since
they were separated from her. How can she have any habit or aptness to contain
them again, having never contained them before?

There is more; For thereby the Cardinal devesteth the Roman Church before he
be aware of the title of Catholic or Universal Church. For the Greek Church is
the root and the stock from which the Roman is sprung. Christian Religion is
past from the Grecians to the Latins. Thus Austin Epist. 170. says Non
considerat ab illa radice Orientalium Ecclesiarum se esse praecisam, unde
Evangelium in Africam venit.
that the Eastern Churches are the root of the Church, and that from them the
Gospel past into Africa. And in the 178. Epist. which is a Dialogue of Austin
with Pascentius, he says, that Graecia ubi fides orta est.
faith was born among the Grecians. For as these words Jesus, Messiah, Amen,
Allelujah, which the Greek Churches use, testify that the Gospel past from the
Jews to the Grecians; Likewise the words of Christ, Bible, Evangelium,
Ecclesia, Baptism, Bishop, Priest, Deacon, Letany, Chrisma, Antiphone, etc.
which are Greek words, yea all the most ordinary terms used in the Roman
Church, show that the Romans have received the Religion from the Grecians, and
that they have been their Disciples: And therefore, by the Cardinals reason,
the Greek Church shall be the Catholic Church, as the stock and the origin.
And (to speak with him) she shall be the whole, though not actual, yet
habitual, containing the Roman Church.

Note by the way, that the Fathers called the Orthodox Church Catholic or
Universal, because it spread far and wide, over Europ, Asia, and Africa. But now
that these Churches are dissenting and separate in communion, that reason
cease: neither is there any pretense of reason, why any of these parts can
alone retain the title of Universal Church.

To the same purpose the Cardinal, after others of his party, objecteth to us
incessantly, the counsel of Vincentius Lirinensis, who writ about the year 450.
That Author in his book against profane novelties, to free a man's spirit from
all errors, gives him two directions. The one is, to stick to the holy
Scripture, of which he says, that the Perfectus Scripturarum Canon, sibique ad
omnia satis superque sufficiens.
Canon is most perfect, and more then sufficient for all things. The other is,
than Duplici modo fidem suam munire debet; Primo scilicet divina legis
authoritate, tum deinde Catholicae Ecclesiae traditione.
since there is a dissension about the interpretation of Scripture, we must
hold the tradition of the Catholic Church, and take the Scripture for our
Interpreter, Secundum Ecclesiastici and Catholici sensus normam, according to
the rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. Then he declares what he
understands by that Catholic sense, namely, quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus creditur: est hoc enim vere proprieque Catholicum. That which has been
believed everywhere, always, and by all; for that is truly and properly
Catholic.

Sed neque semper neque omnes haereses hoc modo impugnandae sunt, sed novitiae
recentesque tantummodo, cum primum scilicet exoriuntur. Caeterum dilatae and
inveteratae haereses nequaquam hac via aggrediendae sunt, etc. Illas
antiquiores nisi aut sola si opus est scripturarum authoritate convincere, aut
certe jam antiquitus universalibus sacerdotum Catholicorum Conciliis convictas
damnatasque vitare.
Nevertheless he adds an exception, that he would not advise one to take that
course, or to make use of that Catholic tradition, against heresies deep
rooted by a long continuance, and such as are spread and received of old among
many, but only against new and springing heresies, which he would stifle in
their birth, by opposing that tradition unto them. But as for ancient and far
spread heresies, he would make use of the holy Scripture only, and of the
authority of Universal Councils.

That Counsel of Vincentius being well considered, not only does not at all
annoy us, but even cuts the throat of Popery. For since our Adversaries say,
that we are infected with ancient heresies, and complain, that our heresy is
diffused in many countries, and very deep rooted, they cannot practice against
us the counsel of Vincentius Lirinensis, who will have such heresies convinced
with the only Scripture, and by the ancient Universal Councils. For indeed
restraining our Adversaries to Scripture, and to the ancient Councils, is
compelling them to impossibilities: since they maintain, that all the doubts
about the faith, cannot be decided by Scripture, and send us to an unwritten
word; herein opposing Vincentius Lirinensis, who says, that Scripture is more
then sufficient to teach us all things; and averting the people from reading
the holy Scripture, for fear (say they) that they should fall into heresies.
And as for the ancient universal Councils, they find nothing in them contray to
us, but many Canons contrary to them. They find in the Council of Chalcedone a
Council. Chalced. Can. 28.
Canon equalling the Bishop of Constantinople, with that of Rome in all things.
They find in the Council of Synod. Laod Can. 58.
Laodicea, approved by many universal Councils, that the books of Judith, Toby,
and Maccabees are not Canonical. They find in the Council of Gangra, approved
likewise and inserted in the Codex of the Universal Church, Council. Gangr. Can.
4.
a condemnation of those that despise married Priests. They find in the Canons
of the VI. Universal Council, a Canon which expounds these words, This is my
body, and This is my blood, with these words, Council. Trull. Can. 23. (...).
that is, bread and wine mingled with water. They find in the same Council two
Canons Council. Trull. Can. 13. and Can. 55.
which expressly and by name condemn the Roman Church for pohibiting Priests and
Deacons to dwell with their wives, and for fasting upon Saturdayes. They find
that the Pope did not preside in the Councils of Nice, nor in the first Council
of Constantinople, nor in the first Council of Sardica, which M. du Perron puts
among the Universals, nor in the Council of Chalcedon. And that he called none
of the ancient Universal Councils. But that the first Council of Constantinople
and that of Chalcedon, did sit against his will, and against his Counsels and
humble petitions to the Emperors.

And if our Adversaries finding no help in the ancient Universal Councils, are
reduced (according to the advice of Vincentius Lirinensis) to the holy
Scripture only, what text can they find there, to prove that the Pope is St.
Peter's successor in the quality of head of the Universal Church, or to prove
that he can put down Kings and dispose of their crowns? Or to prove that we
must yield a religious service unto images, and call upon the Saints departed,
and worship their relics? or that God prohibiteth the marriage of Priests? and
many the like things, which have no ground but in the unwritten word?

Or if the Counsel of Vincentius Lirinensis take place, so that nothing be
received for a Catholic tradition, but that which was always believed, and by
all, and at all times; what will become of Monks and Monastaries, of whom no
mention is found in the first ages, before Paul and Antony the Hermites, who
lived in Constantines time? What will become of the images of the Trinity, and
the adoration of images, and the Popes power to depose Kings? And how shall the
Maccabees subsist among the Canonical books, which 5. Book. chap 18. and 1.
Book. chap. 50.
M. du Perron confesses to have been rejected by the Greek Fathers, and by
Hierom and Ruffinus, and others that have followed their opinion? Yea I
maintain, that of all the Articles of Christian doctrine, scarce two or three
shall be found, but were opposed by some heretics, and of whom one may truly
say, that they were believed everywhere, and at all times. But how can women
and tradesmen know what articles have been believed always and by all, since
so much cannot be known but by the reading of Fathers, and Greek and Latin
histories, where the people understands nothing, and the learned themselves
have litte knowledge?

Truly, I dare say, that if Vincentius Lirinensis were believed and followed,
there should be no more Popery upon earth. Especially in that he will not have
the Church to seek to Catholic tradition for adding of doctrines not received
in Scripture, but only for the interpretation of Scripture. Also in thal the
admits of no traditions as Catholic, but such as were believed by all and
at all times; for the Roman Church teaches a thousand things, which the Greek
and Syrian and Ethiopian Churches believe not, and which have been unknown in
the first ages of the Christian Church. As for us, I make bold to affirm, that
we believe and receive all the doctrines necessary to salvation, which have
been believed by all and everywhere. And none can justly reproach us, that ever
we departed from the universal consent of all ages.

CHAP. 31. Of holiness in doctrine.
THe whole Word of God is true and holy. But between the truth and the holiness
of a doctrine, there is that difference, that the same doctrine is true as it
declineth errors, and holy as it declineth vices. Truth inlighteneth the
understanding, but holiness purifieth the will and affections. Whence it
appears, that truth goes before holiness, because the instruction of the
understanding goes before the motions of the will: because also the holiness of
a doctrine does presuppose it to be true.

A doctrine then is called true, which turns men away from vices, and forms
them to good works and virtue.

Our Adversaries put that holiness of doctrine among the marks of the true
Church, wherein I would not contradict them; for thereby they would have good
doctrine to be a mark of the true Church. Now the doctrine can neither be good
nor holy, unless it be conformable with the Word of God; we must then be
instructed in the Word of God before we can know the true Church.

Two things only, I cannot sufficiently wonder at; The one, that they put the
holiness of the doctrine among the marks of the true Church, and will not put
the truth of the doctrine among these marks, and yet holiness presupposes
truth. It is impossible to know that a doctrine is holy, while one doubts
whether it be true. The other, that they choose that for a mark of the Church,
which less fitteth the Roman Church then any Church in the world. I speak not
of the vices which reign in the Roman Church, but of the rules and doctrines
that teach vices and corrupt manners. In other Churches vices are sicknesses,
but in the Roman Church they are set forth as virtues, and have the force of
Law.

No Church but the Roman teaches perjury, and by the order of a Council
declares, that one is not bound to keep faith unto Heretics. This is found in
the XIX. Session of the Council of Constance, where the Fathers of the Council
declare to the Emperor Sigismund, that he may proceed to the execution of
Hierom of Prague and John Hus, notwithstanding the safe conduct and the oath
given them to send them home safe. The Council of Lions has practiced it
against Friderick the II. and the Council of Constance against Friderick of
Austria. Sess. XX.
The Pope dispenses the Kings Subjects and Officers from the obedience and
oath of allegiance given to the King, of which the histories are full, since
Gregory the VII. and it was seen in France of late.

Is it a holy doctrine to set up brothel-houses by public order, and Emanuel
Sa Aphorismis, verbo Episcopus. Toletus. lib. 5. Instr. Sacerdotum. c. 37.
Bellar. l. 2. de amiss. gratiae. c. 18. dicet. Tit. 8. de Concess. Praebendarum
Can. propusuit In Glossa and did. 34. Can. Lectur. in Gloss. and Can. Sunt
quid. Cause. 25. qu. 1. In Glossa.
permit whoredom? Or to set on the people to rebel against their sovereign
Prince, promising them the remission of sins for their reward? In the time of
the French League, in the year 1588, 1589, and 1590. one might see in the
market places, and other places of public resort, Papal indulgences set forth,
granting nine years of pardon to all that would join with the League against
the King. Remission of sins and salvation was propounded to the people as a
recompense of rebellion against their King and murder of their fellow-Citizens.

Is it an holy Doctrine that the Pope can dispense against the Apostle, and
against the Old Testament? and that he dispenses in the Gospel by an
interpretation? For with such sentences the Glosses of the Roman Decree are
stuffed.

Is it a holy Doctrine, that God after he has pardoned the fault, exacteth
satisfactory pains? Does not that teach men to make fraudulent reconciliations,
and to take revenge after they have pardoned? For why should men be more true
or more merciful then God?

Are these holy Doctrines, to dissolve marriages under pretense of a Monastical
life? and to free children from the fatherly power, when for anger, or other
causes, they have taken Sanctuary in a Monastery, as an Azyle of disobedience?
and to tread the Laws of God and nature under foot, which oblige children to
obey their Parents?

Is it an holy Doctrine, to prohibit the people to read Scripture, which is the
treasure of all the Doctrines of holiness? and putting prayers and alms among
penances or satisfactory pains? Is not that turning virtues into pains, to make
them odious?

Of these accusations and many of the like nature they strive to avenge
themselves by recriminating, that we teach that good works are not necessary to
salvation, and that God is the Author of sin; and that we are enemies of the
Saints and of the Virgin Mary: Abominable Doctrines, falsely attributed to us:
The Confession of our Churches does protest against them.

To shut up this question; I acknowledge the holiness of Doctrine to be a mark
to know the true Church, so that under holiness truth be comprehended, and
conformity with the word of God. But if holiness be taken as a thing distinct
from the truth, then we must know the truth of a Doctrine before we be able to
know the holiness of the same: And so we shall need another mark to know that
mark.

CHAP. 32. Of the succession of chairs. Whether it be a mark of the true
Church? And what that succession is, of which the Fathers speak.
AMong the marks of the true Church, they put the succession of Pastors in the
same chair, ever since the Apostles: Certainly that succession is a goodly
ornament, if with the succession of persons, there may be a succession of
Doctrine and conformity of virtue: But there are many chairs in which they that
sit, hold a contrary Doctrine to their Predecessors. Thus the Scribes and
Pharisees were sitting in the chair of Moses, and had the personal succession;
nevertheless Jesus Christ commands his Disciples to beware of the leaven of
their Doctrine, and reproacheth them that they had transgressed the Law of God
by their tradition, Mat. 15. Thus the Bishops of the Churches of Antioch, and
Rome, and Alexandria, boast themselves to be Successors of Saint Peter, and yet
are dissenting and separate in Communion. The Bishops of Constantinople, fetch
their succession from the Apostle Saint Andrew, as Nicephorus goes about to
prove in the eighth book of his Chronology, chap. 6. Yet these Bishops by the
judgment of the Roman Church, are Schismatics and Heretics. Whence it
appears, that the succession of chairs cannot be a fit mark for the true
Church, since it is found in heretical Churches, as Tertullian says in the
thirty second chapter of the book of prescriptions. Ipsa eorum Doctrinacum
Apostolica comparata, ex diversitate and contrarietate sua pronunciabit neque
Apostoli alicujus esse neque Apostolici.
Their Doctrine compared with the Apostolical Doctrine, will make it manifest
by its diversity and contrariety, that the Author thereof is neither an Apostle
nor an Apostolical man; because as the Apostles have not taught different
things among themselves, so they that followed the Apostles, would not have set
forth things contrary to the Apostles, excepting only those that have withdrawn
themselves from the Apostles, and have taught otherwise. And a little after:
Therefore they shall be summoned to answer that form of examination by the
Churches; which though they cannot produce any of the Apostles, or any
Successor of the Apostles for their Author, as being much later in time, and
some of them every day erected; yet agreeing in the same faith, they are not
held less Apostolical by reason of the consanguinity of their Doctrine [with
the Apostles. Ad hanc itaque formam provocabuntur ab illis Ecclesiis quae licet
nullum ex Apostolis vel Apostolicis authorem suum proserant, ut multo
posteriores, quae denique quotidie instituuntur, tamen in eadem fide
conspirantes, non minus Apostolicae reputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae.
] And soon after, he says, that the Heretic Churches are not received to the
Communion by the Apostolic Churches, because Heretics cannot be Apostolic,
ob diversitatem Sacramenti, by reason of the diversity of the sacred Doctrine;
for so the Fathers take the word Sacrament. And in the twentieth chapter, after
he has said that the Apostles have spread the Doctrine of faith, and that from
thence all the Churches have their origin, he adds, So all the Churches are
first Churches, and all are Apostolic, as long as the communication of peace,
and the name of brethren, and the mutual mark of hospitality, prove that there
is one unity among them all; which rights are ruled by no other reason then the
tradition of the same Doctrine. Thus if Tertullian be believed, true succession
consists in conformity with the Doctrine of the Apostles: which being found
in a Church, whether great or small, of old or fresh date, such a Church is
truly Apostolical, although for lack of Histories, she cannot show the line of
her succession.

Then to know whether that succession of chairs be good, we must of necessity
know before whether the Doctrine agree with that of the Apostles; and to know
that, we must be instructed in the true Apostolical Doctrine. Whence it
follows, that this succession of chairs cannot be a mark of the Church, since
to know her, we have need of another mark which is the truth of the Doctrine,
Sic omnes primae and omnes Apostolicae, dum unam omnium probant unitatem
communicatio pacis and commiseratio hospitalitatis, quae jura non alia ratio
regit quam ejusdem Sacramenti una traditio.
and conformity with the Doctrine of the Apostles; and that the succession of
persons in the same chair, is no perpetual mark of a true Church, since there
are true Churches which cannot prove that continual succession. Where
conformity with the Doctrine of the Apostles is evident, to what end should a
Church be required to show by histories the thread of a continual succession,
unless it be to tire men's spirits by an infinite length, and keep them from
seeking for the conformity in Doctrine, which is easy to be found? What does
it import from how far the water of a brook comes to us, so that the water be
quick and good? And if the brook be spoiled, because it past through unwholesom
fens, what have I to do to follow the whole course of the stream, when I may
drink at the spring?

Where the way is short and easy, why do they labor to make it long and
intricate? Such as love error, purposely loose themselves in an endless length
and an in extricable maze. How much labor and time must one lose? How many
Greek and Latin Books must one read, to know upon every point of Doctrine the
belief of all the Bishops of one Church from the Apostles time unto ours? and
to show upon every point the succession of Doctrine from Bishop to Bishop?
Certainly we are not saved by chairs, but by rules; nor by titles or succession
of persons, but by the precepts of faith and godliness. The Apostle Romans 10.15.
saying after Isaiah, How beautiful are the feet (that is, how is the coming
pleasant) of them that bring peace, that bring gl d tidings of good things!
shows, that in vain one boasts that he is sent, if he bring tidings of evil
things.

Truly if chairs did teach, or if truth was sticking to those chairs, we ought
to believe it without any more ado. But in those chairs men are speaking, who
many times abuse them to give authority to untruth, as the Scribes and Pharisees
made use of the specious title of the chair of Moses to resist Jesus Christ.

Besides, that cannot be a mark of the true Church, which is unknown to the
people. For how small is the number of those that have read all the Greek and
Latin Histories, where that succession is set down? They give to the people a
list of successive Bishops in a picture, but the people know not whether
nothing be false and forged in that picture: They know not whether the last
entered into the chair by usurpation, or violence, or gifts. They know not
whether the last Bishops teach the same as the first, or whether of those that
came between, none erred in the faith. Certain it is, that many Popes have been
notorious heretics, as Liberius and Felix who were Arians, Honorius a
Monothetite, and John the XXIII. that denied the immortality of the soul. In
the Papal See, several Schisms have been, and diverse times many Popes together,
excommunicating one another, and reciprocally calling one another Antichrist;
and of those Antichrists, the worst commonly overcame. So according to the very
Canons of the Roman Church, factions and corruptions in the creation of the
Popes, have several times made their election void, and therefore have broken
the thread of that succession

Some places indeed are found in the Fathers, especially in Tertullian and
Irenaeus, where disputing against Heretics, they oppose unto them the
authority of those Churches that were able to show their succession of persons
and Doctrine since the Apostles, and question those Heretics about their
succession. But they speak of succession of chairs in the same Doctrine.
Besides, those allegations have not the same force in these last ages, as they
had then, when the line of their succession from the Apostles being short, was
also easy to show. It was easy to show at Ephesus since Saint John, and at
Jerusalem since Saint James, that seven or eight successive Bishops had still
taught the same Doctrine. But now after an interval of above fifteen hundred
years, and so many changes and revolutions, the Churches which then agreed,
being now at odds, it is impossible to make such a deduction. And our
Adversaries would find themselves shrewdly plunged, if they were put to show of
every Bishop of Rome, or Alexandria, or Antioch, that all successively have
believed the Purgatory, or the invocation of Saints, or Transubstantiation, or
the Popes power over the temporal of Kings, or the Communion under one kind.

Consider also that these Fathers alleging unto Heretics the succession of
Bishops, spoke unto Heretics that rejected the Scriptures, either whole or in
part; against which they had nec^ to use probable reasons without the
Scripture. But we have to do with men that make a show of the succession of
persons, without speaking of conformity and succession in the Doctrine. Upon
that the words of Irenaeus are pregnant, Irenaeus, lib. 4. chap. 43. Eis qui in
Ecclesia sunt Presbyteris obedire oportet; his qui successionem habent ab
Apostolis, qui cum Episcopatus successione charissimae veritatis certum donum
secundum placitum Patris acceperunt.
We must obey those that are Priests in the Church, that have succession from
the Apostles, and with the most dear succession of Episcopacy, have received
the certain gift of the truth, according to the Fathers will. And Tertullian in
the thirty seventh chapter of Prescriptions, summoning the Heretics to produce
the succession of their chairs, shows, that in the Church where he was, they
had a true succession, because since the Apostles time they had always retained
the same Doctrine. Ego sum haeres Apostolorum; sicut caverunt testamento, sicut
fidei commiserunt, sicut adjuraverunt, ita teneo. Vos certe exhaeredaverunt
semper and abdicaverunt, ut extraneos and inimicos. Vnde autem extranei and
inimici Apostolis haeretici nisi ex diversitate Doctrinae?
I am (says he) an heir of the Apostles: That which they have ordained by
their Testament, that which they have committed to our faith, that which they
have sworn us unto, that I hold: But certainly they have always dis-inherited
you, and disallowed you as strangers and enemies. Now how come Heretics to be
strangers and enemies to the Apostles, but by the diversity of Doctrine, which
every one of them has set forth, or received according to their own fancy
against the Apostles? For a succession of chairs without truth, is either a
continuation of error, or a corruption of the truth: which succession, the
longer it is, the more pernicious, because it has deeper roots; as Gregory
Nazianzen says, in his oration concerning Athanasius, (...).
Where there is the same Doctrine, there is the same See; but where there is
contrariety of opinions, there is also contrariety of Sees, [or chairs] The one
has the name, the other has the truth of succession. He adds, that he that
corrupts the Doctrine is no successor, unless it be as sickness succeeds
health, and darkness light. Athanasius speaks the same language; Athanas. in
Decret. Synodi Niceae contra Arianos. (...).
Behold (says he) we show the succession of our Doctrine from Fathers to
Fathers. And Ambrose Ambr. lib. 1. de poenitentia, cap. 6. Non habet Petri
haereditatem, qui fidem Petri non habet.
, That man has not the succession of Peter, that has not the faith of Peter.
And Irenaeus, in the 4. Book. 43, and 44. chap. calls succession in the true
Doctrine, the Ab omnibus absistendum qui absistunt a principali successione.
principal succession; for having said that those must be held for suspect that
depart from the principal succession, he adds, that such are fallen from the
Truth.

Wherefore we detest the beastial impiety of the Canon Non nos, which in the
40. Distinction of the Roman Decree, pins the holiness of the Popes to their
Chairs, saying, Quis sanctum dubitet esse quem apex tantae dignitatis extollit?
In quo si desint bona acquisita per meritum, sufficient quae a loci
praedecessore praestantur.
Who makes a doubt of that man's holiness who is raised to such a high dignity,
who if he have no good acquired by his merit, he has good enough afforded to
him by his predecessor in that place? It is not the Chair that sanctifies the
Pastor, but it is the holiness of the Pastor and his preaching that sanctifies
the Chair; which the older it is, one may think that there is the more to mend
in it; and the higher it is, and exalted to honor, the more pernicious, when
the authority thereof is employed to authorize Error and oppose the Truth. It
is the complaint that Bernard made of the Church of his time; Bernard. de
conversisione Paul, Sermon. 1. Domine, Jesu! quia sunt in persecutione tua primi,
qui videntur in Ecclesia primatum diligere, gerere principatum.
Alas, alas, Lord Jesus, Those are the first in persecuting thee, that love
primacy in thy Church, and hold the principality of the same. Then he adds,
Multi sunt nostris temporibus Antichristi; There are many Antichrists in our
days. And soon after; Dissimulemus nos quoque necesse est and sileamus
interim, maximeque de Praelatis nostris, Magistris Ecclesiarum.
This we must dissemble, and hold our peace, especially about our Prelates and
Masters of Churches. And in the same place, Iniquitas progressa est a
senioribus judicibus, Vicariis tuis.
Iniquity proceeded from the old Judges, thy Vicars, which seemed to govern thy
people. And in the 33. Sermon, speaking of the Papal Court; Ministri Christi
sunt and serviunt Antichristo; Honorati incedunt de bonis Domini qui Domino
honorem non deferunt.
They are Ministers of Christ, and serve the Antichrist. They that honor not
the Lord, march honored with the Lords goods. Whereupon after he has bewailed
the corruption of the Church, proceeding from them that govern her, he says,
that it remains no more, but that the Antichrist should be revealed, even that
Antichrist, says he, who shall lift up himself above all that is called God.
And in the 77. Sermon, speaking of that succession of Chairs, he says,
Successores omnes cupiunt esse, imitatores pauci.
They will all be Successors, but few will be imitators, etc. Parum est nostris
vigilibus quod non servant nos, nisi and perdant. Superest ut reveletur homo
peccati, Filius perditionis.
It is a small thing to say that our watches do not keep us, but they even
destroy us. And in the fourth Book De Consideratione, speaking of the Roman
Court; De consider. ad Eugen. l. 4. Si auderem dicere, daemonum magis quam
ovium pascua haec, etc. Petrus hic est qui nescitur processisse aliquando vel
gemmis ornatus vel serico, etc. In his successisti non Petro, sed Constantino.
If I durst speak it, These are rather pastures of Devils then of Sheep. And
speaking directly to Pope Eugenius, who boasted of the succession of Peter; We
find not that ever St. Peter marched adorned with Jewels, or clad in Silk, or
covered with Gold, or riding on a white Horse, or attended with guards, or with
a multitude of servants making a noise about him. He believed that without
these things one might fulfill that salutary command, Feed my sheep. In these
things thou have succeeded not Peter, but the Emperor Constantine. That good
man, who felt the Truth in a dark age, would have spoken far more plainly, if
he had lived in an age enlightened with the Sunshine of the Gospel: For in the
fervency of his zeal seeing two Popes excommunicating one another, and mutually
calling one another Antichrist, he goes so far as to say, Epist. 125. Bestia
illa de Apocalypsi cui datum est os loquens blasphemiam, and bellum gerere cum
sanctis, Petri Cathedram occupat tanquam leo paratus ad praedam.
That Beast of the Revelation to whom a mouth was given, speaking blasphemies,
and [power] to make war against the Saints, holds St. Peter's Chair like a Lion
prepared for the prey. And the other Beast is hissing near you, like a wild
beasts cub lurking in a close place. He uses the two Anti-Popes alike, leaving
to us to judge on which side the right of the succession was.

Above 500 years before him, Pope Gregory the I. seems to have prophesied
after the example of Caiaphas: For so he speaks in the 38. Epistle of the 4.
Book; Omnia quae praedicta sunt fiunt. Rex superbiae prope est, and (quod dici
nefas est) sacerdotum est praeparatus exercitus.
All that is foretold is now a doing. The King of pride is at hand; and (that
which is shameful to say) an Army of Priests is prepared for him: foretelling
that the Antichrist will be upheld by a multitude of Priests, and therefore by
them that shall hold the chairs, and boast themselves of the ordinary
succession.

We will shut up this discourse with a sentence of Austin in his 46. Treatise
upon John. Sedendo super Cathedram Moysis legem Dei docent, ergo per illos Deus
docet. Sua vero si velint docere, nolite audire, nolite facere.
If sitting in Moses chair, they teach the Law of God, God teaches by them;
But if they will teach that which is of their own, (that is, their own
inventions) hearken not unto them, and do not what they say.

CHAP. 33. What the Succession was, and what the calling of those who in our
Fathers time took in hand the Reformation of Popery.
OF this matter we have treated more at large in In this Authors Book of the
Vocation of Pastors.
another place: Where we have showed that the charge of Pope, who calls himself
the Head of the Universal Church, and the Cardinals dignity, are not descended
from the Apostles by succession, but that they are humane inventions, and that
the charges of Bishop and Priest, which of their nature are lawful, and
descended by succession from the Apostles, have yet so much good left in the
Roman Church, that they that enter into them are obliged by Oath in their
Ordination to teach the truth of Gods Word. Also that these charges are
corrupted and perverted in the Roman Church, in that Bishops are become Princes
of the Papal Hierarchy, and in their reception take an Oath of allegiance and
obedience to the Pope: Which form of Oath herein is notable, that there is
never a word in it of any duty toward God, or of his Word, or of the obedience
due to him. That form of Oath That Oath is set down in the end of the foresaid
Book of the Vocation of Pastors.
is found in the Roman Pontifical, and is most worthy to be read, as one of the
most express marks of the son of perdition: For it is the Oath of a vassal to
his Prince or Liege-Lord, not the Oath of a Pastor of Gods Church. Likewise the
charge of Priest is corrupted, in that Priests in their ordination are
established Sacrificers of the body of Christ, for the living and the dead, of
which office the institution is not found in the Word of God.

Now it happened in our Fathers time, that some Priests, Doctors, and Bishops
of the Roman Church, having acknowledged by the Word of God the abuses of
Popery, would fulfill their Oath, and in the same Chair began to change
language, and teach the Truth, to bring their Office to the right use again,
and to the first institution; for an Idolatrous and heretical Church can confer
a good calling, and admit a Pastor to his charge by such express forms and
promises, that thereby he shall be obliged to discharge the office of a Pastor
aright: For although a Church be heretical, yet the Office of Pastor in the
same is (of its nature and first institution, and by the expectation of the
people) destined to preach the true Doctrine of Salvation: and every Oath about
a thing good and just, into which a man has not intruded himself, must be
inviolably kept. If in an Arian, or Nestorian Church, a Pastor came to be
converted to the true Doctrine, the nature of his charge and his promise in his
reception authorize him sufficiently, yea and oblige him to change language in
the same Chair, and to teach the Truth. Wherefore also the Codex Canonum
Ecclesiae Africanae, Can. 69. Hieron. Dialogo adversus Luciferanos. Syn.
Nicena, Can. 8. de Catharis and Clericis conversis ad fidem. (...).
ancient Church allowed the Office of heretical Bishops, when they converted
themselves to the true Faith; neither did they confer a new Ordination upon
them. The Imposition of hands which they bestowed upon them, was not a new
ordination, but only a blessing, as Balsamon ad marginem Canonis Niceni 8. ex
Tharasio qui Nicenae secundae Synodo praesedit.
Balsamon teaches. I say then, that the first Reformers of Popery had the
ordinary calling and succession received in their Country, and had besides
that an extraordinary Commission to preach against the intention of their
Ordinator, for the due accomplishing of their charge, and to keep the Oath
taken in their reception.

We must not believe that they held from the Prelates of the Roman Church that
good which remained unto them in their ill ordinary calling; for they held it
from Jesus Christ and his Apostles, from whom those charges first proceeded,
which from them are come to us by succession, although for some ages the
Pastors of the Roman Church have abused those charges, and turned them to
another use. So we have the water of a Brook from the Spring, not from the
infected channel that it has run through. It is one thing to have our calling
by the intervention of the Roman Church, and another thing to have it from the
Roman Church, and from her authority.

It came to pass then, that those faithful servants of God beginning to preach,
the Truth in the very Chairs of the Roman Church, were believed by part of the
people, who long before had some sight of the Errors, and were sighing under
the yoke. But the other part which would not receive their Doctrine, thrust
them out, and excommunicated them, forbidding them the exercise of their
charge. But they stood out, and for their Inhibition would not forsake their
flocks, holding that they ought not to be deprived of their charge, because
they used it well. In vain should they have hoped to be confirmed in their
places by the Pope, since they preached against Popery. Besides, the opinion of
the Roman Church favors us in this point: For they hold that a Priests Office
cannot be taken away, and that it prints an indelible character in a man,
although the use thereof be interdicted by those that cannot suffer that their
Errors should be brought to light. Thus they remained in their charges, and
their Successors remain in them still: God making use of them to gather a
people unto himself in the midst of the darkness of this world, and to bring
many souls to salvation.

CHAP. 34. That in the time of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and in the ages
next to the Apostles, many have preached the Word of God in the Church, without
succession and without ordinary Calling.
ALthough in the age that we live in, it is expedient that none be admitted to
the holy Ministry, but such as are duly called, and (as much as it is
possible) established by the ordinary forms and ways; yet the Christian Church
in her beginnings did not tie her self to that rule. The Christians of that
time embraced with so much fervor the truth of the Doctrine, that they
enquired not with what forms those that taught them the truth had been received
into that Office. Doing the clean contrary to that which is done in the Roman
Church, where the people is kept from the examination of the Doctrine by hiding
from them the holy Scripture, and celebrating Divine Service in a languge which
they understand not. They are instructed only to look to Chairs and Succession,
and to pick a quarrel with our Vocation; following the example of the
Pharisees, who eluded Christ's reprehensions of their false Doctrine, Mat. 21.23.
asking him, By what authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this
authority? and asking the Apostles when they preached Christ, Act. 4.7.
By what power, and by what Name have ye done this?

That in old time many preached the Gospel without charge or ordinary calling,
it is evident by many examples. Our Lord Jesus, Luke 4. teaches in the
Synagogue of Nazareth, and expounds the Prophet Isaiah, although he was
neither Scribe nor Doctor, nor Levite, but of the Tribe of Judah; brought up,
not under the Discipline of the Pharisees, but in a Carpenters shop.

Act. 13. Paul who was neither Levite nor Scribe, is desired by the chief of
the Synagogue of Antioch, of Pisidia, if he had some word of exhortation to
speak it. He had been indeed a Pharisee before his conversion; but the
Pharisaism was not a charge, but a profession of austerity, and works of
overplus.

Act. 8.4. The faithful of the Church of Jerusalem, scattered by persecution,
went everywhere preaching the Word. The same is done by some Cypriots and
Cyrenians that were fled to Antioch, Act. 11.

Act. 18.25. Apollos teaches in the Synagogue, and speaks freely, although he
was yet but meanly instructed in the way of the Lord, knowing only the Baptism
of John. A certain proof that he had no ordinary charge; for with so little
instruction he should never have been admitted to the charge of Pastor or
Evangelist.

It is manifest by the 14. chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
that all such as had some gift of God to prophecy and expound Scripture, or to
speak strange tongues, were allowed to speak in the Church. If (says the
Apostle, v. 24.) all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or
one unlearned, he is convinced of all. And a little after, When ye come
together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a Revelation, has an
Interpretation, Let all things be done to edifying.

Origin Hom. 11. upon the 18. chapter of Numbers. Sicut in aliqua (verbi
gratia) civitate ubi nondum Christiani nati sunt, si accedat aliquis and docere
in ipiat, laboret, instruat, adducat ad fidem, and ipse postmodum iis quos
docuit Princeps and Episcopus fiat, etc.
If (says he) in any City where no Christian is yet born, some one come and
begin to teach, and labor, and instruct, and bring to the Faith; and after
that become Prince and Bishop of those whom he has instructed, etc.

Ambrose upon Ephesians. 4. ut ergo cresceret plebs and multiplicaretur, omnibus
inter initia concessum est and Evangelizare and baptizare, and Scripturas in
Ecclesia. explanare.
That then the people might increase and multiply, it was permitted to all in
the beginning, to preach the Gospel and baptize, and expound the Scriptures in
the Church: But he adds that this was settled by an order since.

Theodoret, Ruffinus, and Sozomenus, relate that two young men, Aedesius and
Frumentius, being come to the Indies for another end, planted there the
Christian Religion. It is true, that Frumentius returning into Egypt, was
persuaded by Athanasius to return into the Indies, and by him created Bishop of
the Indies. But it must, be remembered, that he had already begun that work
before he received the ordinary calling; and that if he could not have returned
into Egypt, being kept in the Indies, either by the difficulties of the ways,
or by sickness, or if the Indians would not have let him go; no doubt but that
he would not have forsaken the work of God for want of a formality, and would
not have left teaching, though he had no succession, and no ordinary calling.
But I think that the Indians by him converted to Christianity would have met,
and calling upon Gods name, would have created him their Pastor.

The same must be said of Maturianus and Saturnianus slaves, which were the
first that brought the Gospel among the Moors, where they were captive; who
after they had sown the seeds of Christianity about the Country, sent for
Priests out of the Roman Territories, as Victor Vticensis recites in the first
Book of the History of the Vandals.

Yea out of the case of necessity the Ancient Christians permitted Laymen to
expound the holy Scriptures, although there were ordinary Pastors in the same
place. Of which we have a very express testimony in the 20. chapter of the 6.
Book of the History of Eusebius, who relates that at the request of the Bishop
of Cesarea, Origin being not a Priest, yet began to expound the holy Scriptures
in the Church. At which one Demetrius complaining, as of a thing being contrary
to custom, and unheard of before, Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and
Theoctistus Bishop of Cesarea, tax him of ignorance, and tell him, (...).
Thou say openly an untruth; for where persons fit and capable are found,
which may edify their brethren, the holy Bishops desire them to instruct the
people in the Word; as at Laranda Euelpis was desired by Neon, and at Iconium
Paulinus was desired by Celsus, etc.

If any Christian cast by shipwreck, or by other accidents into a Pagan Island,
fifteen hundred leagues from Christian Churches, and having no use of
Navigation, should learn the language of the country, and then instruct the
Barbarians with good success in the Christian Religion, there being no
possibility to get Pastors from other places; who doubts, but that the
converted people, might with the invocation of Gods Name, choose among
themselves the fittest man for the Ministry of the Gospel? Should that man
suffer Christian Religion to perish in the Country for want of succession and
ordinary calling? For in extraordinary difficulties it is often impossible to
use ordinary remedies. Besides, in a Country where there is an ordinary
calling, it happens many times, that they that hold the chairs and have the
succession, either are silent like dumb dogs, or preach untruth. In which case
can one find it strange, that God raise some of the lay people to convince
their false doctrine, or rowse their dastardness; as when the guards of the
Capitol were asleep, the geese cried out and gave the alarm? Is it not a
hardened stupidity, when an ignorant man will not come out of the gulf of error,
before that he that would instruct him, has showed him his succession? Such a
man chooses rather to be led into hell by a successive order, and by persons
laden with titles and filling the chairs, then into Paradise by men that
produce not their Commission.

CHAP. 35. A difference to be observed, between the office of Pastor of the
Church, and the means to enter into it.
THere is a wide distance between the charge of Pastor and the means whereby a
man gets into that charge; For one can enter by ill means into a good charge,
instituted by God: As when one enters into the Ministry of the Gospel by favor
of factions, by corruption, by gifts, or by usurpation. But if the charge be of
its nature evil, it cannot be made good and lawful by any formality, nor by
any length of succession. Formalities do not change the nature of things; and
there is no prescription against divine institution. It matters not with how
many formalities one undertakes to make war against God.

Of these two questions, the one, Whether the charge be good of its nature? the
other, Whether one be entered by good means? the first is much more important
then the second; for it is necessary for salvation unto every Christian, but
the other is not. It is necessary for the people, to know whether the offices
of the Pope and of Sacrificer of the body of Christ, be good and lawful, and
instituted by Christ, lest they be subjected to an unjust domination, and
thinking to serve Christ, they serve Antichrist: Lest also that being partakers
of a Sacrifice invented by men, they be guilty of vacating or wronging the only
Sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of defiling themselves with idolatry. But
as for the succession of persons, and the forms of entering into the Office of
Pastor, it is indeed necessary to a Pastor of the Church, not to usurp the holy
Ministry; and he must be very certain in his conscience, that he has followed
the lawful ways, and has not intruded himself; For of that he is to answer
in Gods Judgment, who will not leave an usurper unpunisht, but will call him
to account, for making the holy Ministry a prey, and constraining God (as far
as in him lies) to make use of his service, by doing him that service to which
God called him not; and for bringing the traffic into the Temple, and
purchasing by faction and bribery that holy charge, which teaches humility and
innocence.

But it is not necessary for the people to know the vocation of their Pastors,
and to have an exact knowledge by what ways every one of them is come to the
holy Ministry; For I find not any text in the Word of God, that obliges the
people to that examination, or says that the people must give account unto God
of the calling of their Pastors. If a man crept into the Ministry by fraud and
unlawful ways, yet preach the Gospel purely, and administer the Sacraments as
Jesus Christ did institute them, the people believing his preaching, shall be
saved nothing the less; for the sentence of Jesus Christ is without exception,
that who so believes on him shall have everlasting life: The Word of God
loses not its virtue in the mouth of a Pastor admitted against the forms, as
good seed does not change nature, and bears not the less fruit for being sown
by a thief. As one may wear a suit of clothes, without knowing whether the
workman be admitted of Tailors Hall; So one may profit at a man's preaching,
without knowing whether the man got into the Office of Pastor by good forms and
lawful ways. The people is not accountable unto God for the calling of his
Pastors, but for adhering unto false doctrines, and partaking with a Sacrifice
which God has not commanded. Truly if the people that they may be saved, must
exactly know, what and how long the succession of their Pastors is, and whether
it be desended from the Apostles by a successive line of persons in the same
chair, they are excluded from all hope of salvation; since that cannot be known
but by the reading of Fathers, and Greek and Latin histories, where the people
understand nothing; And if they understood them, yet should they find a discord
between historians, and intervals, and interruptions, where the readers are at
a loss. Therefore Acts 16.14.
Lydia the Purple-seller, and the people of Acts 17.11.
Berea, and the Acts 2.41.
three thousand Jews converted at Peter's preaching, enquired not about Peter's
or Paul's calling; Nor the Eunuch of Queen Candace, of the vocation and
succession of Philip: But believed their preaching, because they proved what
they said by Scripture, although they had neither succession nor ordinary
calling. So much was enough for them to be saved.

Out of that which was said, we gather two things. The one, that in the Roman
Church the people are preposterously instructed; for their Pastors hide from
them the holy Scripture, by which only they might learn, whether the charge of
Pope or Priests be instituted by God; but they are taught to insist upon the
succession of chairs, and to question us about our calling. That which is
necessary to salvation, is hidden from them, and they are taught to enquire of
that which is not necessary for them to know, and about which they shall not be
called to account before God. While they amuse men about formalities, they hide
the doctrine of salvation from their eyes. These poor people fed with empty
husks, content themselves to believe that their leaders have the chairs and the
ordinary succession; but the means are removed from them, to know whether the
truth be taught in those chairs: For so much cannot be known, but by comparing
the doctrine preached to them with the Scriptures, after the example of the
people of Berea, whom St. Luke praises for examining the preaching of St. Paul
by Scripture, although the miracles and the holy eloquence of the Apostle
seemed to give him authority enough.

Our second inference is, that our complaints and accusations against the Roman
Church, are far stronger, and of higher nature, and better grounded, then those
of the Roman Church against us; For the Roman Church does not reproach us that
the charge of our Pastors is of its nature evil; acknowledging that Jesus
Christ has instituted Pastors in his Church, to preach the Gospel and
administer the Sacraments. He that limits his Office within these functions,
cannot be accused to have an Office invented by men. Only the Roman Church
quarrels with us about formalities, and about the means of entering into that
Office, accusing us of intruding without ordinary calling and without any
succession.

But we disputing against the Roman Church, bring heavier accusations against
them, and stand upon far higher terms; For not only we accuse Popes, Cardinals,
Bishops, Priests, and Abbots, of usurpation, and of getting their Office by
sinister ways, and of want of lawful succession; but we question them about
the prime and principal point, necessary to salvation, which is the validity of
their charges; For we find not in the Word of God, that ever he instituted
Popes, or any successors of St. Peter in the Office of Head of the Universal
Church: And we say, that every living head must have a body: Whence it follows,
that if the Pope be head of the Church, we must say, that the church is the
body of the Pope. Ephesians. 1.
Now Scripture calls the Church the body of Christ, not the body of the Pope.
But that question shall be agitated hereafter.

Neither do we find in Scripture any mention of Cardinals. The first Author
that speaks of them, is Pope Gregory the I. who writ in the year 596. For the
Roman Council where that word is found, is false and supposititious, as we
shall show in the proper place. But in the time of that Gregory, to be Cardinal
Priest, was nothing else but to be Parson or Rector of a principal Parish. See
Concilium Meldense. cap. 54.
Other Archiepiscopal towns as Ravenna and Millan, had their Cardinals as well
as Rome. And Popes were elected, not by a College of Cardinals, but by the
suffrages of the people and Clergy. At this time they are Princes of the
Universal Papal Church, and have the right of making Apotheoses or
Canonizations, and to elect a Pope, which a few ages since is taken only out of
their body. In a word, there is nothing in that Court but of humane invention.

As for Bishops, their Office indeed is good and holy as for the origene, but
it has degenerated. Bishops being grown Princes of the Papal Empire, to which
they swear fealty and allegiance in their reception, without any mention of
their duty to God, or of his Word, or of the virtues and functions which the
Apostle requires in a Bishop; they get into their places by the favor of
Kings, and get letters of investiture from the Pope; A thing unknown to all
Antiquity.

Likewise the Office of Priests, being good of its nature, is fallen from its
purity. For whereas the charge of a faithful Priest, is to preach the Gospel,
and to administer the Sacraments; now a man may be a Priest and never preach.
The charge committed to him by the Bishop, while he anoints him, and puts the
pix and the chalice in his hands, is to sacrifice the body of Jesus Christ for
the living and the dead: Of which Priesthood the Institution is not found in
the Word of God, and never a word of it in the holy Scripture.

Here then we have a great advantage over our Adversaries; for we accuse them
to have overthrown the Christian Religion by forging other charges in the
Church, then those which Christ has instituted, and changing the nature of
those which he instituted. But they acknowledging the Office of our Pastors to
be good of its nature, accuse us only of violating the forms, and of want of
succession. We set their crimes before their eyes; And they upon that, question
our Commission. Our accusation is of the ground and essence of faith, and is a
point necessary to salvation. Their accusation is a point of history, and of
Church Discipline, which is of no necessity to salvation. Such then is the
quarrel between us, as if a woman should tax another woman of adultery, and
that other woman in revenge should reproach her that she has a high nose.

Yet let us see with what forms the Church of Rome admits her Pastors, and
especially what is the Popes succession; For Bishops and Priests are not held
such, but in as much as the Pope approves of them: And upon that chair an
infinite multitude of miters and hats are hanging.

CHAP. 36. That the Popes have a false title, and without any Word of God, to
the succession of St. Peter, in the charge of head of the Universal Church, and
that such a charge is not grounded in Gods ordinance.
TO begin at the spring, If St. Peter had no successor in his Apostleship or in
the charge of Head of the Universal Church, then Popes falsely boast of that
succession. Upon that we insist often, but can get no answer. Let our
Adversaries say if they can, where, and when God has appointed successors to
St. Peter in his Apostleship, or in his Headship over the Universal Church. For
such a succession can have no place, if God has not instituted it. But about
that, there is not one word in Gods Word. Thus Aaron had successors in his
charge of High Priest, because God had instituted it in his Law. But Moses
being Prince, Lawgiver, and Priest, had no successor in those joint qualities,
because God had instituted none. John the Baptist had no successor. None
succeeded in the Apostleship of St. John, St. Paul and the other Apostles,
because Christ did not command it, and spoke never a word about that. That
succession then in Peter's primacy is imaginary and an humane invention. We find
indeed in Scripture, that the Apostles going from place to place, preaching the
Gospel, would create Pastors and Presbyters in every town where they past, and
those Pasto^s were successors of the Apostles, in the government of those
particular Churches. Neither must we doubt, but that if Peter ever was at Rome,
he settled Pastors there, to succeed him in the conduct of the Church of Rome.
But of providing a succession for him in the Apostleship, or in the Primacy
over the Universal Church, there is a deep silence in Scripture; For since the
other Apostles left no successors in their Apostleship, there is no reason why
St. Peter should have left any in his. And whereas St. Peter writing his second
Epistle to the Universal Church, was near his death, as himself says, in the
1. chap. and the 14. verse. one might wonder, if any successor should have been
expected in his Office of Apostle, why he did not give notice unto the Church,
what successor he was to leave in his room, that he might be acknowledged and
obeyed after him without contradiction.

And if there had been need of a successor to St. Peter in that primacy, which
they say, he had over the Universal Church, no doubt but that dignity did
belong to some of the Apostles that outlived him; to St. John especially, that
excellent Apostle, the disciple whom Jesus loved, who remained in the world
thirty years after Peter? Is it credible, that Linus or Clement were preferred
before him? the first a man, whose name hardly remains, And of the other we
have but some suppositious Constitutions, and some Epistles ascribed to him,
where there are orders about mice dung, and where he commends Plato for
banishing the words meum and tuum out of his Commonwealth, and Causa 12. qu. 1.
Can. Dilectissimis. Communis usus omnium quae sunt in hoc mundo esse debuit;
sed per iniquitatem alius hoc dixit esse suum and alius istud, and sic inter
mortales facta est divisio. Denique quidam Gra^ little sapientissimus haec ita
sciens esse communia debere, ait amicorum communia esse omnia. In omnibus autem
sine dubio sunt conjuges.
for instituting community of goods and of women.

Or if Linus or Clemens were to be preferred before the Apostles, at least, as
Matthias was chosen by the common suffrage of the Apostles, they ought to have
been called, and so much respect should have been deferred unto them, as to
have had their advice for that election.

And whereas in the first age after the Apostles, the Bishop of Rome was
elected by the common suffrage of the people of the Church of Rome: is it
credible that the people of one City, had the power to give a head to the
Church of all the world, without calling the other Provinces, that had the like
interest in it, and never yielded their right to the people of the Church of
Rome?

Yet suppose that Christ had instituted a successor to St. Peter in that
imaginary primacy; does it follow therefore that this successor must be the
Bishop of Rome? and why rather he then James Bishop of Jerusalem, who by
Clement himself Bishop of Rome is called Episcopus Episcoporum, the Bishop of
Bishops, ruling the Churches of all the world? For this is the inscription of
the first Epistle, which he writes unto James, Clemens Jacobo fratri Domini,
Episcopo Episcoporum, regenti Hebraeorum sanctam Ecclesiam quae est
Ierosolymis, sed and omnes Ecclesias quae ubique Dei providentia^ fundatae sunt.
Clement to James Brother of the Lord, Bishop of Bishops, governing the holy
Church of the Hebrews, which is in Jerusalem, yea and all the Churches which
are founded anywhere by the providence of God.

If one says, that Peter has been at Rome, I will say also, that Christ who
is greater then Peter, has been at Jerusalem, and that all the Apostles have
lived there many years. If one alleges that Peter is dead at Rome, I will say
that Christ is dead at Jerusalem, and James the Apostle, and after him, the
other James Brother of the Lord: And that there is no reason, why that which
ought rather to be a reproach unto Rome, to have put to death such an excellent
Apostle, should turn to that Cities honor, and to an occasion of so great a
privilege. Had Peter suffered martyrdom in a Village, must that Village
therefore be the Seat of the Monarch of the Universal Church?

And since it is believed, that Peter resided seven years in Antioch, Can any
show by good proofs, that Peter removing from thence, and going to Rome,
removed the Primacy from Antioch, seeing that the person of Peter could not be
in one place, and the Seat of his primacy in another? When Peter was in some
Town of Pontus or Galatia, was the Seat of the Universal Church in that Town?
Chrysostom was not of that opinion; For he speaks of the Church of Antioch in
this manner, in the third Homily to the people of Antioch, according to the
version of Bernard of Bress, revised and corrected by the Jesuit Fronto
Ducaeus, a learned man in the Greek tongue; (...).
Consider, (says he) the greatness of the Town, and that our care at this
present, is not of one soul, or two, or three, or ten, but de millibus
infinitis, de totius orbis capite, of infinite thousands, of the capital of all
the world: It is the City, in which Christians were first so called. And in the
seventh Homily upon Matthew, he speaks thus to the people of Antioch; (...).
When it is question of disputing of precedence, you raise your ambition so
high, as to presume to have the presidency over all the earth, because this
Town has the first given name to Christians. Whence it appears, that the
Church of Antioch would at that time prefer her self before the Church of Rome.
The same Father in his Sermon upon Ignatius, having said that Peter, to whom
the Lord Jesus gave the keys, and to whom he permitted the government of the
Church, has long sojourned in Antioch, he infers thence (...). that our
City (meaning Antioch) may be set in the balance against all the world; Which
expression in Greek, is as much as if he said, Our City is equal in dignity to
any City in the world, and not inferior to any, and by consequent, yields not
to the City of Rome. Which he would not have said, had he believed that Peter
had taken the Seat of Primacy from Antioch, to transport it to Rome. Basil in
the fiftieth Epistle, goes further, saying, that Meletius Patriarch of Antioch,
(...).
did preside over the whole body of the Church. For Basil Bishop of Cesarea,
was under the Patriarch of Antioch, whom he esteeemed not to be inferior to the
Roman Bishop, as we shall see hereafter.

So we come to this issue, and here hold fast, that since the Word of God says
not that the Bishop of Rome must be successor of Saint Peter, in the Office of
Head of the Universal Church, yea and gives no successor to him in his
Apostleship, nor in his primacy over the Universal Church, the Pope has but a
false title to that succession which he brags of, and that it is a mere humane
invention without the Word of God.

Here I call upon the consciences of all lovers of truth (for here the spring
of the error is laid open) to see with what spirit of stumbling God has
smitten the Adversaries. Cardinal Bellarmin in his preface to the Books de
Pontifice Romano, speaks thus; What thing is in question when we treat of the
Primacy of the Pope? Etenim de qua re agitur cum de primatu Pontificis agitur?
Brevissime dicam, de summa rei Christianae. Id enim quaeritur, Debeatne
Ecclesia diutius consistere, an vero dissolvi and concidere? Quid enim aliud
est quaerere an oporteat ab aedificio fundamentum removere? etc.
To speak in few words, it is then the question of the sum [or the main
substance] of Christianity. For the question is, whether the Church must
subsist any longer, or be dissolved and perish? For what is it else but to ask
Whether the foundation must be taken away from the building? It is no wonder
that he speaks so, since the Roman Church holds the Pope to be the foundation
of the Church, and the sovereign and infallible judge of matters of faith,
whose authority is above the Scriptures, which receive from him (belike) all
the authority they have. So that by this account, the Popes authority being
overthrown, down falls the Church, and the authority of Scripture, and the whole
Doctrine of salvation vanishes away.

Since then from the Popes succession in the primacy of Saint Peter, the whole
Christian Religion does depend, reason did require, that this succession should
be instituted by God and grounded on his Word. But that Cardinal himself
acknowledges, that God has taken no order about it in his word, and that this
point is not a matter of divine right, as in effect our Adversaries allege no
divine testimony, nor one single word of Scripture to prove that succession.
These be the very words of that same Cardinal Jesuit, in his second book de
Pontifice, in the twelfth chapter, Observandum est, licet sort non sit de jure
divino Romanum Pontificem, ut Romanum. Pontificem, Petro succedere; tamen id ad
fidem Catholicam pertinere. Non enim est idem aliquid esse de fide and de
juredivino. Nec enim de jure divino fuit ut Paulus haberet penulam; est tamen
hoc ipsum de fide Paulum habuisse penulam. Et si autem Romanum Pontificum
succedere Petio non habeatur express in Scripturis, etc.
We must observe (says he) that although perhaps it is not a point of divine
right, that the Roman Pope, as Roman Pope, be a successor of Peter; yet that
belongs to the Catholic faith: For to be of the faith, and to be of divine
right, are not all one. It is not a thing of divine right, that Paul had a
cloak; yet it is a point of faith, that Paul had a cloak. Then he does
ingenuously confess, That it is not found in Scripture, that the Roman Pope is
successor of Peter; tacitly acknowledging, that Saint Paul's cloak is far more
certain then the Popes succession, since Scripture speaks of that cloak, but of
that succession not one word.

Every one that has some liberty of Judgment, will easily acknowledge, that
by this Doctrine, all Christian Religion is blown up, and that the enemy of our
salvation brings us this way strait to Atheism, since they will have the
authority of Scripture, and by consequent that of Gods Law, and of the Doctrine
of salvation contained in the Scripture, to be grounded upon the authority of
the Church, and the authority of the Church upon the Popes authority, and the
Popes authority upon his succession to Saint Peter's primacy; And that this
succession is not of divine right, as our Adversaries confess, and is destitute
of all testimonies of Gods Word. So that to come to the basis of their
building, it is found that they ground the certitude of the divine oracles upon
an humane tradition, and such a tradition as we have showed to be false, and
will further show it hereafter.

CHAP. 37. Of the succession of Popes and Cardinals. By what ways the Popedom
uses to be obtained. Of Schisms: And that the Popes have no lawful succession.
WHo so shall truly know the succession of the Pope and the Cardinals, and by
what means both they and other Prelates enter into their charges, will wonder
how persons destitute of all lawful succession, who have corrupted the charge
of Pastor of the Church, and have turned it to other uses, having intruded
themselves by violence and fraud, and made of their charge a merchandise, can
be so urgent to ask us a reason of our calling. It seems that they look for
companions of their usurpation, and think themselves less guilty if they can
involve us in the same guilt.

Since the Pope claims the succession of Saint Peter, it will be to good
purpose to compare them together. Peter going to preach from Town to Town, on
foot, without money or provision for his journey, paying tribute unto Caesar,
teaching chastity, fidelity and innocence, dispencing not unto the other
Apostles the free and entire use of the keys; The Pope not preaching the
Gospel, riding upon men's shoulders, wearing a triple Crown sparkling with
Diamonds, giving his pantable unto Kings to kiss, The Emperor the day that he
receives the Crown from the Popes hand, lays a mass of gold at the Popes
feet. That ceremony is described in the first Book of the Sacred Ceremonies in
the 5. Section, chapter 3. Caesar Pontificis pedes in reverentiam Salvatoris devote
osculatur. And a little after, Caesar iterum genu fleetens auri massam ad Pedes
Pontificis offert, habetque verba ad Pontificem, gratias agens pro honor
suscepto.
making Caesar to pay tribute to him; suffering himself to be called God, and
the Divine Majesty, causing himself to be adored; Canonizing Saints; fetching
souls out of Purgatory; deposing Kings; giving and taking away Crowns;
bestowing pardons of an hundred thousand years; putting Kingdoms and States in
Interdict, and exposing them as a prey to the first Conqueror; dispensing men
from keeping their vows, and the Oath made unto God, and the obedience sworn to
their Sovereign Prince; dissolving marriages; exempting children from the
subjection due to their Parents; setting up Brothel-houses, permitting
whoredom, and forbidding marriage; robbing other Bishops of part of the use of
the Keys, reserving certain cases to himself, from which none but he can
absolve; prohibiting the reading of the holy Scripture, and giving in stead of
the Scripture Images, and a service in an unknown language. Whosoever will make
this comparison, will easily acknowledge that the Pope cannot be a successor of
St. Peter; but as night suceeeds the day, and sickness health; and that the
name and succession of St. Peter is set forth by the Popes slaves, rather to
mock the world, then out of any opinion that the Pope is a successor of that
Apostle. For is it possible that it should be the same charge, when the
Functions are so contrary, seeing that St. Peter has done nothing at all of
all that the Pope does, and the Pope does nothing at all of all that St. Peter
has done? It is not then without cause, (and there is some mystery in it)
that the Popes renouncing the name of their Baptism when they become Popes, and
taking another name, never take the name of Peter, as not convenient for them.
Yea if any before he was Pope was named Peter, he leaves that name as soon as
he is Pope to take another. So did Peter de Luna, who having obtained the
Popedom of Avignon, took the name of Benedict the XIII. but Gregory the XIII.
his Antipope called him Peter, to reproach him, and anger him. Before him
Peter Bishop of Pavia, being created Pope in the year 984. would be called John
the XIV.

The like comparison can be made between the ancient Bishops of Rome, and the
new. For in the first ages of the Christian Church, the Bishops of Rome
qualified themselves Bishops of the City of Rome only, and took no notice of
the businesses of any Church never so little remote from Rome. They preached
the Gospel, and were eminent only in Martyrdom in the eyes of the world, men
full of zeal, and in deep poverty, as we will show hereafter.

The Roman Bishops of the latter ages who have led Armies, given battles,
fulminated Emperors, filled Christendom with blood, set up a worldly Monarchy,
and heaped up wealth beyond the greatest Kings; can they be successors of those
good Bishops? Certainly where the nature of the Office is altogether changed,
there may be a succession in in the place, but not in the Office of the ancient
Bishops of Rome.

In that succession of place, the lower we go, the worser things do we find.
Bellar. de noris Ecclesiae, c. 8.. Addo ultimo, quod Ecclesiae illae
Patriarchales per longa tempora habuerint Episcopos manifestos baereticos, unde
interrupta est successio veterum Pastorum.
Our Adversaries hold that Heresy breaks the succession in Episcopacy: Now
the Chair of the Bishop of Rome was stained with many Heresies, which the very
Roman Church does condemn. Athanasius in his Epistle to the Solitaries, says,
that (...).
Liberius Bishop of Rome subscribed to Arianism; and Hilary in his Fragments,
very often does anathematize him, because he had subscribed the Confession of
the Arians formed at Syrmium. Hieron. in Fortunatiano.
Hierome says the same in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers.

Viglius Bishop of Rome, has approved by Letters the Eutychian Heresy. His
whole Letters are set down by Liberat Deacon of Carthage, in the 22. chap. of
his Breviary, where he openly declares that he does not acknowledge two
Natures in Christ; for which Baron, an. 537.. 14. Leo 2. Epist. ad Constantin.
Imp.
Baronius taunts him. Oper. 55. capitum, c. 48. page 308.
Hinckmarus says that Vigilius, from an Apostolical Pope is become an
Heretic, and that after many horrible Oaths, when he was detained at
Constantinople. Cardinal du Perron calls that Vigilius Simoniacal, Heretic,
false Pope, and a favourer of Heretics, whilst his Antipope Sylverius lived;
but that he became a true Pope after the death of Sylverius, whom he cruelly
put to death in Prison. Thus that Vigilius from a false and heretical Pope, and
an Usurper, is become a holy and a lawful one by the murder of the lawful
Pope. Being propped with the power of Belisarius who had sold him the Popedom
for ready money, he could do what he would with the Roman Clergy. But though
the Clergy approved him, yet was he a Symoniacal man, and a murderer of his
Predecessor, and he never revoked his Heretical Epistles. Neither did his
instalment hinder Reparatus Bishop of Carthage, from gathering a Council of
African Bishops in the year 549. where Anathema was pronounced against that
Vigilius, as Victor Tunensis relates in his Chronicle.

Honorius the I. Bishop of Rome, is condemned as an Heretic Monothelite by
three Universal Councils, the sixth, the seventh, and the eight. And Leo II.
Bishop of Rome, successor to that Honorius, does detest him as one that had
defiled the Roman See by his heresy. Ep. 93. inter Epistolas Augustini, and
August. lib. 1. in Julianum.
Innocent the I. has taught that the participation of the Eucharist was
necessary to little children to be saved. This Doctrine is condemned with
Anathema by the Council of Trent, Sess. XXI.

John XXIII. was condemned and deposed by the Council of Constance, Session XI.
for diverse crimes, one of the least being that he publicly and notoriously
taught and maintained that the soul is mortal, and that there is neither
Paradise nor Hell. There was at that time three Popes Excommunicating one
another, and a Schism which lasted well nigh 50. years. And by consequent, the
Popes that now reign, are Successors to Heretical and Schismatical Popes.

The Ancient Canons declare him that has bought the Episcopacy with money, to
be no lawful Bishop. The 29. Canon of the Apostles is such. (...).
If any Bishop or Priest, or Deacon is entered into possession of that dignity
with money, let him be deposed, both himself, and he that ordained him. And
that Canon is repeated in the second Council of Nice in the 5. Canon. The
second Canon of the Council of Chalcedon says, If any Bishop gives ordination
for money, and puts to sale such a grace which is not saleable, let him be
endangered to lose his own degree; and let not him that is so ordained receive
any benefit by his ordination or promotion, but let him be expelled from that
dignity and charge which he has obtained with money. See Liberati Breviarium,
c. 22.
in the Roman Decree in the first question of the first cause many the like
Canons, and many places of the Fathers. Against that rule Vigilius obtained the
Popedom, having bought it of Belisarius Leiutenant to the Emperor Justinian in
Italy, for two hundred marks of Gold, the which nevertheless he refused since
to pay, and cosened Belisarius. The time in which the Harlots Marozia and
Theodora reigned at Rome, is full of such examples. And yet at this time Kings
and Princes give Pensions to Cardinals residing at Rome, and buy their
suffrages very dear to have a Pope of their party. The factions made for that
are shameful. This reproach Bernard makes to Pope Eugenius in the 4. Book De
Consideratione; Quem dabis mihi de tota maxima urbe qui te in Papam receperit,
pretio seu spepretii non interveniente?
Can thou give me any in this great City that has received thee Pope without
reward, and without some hope of gain intervening? See then what their
succession is; It is a mere traffic: So that a Simoniacal Pope succeeds
another bought Pope. But yet they will have us to presume that such a Pope who
sets up the bank in Gods Temple, is presently filled with the Holy Ghost, and
cannot err in the Faith.

In the year 882. Marin, or Martin, attained to the Papal dignity, of whom
Platina says, that he Malis artibus Pontificatum adeptus est.
came to the Popedom by ill ways. There was then one Formosus Bishop of Porto,
who by the will of Pope John the IX. had been obliged by Oath never to receive
Episcopacy, though it were presented unto him. But that Marin delivered him
from that Oath by a dispensation, giving him leave to be forsworn with a good
conscience. At that time the Counts of Tusculum had such a power at Rome, that
they made Popes such as they listed. Marin being dead, they promoted Adrian the
III. to the Popedom, and after him Stephen the VII. Platina, Stella, Sigonius
de regno Italiae, lib. 6. Baron. An. 897.. 2.
to whom Formosus succeeded, who made no difficulty to receive the Popedom
against his Oath. This Formosus had but a short reign; he had Bonifacius the
VII. for his successor, whom Steven the VIII. succeeded, who unburyed the body
of Formosus, and having arrayed him with his Priestly Robes, put him in full
Synod upon the Popes Seat; then having cut his fingers wherewith he gave the
blessing, caused him to be dragged and cast into the Tiber, declaring him a
perjured man, and an unlawful Pope. That Steven for his tyrannies was taken by
the Roman people, and strangled in prison.

To that Steven Romanus succeeded, and to him John the X. both which restored
Formosus again to his good name: For this John assembled a Council at Ravenna,
where all the Acts of Formosus, were made valid, and his perjury approved. But
Sergius that came after, abrogated all that, and again unburyed the body of
Formosus with a thousand reproaches. From this Formosus Usurper of the Popedom
against his Oath, the following Popes are descended.

It is a particular stain to that age, that in it the Pope began to authorize
perjury, and to dispense from Oaths. A power which the Popes have often used
since: See the 6. question of the 15. Cause of the Decree, which is full of
such examples. Now the Word of God forbids nothing more expressly then perjury;
Levit. 19.22. Psalm. 15.
and calls it a profanation of Gods Name, praising the man that swears to his
own hurt, and disappointeth not. Joshua deceived by the Gibeonites, yet
preserved their lives rather then violate his faith. 1 Samuel 14.44.
King Saul resolves rather to kill his son, then to go against his Oath; For
Heb. 6.10.
an oath is that which decideth all differences among men: And whosoever brings
in the license of for swearing, breaks all bonds of Society among men.
Wherefore the Mahumetans, who are very religious in keeping their Oath, fear to
contract with a Christian, because they know that the Pope dispenses from
oaths. This truly is exalting ones self above God: for who so dispenses a
servant from obeying his Master, is greater then that Master. Bellarmine
daubeth this with a sly, yet a slight excuse, in the 21. chapter of his Book
against Barklay; saying, that the Pope by that dispensation hinders not a man
to be faithful to God, but only declares that God will not have him in this or
that matter to keep his Oath: For he will have us to believe, that the Pope
knows Gods intent about it, and that God has revealed it unto him. A thing
which none will believe but such as will be deceived.

But to return to Pope Formosus, Baronius is angry with Pope Steven for
condemning the memory of Formosus, and for determining by a Council ruled by
his authority, that a Pope come to the Popedom against his Oath, was an
unlawful Pope, not regarding that Pope Marinus had dispensed him from his Oath.
Baronius then holding that a Pope can dispense from Oaths, and discharge a man
from the promise made unto God, holds also that this Steven was in an error,
and that he was no lawful Pope. If we granted (says he) that Steven the VII.
has erred in the Faith, the authority of the holy See should not be hurt by
it, because he attained to the Papal dignity by tyranny, not by lawful
Election. And yet from that Pope, and from others of that age, who had likewise
got up by intrusion, the following Popes are descended; and upon that depends
the succession of the Popes of this age.

The same Baronius on the year 897. says, Hos Romana Ecclesia passa est
Tyrannos Thusciae Principes, Dominantes sive pecuniis sive armis populo
cleroque Romano; per quos intrusi in Cathedram Petri solium Christi sunt
homines monstruousi, vitae turpissimae.
that the Princes of Tuscany domineering over the people and Clergy of Rome,
have intruded by arms and money into St. Peter's Chair, which is the Throne of
Christ, monstrous men of a most impure life, whom he acknowledges not for
lawful Popes. Which disorder having continued at Rome above one hundred and
fifty years; I do not see where that succession from St. Peter can be found; or
how the thread of that succession so many times broken could ever be knit
again: For in that ninth and tenth age, well nigh fifty Popes will be found who
came to the Sea either by the power of the Counts of Tuscany, or by the faction
and credit of Theodora an infamous harlot, and of her two daughters Marosta and
Theodora, who reigned at Rome many years, and made and unmade Popes. Of which
disorder Cardinal Bellarmin speaks thus Quae tunc facies Ecclesiae Romanae?
quam foedissima, cum Romae dominarentur potentissimae aeque ac sordidissimae
meretrices, quarum arbitrio mutarentur seeds, darentur Episcopi, and quod
auditu horrendum and infandum est, intruderentur in sedem Petri earum amasii
pseudopontifices qui non sunt nisi ad confignanda tanta tempora in Catalogo
Romanorum Pontificum scripti!
What was then the face of the Roman Church and how ugly, when most powerful
and most filthy whores bore the rule at Rome? at whose pleasure Popes were
changed, and Bishoprics were given: and that which is the most horrible to
hear, and not fit to speak, their ruffians false Popes were thrust into Peter's
See. Wherefore the same Cardinal acknowledging such Popes to have been
unlawful, says that the history mentions those Popes only to mark the years
of so long a time: Thereby acknowledging, that for a long time the Roman Church
has been without Popes. And that one may know how great that interval is, and
how long that disorder continued in the Church of Rome, hear Genebrard
speaking, who was a flatterer of the Popes in the highest degree. So he speaks
in the year 901. of his Chronicle. Hoc uno hoc saeculum infelix, quod per annos
fere 150. Pontifices circiter 50. a virtute majorum prorsus defecerunt;
Apotactici Apostacique potius quam Apostolici.
In this thing only this age was unfortunate, that for the space of well nigh a
hundred and fifty years, above fifty Popes did altogether degenerate from the
virtue of their ancestors, being rather Apotactick or Apostatick then
Apostolic. Sigonius makes that space of two hundred years.

In the year 912. John the X. before Archbishop of Ravenna, was chosen Pope. He
bestowed the Archbishopick of Rhemes upon a Child of five years old, as
Frodoard relates in the 19. chap. of the 4. Book of his history. Whereby it is
evident, that it is not of late years that the calling is corrupted in the
Roman Church, and the Office shamefully prostituted. Of this Baronius himself
is ashamed, and An. 925.. 9, 10, and 11. Vidisti Lector, cujus authoritate
Pontificis (si tamen ille Pontifex dicendus) id primum fuerat introductum in
Ecclesiam Dei. Johann. X. quo turpior nullus, cujus sicut ingressus in
cathedram Petri infamissimus, ita and exitus nesandissimus.
says, that is a prodigious thing, unheard of before in the Christian world,
and never entered into man's mind, that a child who scarce was learning his
letters under the rod, should be elected Archbishop of Rhemes. Of this Pope
John the X. Baronius says, that his entry into the Popedom was most infamous,
and his end most wicked. And on the year 908.. 7. he says, that then God had
forgotten his Church.

In the year of the Lord 931. John the XI. came to the Popedom. He was a
bastard, son to Pope Sergius, by the whore Morozia. Upon which Baronius Baron.
an. 931.. 1.
says, The holy Church of God, that is the Roman, suffered her self to be
shamefully trodden under by such a monster.

After him came many Popes creatures of the forenamed harlots, until John the
XII. son to a Roman Consul, who was created Pope by his fathers faction, being
but eighteen years old, as Baronius relates, Baronius. an. 935.. 4.
who detesteth that John as an execrable monster. The Emperor Otho called a
Council where he was deposed, and Leo the VIII. set in his room An. 963. That
Pope renewed the constitution of Adrian I. whereby it is ordained, that the
Pope be thenceforth elected by the Emperor. But as soon as the Emperor was gone
out of Italy, Pope John returned to Rome, expelled Leo and degraded him, having
called a Council against him. Soon after being taken in adultery, he was so
beaten that he dyed of it. Luitprandus in the 6. Book, chap. 11. and Fasciculus
temporum, say, that this Fasciculus, Temp. Tandem cum uxore cujusdam se
oblectans a Diabolo in tempore percutitur and sine poenitentia moritur. Eadem
habet Luitprandus.
John lying with some bodies wife, was so beaten by the Devil in the temples of
his head, that he died of it a sevennight after. This Pope for money created
children Bishops, drunk the Devils health, playing at dice he called upon
Jupiter and Venus, and conferred holy Orders in a stable.

At that time there was two Popes, for the Romans would have none of those
which the Emperor had elected, and created others; and those Popes killed one
another. One of which called Bonifacius, put two Antipopes to death, keeping
the Popedom by violence; for then the strongest and the craftiest carried it,
and there was no other succession. And one Crescentius usurping a tyranny
within Rome, would make and unmake Popes, in spite of the Emperor, who in the
end took him and put him to death.

At the same time, a Council was held at Rhemes, Hugh Capet then reigning; In
which Council Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans bewaileth thus the state of the Roman
Church. O lugenda Roma quae nostris majoribus clara patrum lumina protulisti,
nostris temporibus monstrosas tenebras futuris seculis famosas effudisti!
O deplorable Rome, which in our ancestors time have produced Fathers that were
bright lights, now thou have spread monstrous darkness, which shall be infamous
in future ages! And after he had represented the enormity of the Popes of his
time, he adds, Number talibus hominum monstris ignominia plenis, scientia
divinarum rerum vacuis, innumeros sacerdotes Dei per orbem terrarum scientia
and vitae merito conspicuos subjici decretum est? Doleo Ecclesiam tam foede
deturpatam esse ab iis qui eam regunt.
Is it a thing decreed, that so many of Gods Priests over all the world, men
eminent in learning and in holy life, must be subject to such monsters of men,
full of infamy, and empty of knowledge of divine things? And a little after,
Quid hunc Reverendi Patres, in sublimi solio residentem vest purpurea and
aurea radiantem, quid hunc esse censetis? Nimirum si charitate destituitur,
solaque scientia inflatur, Antichristus est in solio Dei residens.
What think ye then Reverend Fathers, this Pope to be, who sits in a high
throne, glittering with scarlet and gold? If he have no charity, and is puffed up
with learning only, He is the Antichrist, sitting in the throne of God. Again,
in the same vein; But for the animosity of Kings dissenting, it seems that we
ought rather to be judged by them then by that city [of Rome] which being
herself venal, weighs judgments by the weight of money. He says more, that
Antichrist is near, and that the mystery of iniquity advances it self. To
which purpose he alleges the Epistle of the VI. Council of Carthage to
Celestinus, where the Bishops of Africa warn him not to meddle any more with
their businesses, to receive no appeals from Africa, not to send his Legates
thither, and not to bring the pride of the world into the Church. Of which
Epistle we shall speak afterward in the right place. It is very observable,
that this Arnulphus, for thus dealing with the Pope, fared never the worse,
neither did any censure pass upon him, but he kept in his place and in the
Kings favor; For at that time France was but half subject unto the Papal See,
and the French Kings feared not to be deposed by the Pope.

In the year 984. according to Sigonius, in the beginning of the 7. Book of the
Kingdom of Italy, or according to Baronius, in the year 985. Bonifacius, who
would be called John the XV. having killed two Popes, invaded the Popedom by
violence and bribery. Baronius calls him a robber and a thief, who had not so
much as a hair of a true Pope.

In the year 998. John the XVIII. (as Platina relates it) having won
Crescentius a Roman Consul with money, possessed himself of the Popedom which he
had bought.

In the year 999. Gerbert Archbishop of Rhemes, and since Archbishop of
Ravenna, was promoted to the Popedom by the Emperor Otho the III. who had been
his scholar, and was surnamed Sylvester the II. Martinus in Chronico. Galfridus
in Supplemento. Sigertus, Platina, Stella, Onuphrius, Fasciculus temporum and
alii plures.
Historians with a great consent say, that to obtain the Popedom, he made a
paction with the Devil, and made him an absolute gift of his soul, to be
carried away by him after his death. Baronius in the year 999. says this to be
a fable, but brings no proof to confute it. Genebrard in his Chronicle in the
year 1007. speaks thus of the Popes of that time, The Popes of that time being
intruded by the Emperors rather then elected, were monsters: Whereby the
lawful succession was interrupted, as sometimes under the Synagogue in the
time of the Antiochi.

In the year of our Lord 1033. Benedictus the IX. son to Albertus Count of
Tusculum, being but ten years old, was created Pope by the authority and
faction of his father, as it is acknowledged by Coeffeteau p. 625. of his Book
against the Mystery of iniquity.
Bishop of Dardanie. Cardinal Benno says, that he was addicted to Magical
arts. Such was the succession of St. Peter: Children and Magicians were
admitted to it. Cardinal Peter Damianus says, Damian. Epist. ad Nicol. 2.
Pontificem.
that after his death he appeared to a man in the shape of an ass, and said,
that he was so transformed because he had lived like a beast. Platina says the
same, and Fasciculus temporum. And Coeffeteau in the fore-alledged place says,
that Benedictus the IX. was infamous for all sorts of crimes, which give
probability to that vision that Damianus and others relate of him.

That Benedictus being expelled by the Romans Glaber says, that Sylvester was
12. years old when he was elected; but Baronius says that he was but ten.
Sylvester the III. was put in his place, being but ten or twelve years old,
and that by faction and bribery, as Platina says. Such was the succession in
those days; but after nine and forty days Benedictus was restored by his
faction. Whereupon Platina adds, Eo tunc Pontificatus devenerat, ut qui plus
largitione and ambitione, non dico sanctitate vitae and doctrina valeret, is
tantum dignitatis gradum, bonis oppressis and rejectis, obtineret, etc. 3. and
4.
Popedom was then come to this, that he that prevailed, not in holiness of life
and learning, but in gifts and ambition, attained to that great dignity, good
men being oppressed and rejected; and would to God that our time had not retained
that custom. Likewise Johannes Romanam occupat sedem, qui non legitime vocatus
a Deo sedet, sed malis artibus ascendit ad ipsam. Baron. An. 1027. 13. and. 7.
Baronius, An. 1024. of his Annals, speaking of John the XX. brother to
Benedictus the IX. says, that he invaded the Sea unworthily and tyrannically,
and climbed to it by wicked ways. And yet this is the same Pope who put
Romualdus in the list of the Saints, and St. Martial in the number of the
Apostles, as if a devil should carry a soul into Paradise. Where the great
absurdity is, that this St. Martial is an imaginary Saint, who was put in
heaven, and never was in earth; For he of whom Gregorius Turonensis speaks in
his first Book, chap. 30. is above an hundred years posterior to that false
Martial, whom they say to have been cosen to St. Peter, and to have been sent
by him to preach in Gauls. Of such Popes then the Popes of our time are
successors.

Never was the like confusion. That Baronius, Platina, Fasciculus, Coesseteau,
p. 625.
Benedictus the IX. being made Pope, not long after sold the Sea to John
Archpriest of Rome; And after he had received the money, expelled the same
John: So there were three Popes together, the one of which put the two others
out by devilish ways. And all three in the end yielded the Sea to Gregory the
VI. for a great sum of money. But the Emperor Henry the II. turned them all out
in the year 1044. and made Syndeger Bishop of Bamberg Pope, who called himself
Clement the II. Of those Popes Platina in Gregor. VI. Henricus II. in Italiam
cum magno exercitu veniens, habita Synodo, cum Benedictum nonum, Sylvestrum
tertium, Gregorium sextum tanquam tria teterrima monstra abdicare se
magistratur coegisset.
Platina speaks thus: Henry the II. coming into Italy with a great army, called
a Synod, and constrained Benedict the IX. Sylvester the III. and Gregory the
VI. three horrible monsters, to leave the Magistracy. In that time it was hard
to find any in the Monasteries that could read. And Page 628. of his Book
against the Mystery of Iniquity, of M. du Plessis.
Coeffetenu upon this place says, that in that time the chair of St. Peter was
a shop of Simon Magus. From those merchants the Popes of these times are
descended. At the same time in the year 1045. the Kingdom of Poland was made
subject to the Roman See, and obliged to pay to the Pope an obol by the pole.
England also about that time, was brought under the same yoke, and that tribute
by the pole was called Peter's penny.

Sigonius in the 8. Book of the Kingdom of Italy says, that Henry the II.
created a German Pope, to heal the Church of Rome, that had been sick 200.
years. And the sickness which he means, is that which we have represented
before, that the Papal See was exposed as a prey, and a price for violence,
covetousness and ambition. That the Popedom was for a long time conferred by
harlots that reigned at Rome, or by secular men, whose faction was prevalent at
Rome, who made their children Popes by strong hand at nine or ten years of age.
That the Popedom was put to sale and possessed by Necromancers, adulterers, and
murderers. That ordinarily there was many Popes together that expelled one
another. And that the most wicked and strongest in faction, or he that gave
most would carry it. So that among all those wild doings a lawful succession
is no more to be found then fire in ice.

The Emperor thinking to have mended all disorders, came short of his hope; for
Clement the II. whom he had made Pope, was persently after poisoned. Platina
says, the Historians affirm that he was poisoned by his successor Damasus the
II. Flatina in Damaso II. Damasus II. Pontificatum per vim obtinet nullo cleri
populique consensu. Adeo enim inolevenat hic mos ut jam cuique ambitioso
liceret Petri sedem invadere.
For (says the same Platina) that custom had got strength, that to every
ambitious man it was permitted to invade St. Peter's See. But that Damasus was
used as he had used his predecessor, and he died three and twenty days after
his creation.

Leo the IX. succeeded him, who playing the Captain, led an army against the
Normans, who routed him in battle, and took him prisoner.

In the year 1057. Victor the II. successor to Leo, died with poison, which was
given him in the chalice of the Mass. His Subdeacon did him that good Office,
who thereby gave work to the Doctors that maintain transubstantiation. For
they ask whether the blood of Christ can be poisoned? Vide Did. 82. Can.
Presbyter, and ibid. Glossam.
Whether accidents, that is, lines, shape, whitness, redness, can be poisoned?
For if that be, accidents must become the subject of a substance. In that
Victor's time began the custom of changing bodily penances, as fasting and
pilgrimage, into pecuniary pains. Peter Damianus Bishop of Ostia and Cardinal,
speaks thus of it, Non ignoras quin cum a poenitentibus terras, possessiones
agrorum videlicet accipimus, juxta mensuram muneris eis de quantitate
poenitentiae relaxamus. Baron. an. 1055.. 9. and seq.
Thou know, that when we receive from the penitent grounds and fields, we
bate of the penance according to the proportion of that they give. And
Baronius freely acknowledges with Damianus, that thereby the stock of the
Church was raised.

In the year 1061. two Popes were elected, the one by the Romans, who was
called Alexander the II. the other by the Emperor Henry the IV. who called
himself Honorius the II. Between whom there was hard scuffing and much
bloodshed; Honorius had the worst of it, and was in the end constrained to quit
the place.

Otho Frisingensis Chron. lib. 6. cap. 34. Leo Ostiensis lib. 3. Chron. Cassin.
c. 20.
In the year 1084. the Emperor Henry the IV. having caused Gregory the VII. to
be deposed by a Synod, made Clement the III. Pope. Gregory expelled from Rome,
dyed soon after out of grief at Salernum. But after his death, the Countess
Mathild or Maud, who called herself St. Peter's daughter, helped by the Normans,
set on Desiderius Abbot of Mount Cassin to take the Popedom; And he born up by
the Normans, set upon Clement, and after great slaughter drove him out of Rome,
and making himself Pope, called himself Victor the III. Platina following
Martinus Polonus, says, that he was poisoned in the chalice of the Mass. Urban
the II. succeeded; who presently fulminated Clement the AntiPope with
excommunications; but he was maintained by the Emperors power, and kept his See
at Placentia, thundering likewise against Urban, who for his safety left Rome,
and retiring into France, assembled a Council at Clermont in Auvergne against
Clement, and Clement another at Rome against Urban. This is that Urban Causa
15. q. 6. Canone Juratos. Juratos milites Hugoni Comiti ne ipsi quandiu
excommunicatus est serviant prohibeto. Coeffeteau p. 716. and 732. and 3. and
6. Vide Helmondi Historiam Sclavonicam, and Albertum Krantzium and Sigisbertum.
who by an express Decree for bad keeping faith to an excommunicate person.

Urban being dead, Paschal the II. succeeded, Clement the III. the Antipope
still living, and the Roman Church having two heads. This Paschal put Clement
out of Rome by force of arms, and caused the Emperors son to rebel against his
father. That great Emperor laden with so many victories, was in his old age
put down from the Empire by his son Henry, at the Popes instigation, who would
not so much as give the son leave to bury his father. This was the ruin of
Clement the III. so that Paschal remained victorious. But by the just
Judgemennt of God it came to pass, that this same Henry whom Paschal had set on
against his father, was angry with Paschal, and took him prisoner.

Paschal being dead, the Romans created a Pope who called himself Gelasius the
II. But the Emperor caused another to be chosen, who was called Gregory the
VIII. Gelasius beind dead shortly after, at Vienna in Daulphine, Calixtus the
II. succeeded, who having found the way to lay hold on Gregory the VIII. clad
him with raw and bloody goat skins with the flesh-side outward, made him ride
about upon a Camel with his face toward the tail, and giving him the title
Abbas, Fuggerus, Platina, V^pergensis.
of Antichrist, condemned him to perpetual prison. Thus strength prevailed; for
one must always presume (if we believe our Adversaries) that the strongest
Pope was the lawful. This is that Calixtus that sent Matthew. Paris in Henrico
I. Ranulph. in Polych on l. 7. c. 7. Westmonaster.
John de Crema Legate into England, to take the Priests wives from them. But
that Legate was found in a baudy-house at London, lying with a harlot, whereby
his legation was made odious.

In the year 1130. which was the time of Bernard, part of the Cardinals elected
Innocent II. But a contrary faction elected Anacletus the II. These two Popes
were excommunicating one another, and continually calling one another
Antichrists, and assembling contrary Councils. Of these two Popes Bernard gives
this verdict in the hundred twenty fifth Epistle. This Apocalyptical Beast to
whom a mouth was given speaking blasphemy, and that makes war with the Saints,
holds St. Peter's chair like a Lion prepared for the prey; and the other Beast
silently blows near you, like the cub of a wild beast lurking in a close
place, These Popes were fulminating one against the other and fighting cruelly.

Anaclet having held the Sea eight years, and put Innocent out of Rome, died:
His death put life into the courage of Innocent, who soon after installed
himself at Rome. That Innocent was the true Pope, there is no proof, but that
he overcame, and had the better success.

The like happened in the year 1160. For Pope Adrian the fourth being dead, the
Cardinals were divided into two factions: The one chose Octavian, who would be
called Victor the IV. The other chose Rolland; who took the name of Alexander
the III. Victor having made himself Master of Rome, put Alexander out: Whence
followed many reciprocal excommunications, whereby they sent one another, and
all their adherents into hell; so that there was not one in the whole Roman
Church, but was excommunicated. Victor was confirmed by a Council held at
Pavia: But Alexander fled into France, where he assembled a Council against
Victor, and against the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa Shortly after Victor died,
whom Paschal the III. succeeded, and Calixtus succeeded Paschal: But Alexander
held out, and by his practices got himself, called by the people of Rome: Being
in Italy, he created many enemies unto Frederick, and made the Towns of
Lombardy to revolt from him: Whereby the Emperor was constrained to be a Suitor
to Alexander for peace, whom he came to meet at Venicei.

This Pope received the Emperor upon the stairs of the Church of Saint Mark at
Venice. Whereas the Emperor was stooping to kiss the pantable of Alexander, the
Pope trod upon his neck with his foot, saying, Thou shall tread upon the asp^
and adder, the Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under feet: Nauclerus 2
vol. Genesis 40. Bergomensis in Supplem. Chron ad ann. 1160. Petrus Justini^nus l.
2. rerum Venetarum. Sabellicus, l. 7. Decad. 5. Azor. institut. moral. part. 2.
l. 5. c. 43. Bard in victoria navali, p. 140. and 141.
That History is related by Nauclerus, Sabellicus, Papirius, Masso, Petrus
Justinianus, and many more. And the Jesuit Azorius puts this heroical act
among the triumphs of the Church. The ill success of the businesses of
Frederick, made this Alexander to be held a successor of Saint Peter. If the
Emperor had prospered, Calixtus would have been the lawful Pope, and Alexander
an usurper. For our Adversaries to maintain the succession of the Popes,
presuppose always that the stronger of the Antipopes was the lawful Pope,
although he was the most vicious, and although he had crept into the Popedom by
fraud and corruption, and kept it by violence.

Observe that the Antipopes had created many Bishops, and those Bishops many
Priests, and that he that remained victorious would degrade all those Bishops
and Priests, as unlawfully created by an usurper. Whence it happened, that the
Sacraments and absolutions conferred by those Bishops and Priests were void, by
which means many died without Baptism, and without Sacraments, and without
Remission of sins.

Ranulphus Poly chronico Roger. Annal. Baron. an. 1191.
In the year 1191. Celestin the III. came to the Popedom, being fourscore years
old. The Emperor Henry the VI. came to him to receive the Imperial crown from
his hands. And as he bowed to kiss the Popes feet, Celestin with his foot smote
Henry's crown, and made it fall, to show that he had the power to take it from
him, when he listed: Baronius approves that action.

In the year 1269. died Pope Clement the IV. after whom, the Roman Church was
two years and nine months without a Pope. So that the^thred of that imaginary
succession was long interrupted. The like vacancy of the Papal See, was after
the Death of Nicolas the IV. which lasted two years and three months, because
the Cardinals could not agree about the election of any. In the end, as by
contempt they elected a poor silly Hermit, who would be called Celestin the V.
that Pope would ride upon an Ass, after the example of Jesus Christ, and would
bring all the Cardinals to do the like. One Platina in Bonifacio VIII Paul.
Emilius, Krantzius, Du Tillet, Nicol. Gil. in the life of Philip. Fasciculus
Temp. Ranulphus Polychronico, l. 7. c. 39.
Cardinal Benedict played upon his simplicity to make himself Pope; for he would
make admonitions to him, saying, that he must leave the Popedom, if he would be
saved; and that it was too great a burden for him, to have so many souls to
answer for unto God. Then he suborned a groom of Celestins chamber, who In the
night spoke in his ear out of an hole, Celestine, Leave the Popedom, if thou will be saved; saying, that he was an Angel of God sent to him: The good man
frighted with this, resigned the Papal Dignity, which was transferred to that
Cardinal Benedict, in the year 1294. This was that famous Bonifacius the VIII.
Wherefore when some years after this Boniface was apprehended by Sarra Colona
and Nogaret, sent by Philip the Fair King of France, and carried prisoner to
Rome, for excommunicating the said King, and bestowing France upon the Emperor
Albert, if he would get it, upon which disgrace Boniface dyed with anger and
grief, the world said of him, that he entered into the Papal dignity like a Fox,
reigned like a Lion, and died like a Dog. I leave it to the Readers Judgment,
whether the succession of this Boniface into Celestins place, was lawful and
valid.

The succession of John XXII. was not lawfuller: For Clement the V. who had
transported the Papal See to Avignon, being dead, the Cardinals were two years,
three months and an half about the election of a Pope; and found no other way
to end their difference, then to defer unto James d' Ossa Bishop of Porto, the
power of naming a Pope: Anno 1315.
But he deceived them all, and named himself. This is that Pope that taught,
that the souls shall not enjoy the vision of God before the resurrection, as
Ockam witnesses in his work of ninety three days, Gerson in his Sermon of the
Passover, Erasmus in his Preface upon the fifth book of Irenaeus, Genebrardus
in his Chronicle upon the year of the world. 5422. Wherefore also that Pope was
censured by the Sorbon. Thus the following Popes are successors of an heretical
Pope: Now our Adversaries hold, that heresy breaks the thread of succession, as
we have showed in this chapter.

The most horrible Schism that ever was in the Papacy, was that which begun in
the year 1377. between Clement the VI. a French man, and Urban the V. an
Italian. For that Schism continued almost fifty years with unheard of cruelties
and violences, which tore Italy, France, and Germany in a strange manner. Urban
was residing at Rome, after whom came successively Boniface the IX. Innocent
VII. Gregory XII. But to Clement residing at Avignon, succeeded Peter de la
Luna, called Benedict the XIII.

Gregory was elected Pope at Rome upon the oath which he took, that he would
resign the Popedom whenever he should be required, for the peace of the
Church. The same his Antipope, Benedict the XIII. did promise: But both broke
their oath; for whereas they dispensed others from keeping their oaths and
vows, they could easily give dispensation to themselves. Who so will know the
confusions, rapines, perjuries, treacheries, and devilish tricks of these two
Antipopes, let him read Theodoricus a Niem, Secretary to the four Italian Popes
abovenamed; who has writ a book purposely of that matter.

To make up that rent, the Cardinals being assembled, held a Council at Pisa,
in the year 1411. in which, Benedict XIII. and Gregory XII. were declared
Heretics, Schismatics, and false Popes; Whence it follows, that the Popes
come since, are successors of heretics. And since these Antipopes, as well the
one, as the other, were false and unlawful Popes; it follows, that the Roman
Church has been many years without a Pope, like a body without a head; and
that the Popes come since, are successors of false and imaginary Popes.

Here is worse: For the same Council elected a Pope named Alexander the V. But
Gregory the XII. and Benedict XIII. kept themselves in the Popedom by force and
arms, so that instead of two Popes, there was three, each of which called
himself successor of Saint Peter. France, and Spain, and Scotland acknowledged
Benedict, and obeyed him. But now, even in France, the Doctors hold that both
he and his Predecessor Clement the VI. were usurpers and unlawful, and the same
they say of Gregory the XII. sitting at Rome.

That Alexander the V. created by the Council, lasted but little. Balthazar
Cossa who is John XXIII. succeeded him, Platina in Joh. XXIII. Largitione usus
Pontifex creatur.
having bought with money the suffrages of the Cardinals. Three Popes then were
reigning together, John XXIII. Gregory XII. and Benedict XIII. who were
exchanging excommunications among themselves, breaking and disanulling all
sentences, bulls, judgments and ordinations, each of the two others; So that
over all the Roman Church, there was neither Priest, nor Bishop unquestionably
such, and of whom it was not doubted, whether they had a lawful power to make
the consecration in the Mass; Which being not made, they hold that the people
worship bread, and fall into idolatry.

That John, the most abominable of all, as teaching openly that there was
neither Paradise nor Hell, assembled a Council. Nicolas de Clemangis,
Archdeacon of Bayeux, who lived among all that confusion, says, that over that
Pope in the midst of the Council, a great Owl sat shreeking hideously, and
that for many Sessions. The common saying was, that the Holy Ghost descended
upon his Holiness in the shape of that Dove.

In the end, the Emperor Sigismond with much ado prevailed so far, that a
Council was called at Constance in the year 1416. where Pope Gregory the XII.
being fourscore years old, resigned the Popedom, sending to that purpose his
Papal Cloak or Pall to the Council, to show that he divested himself. Benedict
would not appear, nor resign, but fled into the I Will of Paniscola, near the
coasts of Spain, where he kept many years the title of Pope until death. John
the XXIII. came to the Council: But seeing that they went about to proceed
against him, he ran away: But he was overtaken, and brought back, and committed
prisoner. Against him fifty four accusations were brought; Of which this was
one notoriously known, That he had publicly taught, and maintained, that the
souls of men died like those of beasts, and that there was neither Paradise nor
Hell. For which crimes, and for getting the Popedom by bribery, he was deposed;
As also Gregory the XII. and Benedict the XIII.

The Popes which came since, are not well resolved from which of these Popes
they must fetch their succession; For they were all declared Heretics and
false Popes by the Councils of Pisa and Constance; And it is not yet known in
our days, which of them was Pope in the Roman Church. Yet the succession of
the following Popes shows, that John XXIII. that honest man, successor to
Alexander the V. was held to be the lawful Pope in after ages, since the next
that took the name of Alexander since Alexander the V. called himself Alexander
the VI. Behold then the line of the chair. Behold that continued thread of
Apostolical succession, which is so much boasted of. Here is that chair in
which Devils are playing at in and out. With what face now can these Gentlemen
question us about our succession?

In that Council of Constance, the three abovenamed Popes being deposed, Martin
the V. was elected; whom the Emperor Sigismond worshipped, and kissed his feet
in full Council. That Martin sent Ambassadors to Constantinople, to whom he
gave instructions, which begin thus; These instructions were prepared at the
Council of Senes, printed at Paris, an. 1612. Sanctissimus and beatissimus, qui
habet coelester arbitrium, qui est Dominus in terris, Successor Petri, Christus
Domini, Dominus Vniversi, Regum Pater, orbis lumen, etc.
The most holy and most beat, who has the heavenly Empire, who is Lord on
earth, the successor of Peter, the Christ of the Lord, the Master of the
Universe, the Father of Kings, the light of the world, the Sovereign Pope
Martin by the divine providence, commands Mr. Antony Mason, etc. Such
doubtless were the titles which Saint Peter assumed in his instructions to his
Ambassadors whom he sent to the King of the Parthians, or to the Emperor Nero!

The example that follows, is no better proof of a goodly succession. This
Martin died in the year 1431. whom Eugenius the IV. succeeded, who was deposed
by the Council of Basil, assembled by himself to reform the Church. In the
place of Eugenius, the Council chose Amadeus Duke of Savoy, who called himself
Felix. But Eugenius brought against Basil the Daulphn of France, who was since
Lewis the eleventh, who in all things opposed his Father Charles the VII. and
his confederates. He brought four thousand horse against Basil, to break the
Council; which yet he could not have effected, had not the pestilence within
Basil, forced the Fathers of the Council to separate themselves after they had
condemned Eugenius as an Heretic, and unworthy to govern the Church.

But Eugenius took arms, and being held up by Princes, maintained himself
against the Antipope Felix, who after he had been five years Pope, retired to
Ripaille, a pleasant house in Savoy, there to lead a private life. So the
Popedom remained in the hands of a man deposed by a Council, assembled by the
Pope himself, where Bishops met out of all parts of the Roman Church. Note that
after his deposition, he created many Cardinals and Bishops, whose office was
null and illegitimate, since they were created by an usurper, who had by force
maintained himself in the office of Pope after his deposition. And yet those
very Cardinals created by Eugenius an usurper of the Popedom, are those very
men that elected the successors of Eugenius, Nicolas, and Pius the second, from
whom is descended the succession of the Popes of our time.

Peruse all histories ever since there was any Empire in the world, and see if
ever there was any Monarchy that bore more marks of the wrath of God on the
forehead, or any throne stained with more vices, or troubled with more
confusions. It is not then without reason, that two of the less evil Popes,
Adrian the IV. and Marcel the II. would say with grief, that they thought that
a Pope could not be saved, as Onuphrius, Panuinus, Supplemento Platinae in
Marcello. II.
Onuphrius an Augustinian Monk relates. Which is a notable confession, and
extorted by the sense of the truth.

See the first book of the Sacred Ceremonies, Sect. 1.
I pass by the busy mysteries of the Conclave, when they are about the election
of a Pope; How the windows of the Conclave are walled up, and all doors but
one, so that no daylight gets in. How meat is thrust in for the Cardinals by
an hole, their bread cut into small bits, for fear of some letter hidden; their
drink in clear glass bottles: How they eat every one by himself, and are
forbidden to present any thing of their meat to one another. How there are
commonly three factions, the one of France, another of Spain, and the third of
the Princes of Italy. There is no Cardinal but sels his suffrage very dear, and
gets pensions out of France or Spain, whose factions are always contrary: That
of Italy joining with this or that, carries it by the plurality. There are
employed all the arts possible to cross and traverse the suffrages one of
another. In a word, all things there are done, as the question being not to
choose a Pastor for the Church, but a Prince whose inclinations further or
hinder the affairs of other Princes, and are a casting weight in the balance.
He that has the two thirds of the suffrages, is chosen Pope, who is presently
divested of his clothes, and invested with Pontifical robes, and crowned with
the tripple crown; he is carried up, and laid upon the Altar, which is Gods
place, and then every one of the Cardinals does him the homage of adoration. In
that election none enquires, whether he that is in election, be fit to teach,
nor whether his Doctrine be pure, or his life holy? So much is presupposed
without difficulty.

To all these, add the eleventh Canon of the VII. Session of the Council of
Trent. If any say, that in the Ministers, when they do, and confer the
Sacraments, the intention is not requisite to do at least that which the Church
does, Let him be Anathema. By that rule, if a Bishop who is come to confer the
sacred Orders, has no intention to confer them, or to confer any true
Priesthood, or to consecrate a true Bishop (for it is that which the Church
that the Council speaks of, pretends to do) the order conferred is null, and
the Sacrament of the Orders is null. The like of the Sacrament of Baptism,
which is null, if he that baptizeth, has no intention to confer a true
Baptism. That intention is presumed by conjecture; for none can have a certain
knowledge of the thought and intention of a man but God alone. Now who knows
not that there are many Atheists, and many profane persons that laugh in their
heart at that they do? It may then happen, that a Pope was baptized by one that
had no intention to baptize him really; and it is impossible for a Pope to be
certain of the intention of him that baptized him. And if for want of
intention, the Baptism which he received, is null, it follows, that he is
incapable to receive the sacred Orders, through which he must of necessity
pass, before he can exercise the Office of Pope.

No more can the Pope be assured of the intention of him that conferred Orders
upon him. Whence it follows, that the Pope knows not whether the Orders which
he has received, be valid or invalid: He is a conjectural Pope, who knows not
whether he be Pope, or whether he be so much as baptized.

Yea it is possible, that he that conferred orders unto the Pope, received them
from another that had no intention to confer them. And that other from another
again that had not that intention, or was baptized by another, that had no
intention to baptize him. So that by remounting upwards, the uncertainty is
still doubled; and multiplied, even to infinity.

CHAP. 38. Of the ways whereby Cardinals and other Prelates come to their
Charges.
AS defluxions will flow from the head upon the body, so the corruption and
Simony which has infected the Papal See is fallen from the Popes to the whole
body of the Clergy. Every one knows what traffic is made of Benefices; how
Bishoprics and Abbeys are swapt, giving money to boot, to make even bargains;
and what solicitations are made in the Courts of Kings, and in that of Rome, to
come by them. We have seen already in the precedent chapter, how John the X.
gave the Archbishopric of Rhemes to a child of five years of age, which
Baronius condemns, although he knew that it is an ordinary thing in these
days. Younger Brothers of great houses have Benefices and Bishoprics bestowed
upon them in their Cradle. Hardly are they come out of the womb when they enter
into the Episcopal Dignity.

I have known Bishops that could not read their Mass. An unlettered Prince is
possessed of an Archbishopric, in which he places a Coadjutor, who contents
himself with the third or fourth part of the revenue; the rest is for the
Prince that has obtained the gift of the same.

The famous Thuanus, in the sixth Book of his history, in the year 1550.
relates an action of Jules the III. when he was newly made Pope, which is
worthy of memory. Cum antiquae consuetudinis sit ut novus Pontifex galerum cui
velit suum largiatur, eum juveni cuidam cui Innocentio nomen, donavit, quique
quod in familia simiae curam gereret, Simiae etiam post adeptam dignitatem
nomen retinuit, etc.
The custom (says he) being that the new Pope gives his Cardinals Hat to whom
he pleases, he bestowed his upon a youth called Innocent; who because his
Office in the house was to keep an Ape, retained the name of Ape after he had
attained his Cardinals dignity; and to him the Pope gave also his on surname
and coat of arms. Whereupon when the Cardinals expostulated with him for
raising an unworthy person to such a high Dignity, he answered them pleasantly
enough, And you, what perfection did ye find in me to make me Head of the
Christian Commonwealth? With that answer he stopped their mouth.

Every one knows that the Embassy of M. du Perron to Clement the VIII. to
desire him to receive King Henry the IV. into the bosom of the Church, served
in part to promote him to the Cardinalship. That recompense he had for
prostituting the dignity of the King his Master, having cast himself at the
Popes feet, and received by the Penitencer, blows with a wand both upon the
back and the belly; as representing the Kings person, upon whom the Pope
inflicted penance, admitting his Majesty to receive it by proxy. But the
chief, yea the only cause that moved the Pope to receive the King, was that the
party of the League was going to wrack in France, and that the Towns returned
to the Kings obedience. Nevertheless all past as if Clement had been moved by
divine Inspiration to receive the King. But unto M. du Perron to recompense him
for blemishing the dignity of the King his Master with such a base submission,
the Pope gave some bags full of Medals, little Crosses, and blessed Beads, to
scatter them among the people, to which Beads and Crosses he gave that virtue,
that whosoever should kiss them, and say certain Prayers, should get an hundred
years of pardon. Which liberality brought to the King and to the Kingdom of
France a great measure of Consolation. I remember that my self at Fontainbleau
did upbraid M. du Perron with this, in the presence of the late Kings That Lady
was Catherine de Bourbon, Duchess of Bar, sister to Henry the IV. of France.
Of that Princess this Author was Chaplain, and God made use of him to keep her
to the last breath in the Protestant profession, opposing continually this du
Perron, who in her life, and in her death, was her perpetual tempter to make
her turn Papist.
sister, he being then Bishop of Eureux. His answer was, that the Pope did like
Jesus Christ, who sent those he healed to the Pool of Siloam, although he could
have healed them without that.

If I would stir this sink further, I could bring forth persons who have got
the Cardinals Hat for a recompense Here the Author does tax du Perron, who was
known to be pandar to Henry the IV. Whereupon a Pasquil went about when du
Perron was made Cardinal, that if du Perron was made Cardinal for his good
services, there was hope that La Varenne (the Kings chief Pandar) should once
be made Pope.
of unchaste and dishonest services done to great men. The very form used to get
that dignity, which is to employ the favor of Kings to obtain it for persons
incapable, is an accusation. That Hat the Pope sends packt up. Such Hats
doubtless were sent by Saint Peter to those that he would advance to honor!

Liber. 1. Sacr. Ceremon. sect. 10. cap. 8.
At Rome in the Church of Saint Agnes, some white Lambs are kept, with whose
wool white cloth is made, and with that cloth little white cloaks, which are
laid over St. Peter's Tomb. None can exercise an Archbishops function, but he
must first buy one of these cloaks, and there is such a cloak for which forty
or fifty thousand Ducats must be paid. By that gate they enter into the
Archiespiscopal Dignity: Behold the Vocation, behold the Succession that is so
much cried up. Note, that if an Archbishop die one day after he has paid for
that Cloak, his Successor must buy another; so that mortality among Prelates is
exceedingly lucrative to his Holiness.

See the first Book of Sacred Ceremonies, Sect. 8.
This also is to be observed of the charge of Cardinals, that as soon as a Bishop
is made Cardinal, he is presently discharged of the care of that Church which
was committed to him: For he cease to be Pastor of a flock, and becomes a
Prince of the Papal Hierarchy, and capable to receive Benefices of all sorts.
After that, with what conscience can these Gentlemen open their mouths to
speak of their Vocation?

What shall I say of the titular and imaginary Bishops? to whom a Church is
assigned, which is not in being, and a Flock forged in the air. The Pope will
create a Bishop of Dardania, or Damascus, or Alepo, where there are no
Christians. As if the Ministers of Amsterdam, or Sedan, would create a Minister
of Fez, or Cairo, or Maroco. But these Bishops take a long term, to think
whether they ought to visit their Churches; and they have need of time to learn
to speak Arabic or Turk; then it is not good to venture overmuch. Wherefore
they make no haste to go. In the interim that title gets them a place, and the
privilege to enjoy some Benifices, while they look for a better Bishopric.
Thus a Cardinal living in France, is Priest of a Parish in Rome, which Parish
he has never seen, and makes no account ever to see it.

CHAP. 39. Of the perpetual Duration, which M. du Perron calls
Indefectibility.
PErpetual duration is also put among the marks of the true Church. Which mark
being admitted, serves for a proof that the Roman Church is not the true
Church, since her Doctrine is new, and was not in the Apostles time.

Between Duration and Antiquity there is this difference, that antiquity
regards only the time past, but duration regards also the time to come. Which
is enough to prove, that although the true Church must always endure, yet that
duration is not a mark to know her by: For the marks of a thing are things
actual and present. But perpetual duration is not yet, but is expected and
hoped for: For that which is not yet, cannot be an evidence of a thing that is.
Our hopes and desires cannot be marks of the true Church: For to that hope one
may oppose a contrary hope, and say that the Roman Church is not the true
Church, because we hope that she shall not last always, but shall be cut off,
of which she is threatened by St. Paul, Romans 11.22.

Since then one cannot certainly pronounce of any particular Church, and by
consequent not of the Roman, that she shall endure unto the end, because no
particular Church has any promise of God of a perpetual duration, and that one
shall never be able to affirm with certainty, that the Roman or the Greek
Church are of perpetual duration, but when the world is at an end; therefore
that dispute about the perpetual duration must be put off till the day of
judgment.

As for that duration which is already past, it cannot be a proper mark of the
true Church, since it is common also unto Paganism and Judaism; which have been
in the world before Christianity. The Greek and Syrian Churches continue still,
and have begun before the Roman. And the Roman Church which is now questioning
the Churches which she has endeavored to extermine about their duration,
could not yet give an account of hers, nor show that she has been in the
Apostles time, nor in five hundred years after Christ produce one man that
professed a Religion in any wise near that which she now professes.

That I may not stand long upon an unnecessary thing, we are agreed that the
Church must last always, and that there will be always some faithful
Christians in the world. But that which is properly attributed to the Church,
is not always a mark to know the Church by. And it follows not that a thing,
which lasts always, must always be visible to every one. But the marks of
the Church must be sensible and perceived by every one.

CHAP. 40. Of the multitude and great number; and that the multitude is not a
mark of the true Church.
AMong the marks of the true Church, our Adversaries, who boast of their
number, put multitude. As good as saying, that to find the Church where we may
be saved, we must get a Cord to measure the Country, or have Counters to
number the persons. This is very strange, that the true Church should be
discerned by that mark wherein Pagans go beyond Christians; and that this
should be given for a mark of the true Church, which by the judgment of
Scripture is rather a mark of Error. Before the flood, the family of Noah was
very small in comparison of all mankind. What was the family of Abraham
compared to the rest of the world? or the people of Israel in comparison of the
Empires of Babylon and Persia? And of that very people of Israel ten Tribes
revolted. And in the two that remained, many times the Idolaters and profane
were the greatest number. Against one Prophet of God, Micaiah, four hundred
false Prophets rise, 1 King. 22.6. And after the death of the Lord, the Church
consisted in very few Disciples. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil,
says our God, Exodus 23.2. In the 10. of Luke, the Lord Jesus calls his Church
a little flock. And Matthew. 7, he commands us to take the narrow way which
leads unto life, and says, that few there be that find it; and that the
broad way leads unto perdition. And Rev. 13. the Spirit of God foretells a
time, when all the earth shall run after the Beast. Likewise Luke 18.8. the Son
of God speaking of the time next before his coming, says, When the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith on the Earth? Where shall at that time that visible
multitude be, and that Church eminent in number and splendour? And when wings
are given to the Church to fly and hide her self in the desert for a time,
Rev. 12. it is not like that then she was or shall be great in number; for a
great multitude cannot be hid.

There was always more Pagans then Christians, and many times heretics have
past the Orthodox in number. A time when Arians were the greater number, as
Vincentius Lirinensis says, Arianorum venenum non jam portiunculam quandam sed
pene orbem totum contaminaverat, adeo ut prope cunctis Latini sermonis
Episcopis partim vi partim fraud deceptis, etc.
The venom of the Arians had defiled not a small portion, but well nigh all the
world; so that almost all the Latin Bishops were deceived, partly by force,
partly by fraud; a deep darkness had overspred the spirits. Among those Latin
Bishops were the Bishops of Rome, Liberius and Felix; the one of which by fear,
the other in earnest, had embraced Arianism. And Hierom in his Dialogue against
the Luciferians says, All the world groaned and wondered to see it self turned
Arian. And upon the 133. Psalm. Ecclesia non parietibus consistit, sed dogmatum
veritate. Ecclesia ibi est ubi vera fides est. Caeterum ante annos quindecim
aut viginti, parietes omnes Ecclesiarum hic haeretici possidebant. Ante viginti
annos, omnes Ecclesias ha^ haeretici possidebant; Ecclesia autem illic vera
erat, ubi vera fides erat.
The Church consists not in the walls, but in the truth of the doctrine.
There the Church is where the true faith is; for it is but fifteen or twenty
years since heretics possessed all the walls of these Churches; but there the
true Church was where the true faith was. The Author of the life of Gregory
Nazianzen speaks thus, The heresy of Arius did hold well nigh the whole breadth
of the world, being backed with the help of an ungodly Emperor.

Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration against the Arians, and concerning himself,
Where are they that upbraid us with our poverty? (...)?
That define the Church by her multitude, and despise the little flock? As they
have the people, so we have the faith. They have the gold and the silver, we
the faith and the doctrine. Himself in the verses of his life, (...).
It is a small people, but of great price before God, who numbereth not the
multitude, but the hearts. And in the 32. Oration pronounced before a hundred
and fifty Bishops, he speaks thus to the Adversaries who boasted of their great
number; (...).
God delighted not in the greatest number. Thou countest the thousands, but God
those that are saved. Thou countest the infinite dust, but I the vessels of
election.

The second Tome of Athanasius, has an express treatise against those who
judge of the truth by the multitude, Tom. 2. page 246. (...).
How miserable (says he) are those that attribute the strength of reason unto
the only multitude! He that finding himself unable to resolve a question
propounded, and wanting proofs, has recourse unto the multitude, confesses
himself overcome, as having no provision to maintain the truth. Why do thou
boast of multitude, as if thou did threaten God to build another tower of
Babel, etc. That text is very long and very express. In the end he concludes,
(...), etc.
Do thou strengthen untruth with the multitude? Thou show thereby that the
evil is so much the greater. In the 16. chap. of the 2. Book of the history of
Theodoret, the Emperor Constantine who was an Arian, upbraideth Liberius, that
he was alone of the party of Athanasius: to which Liberius answers, (...).
Although I be alone, the word of faith is not thereby weakened. In old time
three persons only were found that resisted the ordinance; he durst not add, of
Nebucadnetsar, for fear of offending the Emperor. Pope Nicolas the I. in his
Epistle to the Emperor Michael, The small number does no harm where piety
abounds. The great number avails nothing where impiety reigns; yea the
more the congregation of the wicked is numerous, the more is she powerful to
compass her evil designs, etc. Nolite gloriari in multitudine, quia non
multitudo sed causa damnationem vel justificationem adducit.
Glory not in the multitude; for it is not the multitude, but the cause that
makes one condemned or justified.

Austin is the only Father, to whom it happened to go about sometimes to
discern the true Church by the multitude; for disputing with the Donatists,
whose Church was small, compared to the Orthodox Church, he maintains in
several places, that the true Church is always eminent and in greater number
then the society of Heretics. Which text M. du Perron sets forth with a great
show, and alleges them upon all occasions. But Austin must not be believed
against himself, and against the other Fathers, much less against the Word of
God, and against experience. Himself, chap. 19. of his Book de catechizandis
rudibus, speaks thus, Neque hoc nos movere debet quia multi diabolo
consentiunt, and pauci Dominum sequuntur, quia and frumentum in comparatione
palcarum valde pauciorem habet numerum.
We ought not to be moved that many consent with the devil, and few follow the
Lord; for wheat also is very small in comparison of the straw. And in the 6.
Sermon upon the words of the Lord in St. Matthew, Quod tunc corpus ejus in
turba patiebatur, hoc patitur Ecclesia ejus; a turbis premitur, a paucis
tangitur.
The Church of Jesus Christ suffers that which himself suffered in the crowd
of the people; She is oppressed by the crowd, but few persons touch her. Where by
those that touch the Church, he understands the faithful. See Austin upon the
128. Psalm. where he says, that the Church in old time was in Abel only,
another time in Enoch only, and after Enoch in the only family of Noah; for in
all these texts he disputes not against the Donatists Note also that those
Churches, the multitude whereof Austin opposes unto the Donatists, are at this
time contrary to the Roman Church.

CHAP. 41. Examination of the proofs which M. du Perron brings to prove that
the true Church had always the greatest number.
THe Cardinal in the 88. chap. of his first Book against the King, brings many
texts of Scripture which promise unto the Church a great confluence of nations.
As that which is said to Abraham; Genesis 22. In thy seed shall all nations be
blessed; and thy seed shall be like the stars of Heaven, and like the sand of
the sea. And in the 2. chap. of Haggai, v. 9. The glory of this latter house
shall be greater then of the former. And Cant. 8.8. We have a little sister and
she has no breasts, And Isa. 54.1. Sing O barren, for more are the children of
the desolate then the children of the married wife.

These texts are Prophesies of the vocation of the Gentiles, by the preaching
of the Gospel, and were fulfilled in the time of the Apostles and of their
Disciples, and in the ages in which the Gospel was much propagated, and the
Church much increased; whose multitude has much exceeded that of the Church of
Israel, which was enclosed in one only nation; but the Christian Church
receives all nations; and must, not all at one time, but successively, be
carried over all the world. So is understood the text of Psalm. 2. I shall give
thee the nations for thine inheritance, and for thy possession the uttermost
parts of the earth. And this of Psalm. 72. He shall have Dominion from Sea to
Sea. And that of Acts 1. And you shall be witnesses unto me unto the utmost
parts of the earth. Which texts are abused, if one will prove by them that the
Church must always extend over all the world, or fill the whole earth all at
one time. That never was and never shall be, but she must go successively over
all the world, and pass from one people to another. Which succession may as
well be done, the Church being small as great; as one may carry through the
house as well a little candle as a great one. St. Paul does plainly intimate
this, Romans 10.18. where he applies to the preaching of the Apostels, that
which is said of the Sun and Stars, Psalm. 19. Their line is gone out through
all the earth, and their words to the end of the world; for the Sun and Stars
give not their light to the earth all at once, but successively, to one part
after the other.

With the like abuse these texts are employed to prove that at all times the
true Church must be the most populous; for there is not one of all these texts
that speak of a perpetual multitude and eminence. They are Prophecies that
peculiarly regard the calling of the Gentiles in the time of the Apostles and
their Disciples, in which there was a very great confluence of people converted
to the faith. This clearly appears in the text of Isa. 2. where God
promises, that many people shall go and say, Come ye and let us go to the
mountain of the Lord; for presently after that promise Isaiah adds, For out
of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; where
it is evident, that he speaks of a time when the Word of God was to be carried
among the nations from Jerusalem and Judea; which happened not but in the
Apostles time.

CHAP. 42. Of Miracles.
MIracles are no fitter marks for the true Church, and that for four reasons.
1. Because false Churches make miracles also, and miracles are found among
Pagans and Infidels. 2. Because miracles are neither necessary nor perpetual in
the Church. 3. Because they may be false, and give fair play for Satan's
impostures. 4. And lastly, because miracles are often hurtful, and it is
sometimes expedient that there be none.

I. That miracles are not proper to the true Church, and that false Doctors
will make some, Jesus Christ teaches it, Matthew. 24. False Christ's and false
Prophets shall rise, making signs and miracles. And chap. 7. v. 22. In that day
many shall say unto me Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? have we
not cast out Devils in thy name? And the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. foretells that the
son of perdition will come, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, and that God will give them (...),
the power of delusion. The Jews exorcists did miracles, and expelled the
unclean spirits; of which we have an example in a Jew named Eleazar, that
healed a man possessed of a Devil in the presence of Vespatian, as Josephus
relates it in the 8. Book of the Antiquities, chap. 2. Philostratus relates the
miracles of Apollonius Thyanaeus; and at this time yet miracles are done at
Mahomets sepulcher. See Suetonius in the life of Vespatian, chap. 7. Porphyrius
a sworn enemy of Jesus Christ, opposed to the Christians the miracles which the
Pagans did, as may be seen in Eusebius, in the fourth Book of Evangelical
preparation: (...).
They make a great noise of there predictions, and oracles, and cures and
healing of all kinds of diseases. Florus. Cicero de Divinatione.
The example of Actius Navius Augur is famous, who in the presence of King
Tarquinius Priscus, cut a whet-stone in two with a razor.

After the Ascension of Jesus Christ, Heretics began to do many miracles.
Adjicient praeterea multa de authoritate cujusque doctoris haeretici, illos
maxim doctrinae suae fidem confirmasse, mortuos suscitasse, debiles
refirmasse, etc.
Tertullian, chap. 44. of Prescriptions, says, that Heretics boasted, that
they had exceeded all others in the confirmation of their doctrine by miracles;
that they had raised the dead and healed the sick: And that Jesus Christ had
foretold so much, saying, that many would come that should do very great
miracles to authorize their false doctrine. And in the 3. Book against Marcion,
chap. 3. he says, Christus temerariam signorum and virtutum fidem ostendit ut
etiam inter pseudo^-Christos facillimam.
that to do miracles was a thing very easy among the false Christ's, and that
it was a rash part to hang our belief upon them. Theodoret upon Deuteronomy. 13. We
are taught not to believe [miracles] when he that does them teaches things
contrary to piety. Hierom upon Gal. 3. Observandum est quod virtutes dicuntur
operantes hi qui non habent Evangelii veritatem.
We must observe, that those are said to do miracles that hold not the truth of
the Gospel. Then he adds, This I say against heretics that hold it an
approbation of their faith when they do some sign.

The imperfect work upon St. Matthew, attributed unto Chrysostom in the 49.
Homily, Nunc autem signorum operatio omnino levata est, magis autem apud eos
invenitur qui falsi sunt Christiani, sieri.
The operation of miracles is now quite taken away, and it is found that many
more fained miracles are done among those that are false Christians. Austin in
the Book of the 83. questions, in the 79. says, Quaedam miracula etiam
scoleratos homines facere, qualia sancti facere non possunt, nec tamen potiore
loco apud Deum esse arbitrandi sunt.
that perverse and wicked men do miracles, which the Saints cannot do. Himself
against the letters of Petilianus, lib. 2. cap. 55. Nam de exclusione daemonum
and de potentia miraculorum, quoniam plerique talia non faciunt, and tamen ad
regnum Dei pertinent, plerique autem faciunt and non pertinent, nec nostri nec
vestri debem gloriari.
For as for expelling Devils, and the power of miracles, because many do not
these things, and yet belong to the kingdom of God, and that many do them which
belong not unto that kingdom, neither your side, nor ours ought to boast of
them. That especially is remarkable, which we learn of the nine and thirty four
Canons of the Council of Laodicea, and of Balsamon upon the thirty fourth Canon
of that Council, that the Orthodox would come to the Sepulchers of the
Heretics, and there be healed. Whence it appears, that Heretics did true
miracles, since healing followed. And Scripture witnesses that the Magicians
by their enchantments, did the same miracles as Moses.

II. Secondly, I say that miracles are neither necessary nor perpetual in the
Church. We find not that before God appeared to Moses, any miracle was done in
the Church of Israel, during their abode in Egypt. And the Church of the Jews
has been many years without miracles, since their return from their captivity
of Babylon. And when in the time of King Josiah, the Book of the Law was found
and published, God made no miracle to authorize that Law, because the miracles
done in the first publication of the Law in the wilderness, were sufficient to
give it authority with posterity. Likewise the miracles of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles done in the beginning of the publishing of the Gospel, serve yet this
day to confirm the same Doctrine, and no need of new miracles to confirm it.
Many Prophets extraordinarily sent; as Hosea, Amos, Zechariah, did no miracles.
It cannot be said, that their very prophesying was a miracle; for here by
miracles, we understand sensible events, contrary to nature, which serve to
authorize a Doctrine. Besides, Prophecies are not acknowledged to be divine and
miraculous, but after the fulfilling, either wholly or in part; and by
consequent, the inspiration of Prophecy cannot, before the fulfilling, be taken
for a miracle. To this purpose, Gregory the I. in the twenty ninth Homily upon
the Gospel says very well, My brethren, do you forbear believing, because you
do no miracles? But these things were necessary in the beginnings of the
Church, that the multitude might grow in faith. If then any bring in a new
Doctrine, it behooves him to do miracles. But we of whom miracles are demanded,
bring no new Doctrine.

III. Thirdly, miracles are dubious things, and imposture about them is
frequent. Especially about the miracles of the Roman Church, which in our time
are reduced to ejecting of Devils, where Satan has fair play to deceive. But
to raise a man from the dead, or to give sight to a man born blind, they are
things which are not done in the Roman Church. The Legends of Saints are
stuffed with miraculous tales, grossly coined: The Courts of Parliament have
given many sentences against false miracles, and have often punished such
impostures. Let these Gentlemen that cry up their miracles, send some
miraculous punishment upon those that laugh at their miracles. But of that no
example was yet seen; So gently they are pleased to deal with us. But indeed
the Devil has no power over Gods children.

IV. Lastly, miracles are many times hurtful: For he that believes not unless
he see miracles, does thereby, though against his mind, invite Satan to play
some juggling trick, and exposes himself to the wiles and craft of the Devil.

For these causes, Deuteronomy. 13. God commands his people to judge, not of the
doctrine by the miracles, but of the miracles by the Doctrine. And that if one
bring forth a dream or a miracle, and say together, Let us go and serve strange
Gods; let such a Prophet be stoned to death notwithstanding his miracles.

As for the miracles which in the first ages were done in the Christian Church,
God made use of them to make Pagans turn Christians. But we read not that ever
any miracle was done to confirm the adoration of images, or Purgatory, or
Transubstantiation; for the miracles which are alleged to that purpose, are
later then the invention of these Doctrines, or are related by Authors
manifestly fabulous, and so prone to be false and forged. I will shut up this
discourse with a sentence of Prosper, Prosper libro Sententiarum ex Augustino,
Sent. XII. Imitatores Magistri debent esse Discipuli, non in faciendis
miraculis quae nemo exigit, sed in custodienda humilitate and patientia ad quae
Dominus nos suo invitat exemplo.
drawn from Saint Austin. The Disciples ought to be imitators of Christ, not by
doing miracles, which no body requires of them; but by keeping humility and
patience, to which the Lord has invited us by his example.

CHAP. 43. Of Union in the visible Church.
UNion and concord are desirable things, so it be an union in things good and
holy; for otherwise union is but a conspiracy. Thus the Apostle Ephesians. 4.15.
commands us to follow truth with charity, rejecting that charity which
maintains untruth. The Devils themselves have an union among them. And
without a strict union, a company of thieves cannot subsist. When then our
Adversaries give us union for a mark of the true Church, we ask Whether they
understand union in the true Doctrine, or in the false? If they mean (as it is
to be supposed) union in the true Faith and Doctrine, it follows, that before
we can know whether union in a Church be good and holy, that Church must be
instructed before in the true Faith and Religion. It appears then, that union
cannot be a mark of the true Church, since to judge of that union, there is
need of another mark.

Neither can that be an infallible mark of the true Church, which is not
perpetual with the true Church, and may not less or more consist with the
societies of Heretics and Infidels. For the ancient Christian Church has been
often troubled with dissentions; and before the Schism and separation between
the Greek and the Roman Church, there was always something to mend, and some
quarrel to appease: And the Roman Church which bears her self for the only true
Church, has many times been troubled with Schisms: And at this day, yet they
are not agreed in the Roman Church, whether the Pope be above the Council, or
the Council above the Pope. Now there can hardly be a greater and more
important quarrel in a State, then to dispute to whom the Sovereignty does
belong.

Besides, union in the same religion is found also among Heretics, and
therefore cannot be an infallible mark of the true Church. In the whole Empire
of the Turk, which is the greatest of the world, there is a very great
agreement about Religion. The Jews also keep among them an admirable union.
Neither is there any, though never so small heretical Church, but is united in
her error. For it is not the great number that makes the union to be good or
evil, but the agreement to do well or ill, or to believe well or ill.

That union is inculcated by our Adversaries to upbraid us, that we agree not
with the Lutherans and Anabaptists. But herein the Roman Church upbraids us
with nothing, but what she may be upbraided with: For she also disagreeth with
the Lutherans and Anabaptists. The reproaches of the Roman Church to us upon
that Subject, are of no force, since the Pagans and Jews make the same reproach
to the Roman Church with the like force, and to all Christians in general. For
thence they gather, that Christian Religion is false, since Christians are at
odds about their Religion, and the Greek Church has a Religion, the Roman
Church another, the Ethiopian Church another, etc.

Let our union then be with our Lord Jesus Christ, and through Jesus Christ
with God, and with them that serve him, according to his Word. For in vain do
we seek union with men, while we are in discord with God. Now the way to be
united with God, is to follow his Word, and to conform our selves unto his
Will; By consequent that we may enter into that union, we must be instructed in
his Word: For it is an open contradiction to reason, and a wilful blindness, to
think to agree upon an union, and not know about what we must be united; and to
press concord upon the people, and at the same time to hide the truth from
them, without which, all agreement is a conspiracy against God.

CHAP. 44. Whether the Universal Church must be called Roman.
ALthough the Roman Church be a particular Church, yet she will be called
Universal. Nowadayes to be a true Christian, and to be Roman, are taken for one
and the same thing; and the same man is called a Catholic Roman, that is, an
Univesal Particular. But the Word of God does not oblige us to be Romans, or to
be of the Roman Church or Religion to be saved: Nay the Apostle Romans 11.22.
threatens the Romans, that they shall be cut off, that is, that they shall fall
off from Gods Covenant. For although that threatening be spoken generally to the
Gentiles, grafted in the place of the Jews, yet it is not without cause, that
it is particularly addressed by the Spirit of God to the Roman Church. Saint Paul
indeed commends the faith of the Romans, that is, of the Christians of the
City of Rome; but he gives the like praise to the faith of the Thessalonians,
saying, that from them sounded out the Word of the Lord, 1 These. 1.8.
and that in every place, their faith to Godward was spread abroad. And yet he
obliges not thereby all Christians to call themselves Thessalonians, or
belonging to the Church of Thessalonica. It is very considerable, that Saint
Paul having written such a long Letter to the Roman Church, did not think of
exhorting them to their duty, by the consideration of the dignity of their
Church, and of the superiority of the Church of Rome. It is certain, that
Christian Religion was planted and spread over Judea, Syria, Egypt, Natolia,
Grecia, etc. many years before there were Christians at Rome. It would be a
great error to think, that at that time the Universal Church ought to have been
called Roman. Neither do we find, that in the first ages, the Christians of
Syria, or Persia, or Armenia, or Egypt, did style themselves Romans, or of the
Roman Religion. That Title is grown with the Papal domination, and is now one
of the marks of his Empire. It is very probable, that this word Roman, is that
mark of which it is spoken, Rev. 13.16, 17.

Cardinal Baronius in his Annals, on the year 45.. 10. brings some Texts of the
Ancients, to prove that in old time to be a Roman, and to be a Catholic, was
all one. He alleges Theodosius the II. speaking thus in an Epistle to
Acacius, Actis Concilii Ephesini. Vos probatos Romanae religionis Sacerdotes
manifesto argumento declarate.
Show us by an evident proof, that you are approved Priests of the Roman
Religion. That passage is mistaken by that Cardinal; for Theodosius by the
Roman Religion, understands not that of the Church or the Pope of Rome, but the
Religion kept in the Roman Empire; as if one now called the Turkish Religion
that which is established in the Turkish Empire.

Baronius brings another authority of Victor Vticensis, in the first book of
the persecution of the Vandals, where an Arian disswadeth King Theodoricus from
putting an Orthodox man to death. For (says he) if thou killest him with the
sword, the Romans will begin to make a Martyr of him. But whosoever has read
Victor, knows that under the reign of the Vandals in Africa, there was three
sorts of persons; The Vandals which were Arians; The Moors which were Pagans;
And the Romans which were Orthodox, who having been subject to the Roman
Empire, were oppressed by the victorious Vandals, and were called Romans, because
they had been conquered by the Vandals from the Roman Empire. The like to this
may be seen in Gregor. Hist. l. 2.. 27. Syagrius Romanorum Rex Aegidii filius,
ad civitatem Suessionis sedem habuit, and l. 2. c. 33. Gundobaldus
Burgundionibus leges mitiores instituit ne Romanos opprimerent. Et appendice c.
78. Harcardus ex genere Francorum, Raulinus ex genere Romano, Trillibaldus
Patricius ex genere Burgundionum.
Gregorius Turonensis, that the Gauls subdued by the Franks and Burgundians,
and conquered from the Roman Empire, were called Romans not with any regard to
the Roman Religion, but in relation to the Roman Empire.

CHAP. 45. Of Antiquity, whether it be a mark of the true Church.
When we speak of the Antiquity of the Church, we mean not the antiquity of
the Temples; for in an old building one may teach a new Doctrine. Nor the
antiquity of the Chairs; for they that sit in them may change the Doctrine of
their Predecessors; but the antiquity of the Doctrine. Which antiquity is good,
and of great authority if it be the first, before which nothing is more
ancient: For all that which is instituted since Christ and his Apostles, is
new; and the multitude of years cannot authorize a false Doctrine. We judge not
of the true Church by the years, but by the rules. Jesus Christ is not the
Custom, but the Truth. Yea, as unchaste women grow worse by age; the more an
Error is old, the more it is pernicious, because it is deeper rooted. If time
and multitude of years could make an evil Doctrine to become good, we would
have the abettors of that opinion to set us down precisely, how many years are
requisite to make that alteration, and to give authority to a false Doctrine.
As then in the question of divorce, without cause of adultery, granted by Moses
to the Israelites because of the hardness of their heart, Jesus Christ brings
them back to the source, and to the first antiquity, saying, In the beginning
it was not so, Matthew. 19. We also, in all Controversies about the Faith, let us
endeavor to bring men's minds back to the first institution, and to the
doctrine of the ancient of days, and of our Lord Jesus, who corrects the
Errors of the Ancient by his authority, saying, Matthew. 5. It has been said by
them of old time, etc. But I say unto you, etc. For the Truth of God is
Eternal, and there is no prescription against his authority. If in things civil
and mutable one cannot prescribe against the right of Kings, much less against
the Law of the King of Kings; and in things spiritual and eternal. A time was
when these Doctors which are called ancient were new. And before that those
that are called Fathers did write, Scripture had already a full authority.

The Roman Church in this point is intolerable: For she boasts of Antiquity,
but will not suffer the truth of her Doctrine to be examined, though it be the
only way to discern true Antiquity. She will have us to judge of the Truth by
antiquity, whereas we ought to judge of antiquity by the Truth, and by the
conformity to the Word of God, which is the first antiquity. She boasts to be
ancient, and yet every age brings additions or alterations to her Doctrine; so
that the form of the old building is no more seen, and yet that building keeps
the same Name. She boasts of antiquity, and yet brings new things every day.
She makes a show of some old patched clothes, to make the world believe that
she comes from far, as the Gibeonites did: But when one comes to examine her
Doctrine by pieces, one finds that she comes not from very far, and that almost
all is new. And indeed there was need of great alteration to make a Bishop of
the City of Rome to become the Monarch of the Universal Church, and to make the
Doctrine of the Gospel to serve for building an earthly Kingdom. We are ready
to undergo any punishment, if it be found that the ancient Church many ages
after the Apostles excluded the people from the Cup, or kept them from reading
the holy Scripture; or made pictures of the Trinity; or yielded Veneration to
the Images of the Saints; or called the Virgin Mary the Queen of Heaven; ^or
made mention of the Roman Indulgences; or of the power of the Pope to depose
Kings, and fetch souls out of Purgatory, etc. In a word, as it is now another
Doctrine, so it is another Church, because it is another Religion. And we have
proved before by a multitude of very express passages, that the Roman Church
boasts that she has power to add to the Symbol, and dispense against the
Apostle, and to alter that which God has commanded in his Word. M. du Perron
has bestowed a Chapter purposely upon that subject in the 674. page. Yet after
that, these men speak of nothing but Antiquity and Fathers, hoping thereby to
confound men's understandings, and avoid the Examination of their Doctrine by
the Word of God. But of that we shall speak hereafter.

Now if it be demanded, whether Antiquity must be placed among the marks of the
true Church; I answer, that although the first and true antiquity belong to the
true Church, yet antiquity cannot be a mark of the true Church.

For to know that mark, there is need of another mark, even of the truth of the
Doctrine, it being impossible to judge, whether the Church that professes that
Doctrine be ancient, but by examining it upon the Rule of Truth, which is the
Word of God.

Besides, the marks of the Church must be proper to her at all times: Now a
time has been when the Christian Church was new. The Church of Israel had her
beginning, and the Church could not be ancient when the world was new.

Also the essential marks of a thing must proceed from the form and essence of
that thing: But time and years are not of the essence, and proceed not from the
form of things that are measured by the time. Old age is not the mark of a true
man, or of a good Commonwealth.

If Antiquity were the mark of a good Church, the Church should always grow
better with the time; and with the antiquity the goodness and the truth of a
Church should also grow: And the Church should be better in our days then in
the days of the Apostles, because it is more ancient.

By that means also the Roman Church should lose her cause, for the Greek
Church is her Mother; and Christian Religion has past from the East to Rome,
and to the West, as the History of the Acts of the Apostles shows it evidently,
and there is no Church so corrupt but boasts of Antiquity: The Jews boasted
themselves to be children of Abraham, even when they reviled Christ, Joh. 8.
and said that he had a Devil. And the Samaritans called Jacob their Father,
and by the authority of their Fathers who had worshipped God in their Mountain,
Joh. 4.
they defended their Religion.

As the antiquity of a building is the cause that there is always to mend in
it; so it is so far from truth, that the antiquity of a particular Church
should be a mark of her purity, that on the contrary it gives just reason to
presume that the multitude of ages had made it worse.

Wherefore St. Austin made no difficulty from to depart from his predecessors
in the points of Nature and Grace, and Predestination; the Pelagians having
sharpened his wit upon those points, which were not debated before, and obliged
him to search the Scriptures with more diligence; whereby he has got much
praise, and was followed by them that came after, as Fulgentius, Prosper,
Hilarious Arel^tensis, etc.

Upon that it is good to see Symmachus, a Pagan, Epist. 54. of the 10. Book,
where writing to the Christian Emperors, Valens, Theodosius, and Arcadius, he
desires them to have a reverence for the Pagan Religion, by reason of her
antiquity, Jam si longa aetas authoritatem religionis faciat, servanda est tot
seculis fides, and sequendi nobis parents qui feliciter secuti sunt suos, etc.
Optimis Principes, Patres patriae, reveremini annos meos in quos me pius ritus
adduxit ut utar Ceremonijs avitis, etc. Hic cultus in leges meas orbem redegit,
haec sacra Annibalem a moenibus, a Capitolio Senones repulerunt. Ad hoc ergo
servata sum ut longaeva reprehendar? sera and contumeliosa est emendatio
senectutis.
If (says he) the length of time gives authority to Religion, we must keep
faith to so many ages, and follow our Fathers who have so happily followed
theirs. Then he personates the old Pagan Rome, thus speaking to the Emperors;
Good Princes, Fathers of your Country, respect my years, unto which the pious
Ceremonies have brought me; permit me to use the Ceremonies of my Ancestors.
This Religion has subjected the world unto my laws: These holy services have
beaten back Hannibal from the walls, and the Senones from the Capitol. Have I
been preserved till this time that I should be rebuked in my old age? The
correction of old age comes too late and is injurious. What could Ambrose and
Prudentius answer, who confuted that Epistle, but that the Law of God is more
ancient then Numa Pompilius, the Author of these Ceremonies? And that all is
new which is not from the beginning? and that Error cannot be authorized by the
number of years?

See Lactantius in the 5. Book of Justice, c. 10. where he says, that the
Pagans disputing against the Christians, A quibus si persuasionis ejus rationem
requiras, nullum possunt reddere; sed ad majorum judicia confugiunt, quod illi
sapientes fuerint.
when one asks them a reason of their belief, they cannot give any, but have
a recourse to the judgment of their ancestors who were wise.

CHAP. 46. Of the Fathers and Ancient Doctors, and of their Authority.
THe writings of the Ancient Doctors near unto the Apostles times cannot be
despised, but by persons wedded to their opinion, that blame all that they
understand not: For although every one of them be subject to err, yet when they
agree all in that they say, their consent is of great authority. But we must
take good heed, how, and for what end it is used. For our Adversaries make a
great noise about that, and make a flourish of Fathers, not out of any belief
that these Fathers are favorable to them, nor out of hope to gain their cause
before these Judges; but to make the people look off from Scripture, whose
trial they labor by all means to avoid.

When the question is to resolve a conscience by testimonies of Fathers, we
meet with many hindrances; For their writings are Greek and Latin, of an
infinite length and multitude. They are Books which the people never see, and
where they understand nothing. If to attain to Salvation it is necessary to be
versed in the Doctrine of Fathers, hardly of a thousand Christians can one be
saved. And among the Fathers writings many suppositiuous Books are mingled, and
new corruptions are every day discovered: Then there is as much or more dispute
about the sense of the Text of the Fathers, as about that of Scripture: So that
if the Fathers be taken for Judges, there will be need of other Judges that
judge infallibly of the sense of the Fathers. It were worth knowing whether the
Roman Church, which boasts to be an infallible Interpreter of the sense of
Scripture, has the same perfection in the interpretation of Fathers.

Again, when the Fathers dissent among themselves about the Exposition of
Scripture, who shall be Judge of their differences? or who will undertake, to
define which Fathers have most authority? Or how many Fathers are requisite to
make an Article of Faith? For it is not reasonable, since our Adversaries take
the Fathers for their Judges, that themselves be Judges of the Fathers.

Besides, when a passage of a Father is alleged, who knows whether other
Fathers agree with him? Who knows whether the same Father speak otherwise in
other places, as it is usual with the Ancient?

Another hinderance troubles men's minds very much, That the words which the
Ancient used have lost their signification, and are now taken in a quite
different sense; as the words of Mass, Sacrifice, Indulgence, Oblation, Pope.
Purgatory, Satisfaction, Prayer for the dead, etc. have lost their ancient
signification, and are taken in our time in another sense then in old time.
Whereby the ignorant are deceived, not knowing that such words in those days
signified quite another thing then in ours, and that the Roman Church puts old
words upon new inventions. He that will lead the spirits of a people that way,
in stead of bringing them to the Word of God, does involve them in a dark
labyrinth, puts them in a way that has no end, and makes men Judges in Gods
cause.

As then on the one side, we reverence Fathers as lights that have been shining
in their time, and recommend the reading of them to such as have leisure and
capacity; so on the other side, when it is question of giving laws to the
Church, we acknowledge no other Lawgiver but God, and no other rule of faith
but his Word; which, in matters necessary to salvation, is so clear, that it
needs no interpreter; which also is as strong alone as attended, and suffers
wrong in its authority, when it is defended with the testimony of men.

The Fathers themselves acknowledging their infirmity, and their subjection to
Scripture, will not be believed but so far as they speak conformably to
Scripture; and acknowledging themselves subject to err, return always to that
rule.

Cyrillus of Jerusalem, in his fourth Catechesis, speaks thus, (...).
One must not teach the least thing concerning the divine and sacred mysteries
of faith without the holy Scriptures. And a little after, (...).
Believe me not simply when I say these things unto thee, unless thou have
proofs of what I say by the holy Scriptures.

Hierom upon the 86. Psalm. Quamvis ergo sanctus sit aliquis post Apostolos,
quamvis disertus sit, non habet authoritatem.
Although some man since the Apostles be holy, although he be well spoken, yet
he has no authority.

And Austin against Faustus the Manichean, Book, 11. chap. 3. speaking of his
own writings and of other Fathers, Non praecipiendi authoritate, sed
proficiendi exercitatione scribuntur a nobis. Liberum ibi habet Lector
auditoris judicium quo vel approbet quod placuerit, vel improbet quod
offenderit. Non me movet authoritas Cypriani. The authority of Cyprian moves me
not. And he gives for reason, that he is not greater then the Apostle Peter.
See the 9. Did. Can. Ego solus Alphons. de Castro Franciscan. cap. 7. lib. 1.
de haeresib. has gathered many the like passages.
These Books (says he) are written by us, not by authority of commanding, but
to profit by exercise. And soon after, having established the holy Scripture for
Judge, he says, that in other works of them that have written since, the
Reader has his judgment free, either to receive that which he approves, or
to reject that which displeases him. The same in the 1. chap. of the second
Book of Baptism, (e) rejects the authority of Cyprian which was objected to
him.

That by alleging the Fathers, our Adversaries intend only to avoid Scripture,
and puzzle the spirits of the simple, it appears in that they assign for a
mark of the true Church, conformity with the Ancient Fathers, but will not
assign for a mark of the same Church, conformity with the Word of God contained
in the holy Scriptures. Also in that there be many questions upon which they
allege not the Fathers, silently confessing, that there the help of antiquity
fails them, as is the point of denying the communion of the cup to the people.
Such are also the images of the Trinity, and forbidding the people to read the
Scripture, and the title of Queen of heaven given to the Virgin Mary, and the
Roman Indulgences, and the Popes power to depose Kings, and fetch souls out of
Purgatory, and private Masses, and the custom of praying in a language not
understood by him that prays; and many other points. In this especially it
appears, how little in effect they trust the Fathers, although they take them
for Judges, that when these Fathers speak against the Roman Church, they make
no difficulty to rebuke and taunt them, making themselves Judges and censors of
the Fathers, yea and opposing them when they consent together: As we shall see
in the following Chapter.

CHAP. 47. That our Adversaries condemn the Fathers, and by consequent cannot
have them for Judges.
THe Glossary of the Decree upon the 9. distinction, endeavoring to elude some
testimonies of St Austin, who says, that the holy Scriptures have alone the
perfection of infallibility, but that all other writings of persons never so
holy are subject to err, and ought to be read with circumspection, has put
this Gloss in the margent, Hodie jubentur teneri usque ad ultimum iota, ut
infra. did. 15. cap. ult.
These words must be understood according to that time when the writings of
Austin and other holy Fathers were not authentical, but now it is commanded to
keep them to the last tittle. Against that Glossarie Alphonsus de Castro takes
a quarrel in the 1. Book of heresies, chap. 7. and calls him a fool and liar,
seeing that the writings of the Fathers are often dissenting among themselves:
And Melchior Canus in the 7. Book of the Theological places, in the 3. chap. to
the same purpose alleges many errors of the Fathers; of Cyprian among others,
who believed that those that were baptized by heretics must be rebaptized; and
of Hilary, who denies that the body of Jesus Christ has felt any pain,
ascribing to him an impassible body; of Irenaeus, who was a Chiliast; and he
goes so far as to say, that the Fathers sometimes bring forth monsters against
the order of nature. Cardinal Baronius, whose writings are so highly esteemed
by our Adversaries, censureth the Fathers with great liberty. On the year 34..
113. he acknowledges freely, that Sanctissimos Patres in interpretatione
Scrptura non semp^r in omnibus Catholica sequitur Ecclesia.
the Catholic Church does not always follow the most holy Fathers in the
interpretation of Scripture. Himself on the year 31.. 24. rebukes St. Austin,
because he did not well understand these words of our Lord, Thou art Peter,
etc. for want of understanding the Syrian tongue. And on the year 34.. 185.
Hierom has erred for want of memory. And on the year 60.. 20. he quarrelleth
with Theodoret for rejecting the invocation of Angels. grounded upon a text of
St. Paul; Ex his videas Theodoretum hand felicite^ (eius pace dictum sit)
affecutum esse Pauli verborum sensum.
Hereby (says he) one may see that Theodoret, by his have, has not well
comprehended the sense of the words of Paul. And on the year 369.. 24. Hilary
had also his errors.

Bellarmine every where bears himself as judge and censor of the Fathers. In
the first Book of the felicity of the Saints;. Sunt tamen; and. S. Antonius.
Justini, Irenaei, Epiphanii, Oecumenii sententiam non video quo pacto ab errore
possimus defendere.
I see not how we may defend from error the opinion of Justinus, Irenaeus,
Epiphanius and Oecumenius. In the same place he heaps up the errors of many
Fathers. Of whom also he says in the second book of the Councils, chap. 13.
Lib. 6. de Conciliis c. 13. Scripta Patrum non sunt regula, nec habent
authoritatem obligandi.
The writings of Fathers are not the rule, and have no authority to oblige us.

Himself in the 1. Book de Pontifice Romano, chap. 8. speaking of the opinion
of Hierom, that Priests are inferior to Bishops by Ecclesiastical right only,
not of divine right: That opinion (says he) is false, and must be confuted in
the proper place. And chap. 10.. Addo. Austin (says he) has been deceived by
the only ignorance of the Hebrew tongue. And in the Book de monachis, chap. 13.
he goes about to prove, that the opinion of Austin, of Thomas, and of Bernard,
seems not to be conformable unto the holy Scripture.

Sixtus Senensis, in his Preface upon the 5. Book of his Bibliotheca, says,
that In libris sanctorum Doctorum quos authentice legit Ecclesia, nonnunquam
inveniuntur quaedam prava vel haeretica.
in the holy Doctors which are read in the Church with authority, sometimes
things evil and heretical are found.

Andradius in the 2. Book of the defense of the Tridentine faith, Vt
Augustinum, Basilium, etc. taceam, quorum non sumus semper opinionibus addicti.
I will say nothing (says he) of Austin, Basil, Athanasius, and the other
Cyrillus, Chrysostomus, and Epiphanius, to whose opinions we are not always
tied. And in the same place he says, that the Fathers are contradicting one
another, and then adds, So many things there be wherein it is lawful for us
to depart from the opinion of the Fathers.

Cardinal Cajetan in the beginning of his Comments on Genesis, Nullus
detestetur novum Scripturae sensum ex hoc quod dissonat a priscis doctoribus,
etc. Non enim alligavit Deus expositionem Scripturarum priscorum Doctorum
sensibus, etc.
If (says he) sometimes a new interpretation occurs agreeing with the text,
and not contrary to Scripture or to the doctrine of the Church, let the Reader
show himself an equitable censor, although that interpretation be diverse from
the stream of the holy Doctors. And in the same place, Let none detest a new
sense of Scripture, because it is dissonant from the ancient Doctors, etc. For
God has not tied the exposition of Scripture to the sense of the ancient
Doctors, but to the whole Scripture it self, under the censure of the Catholic
Church; subjecting Scripture unto the censures of the Roman Church.

The Jesuit Pererius in the 8. Book upon Genesis, in the first disputation,
Pudet dicere quae de optimis scriptoribus hoc loco dicturus sum, adeo sunt non
modo falsa sed pudenda and absurda -- Me tamen cogit dicere veritas.
I am ashamed (says he) to say the things which I must say against very good
writers, which say things not only false, but also shameful and absurd. Now
the Fathers which he has a quarrel with, are Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Cyprian, Ambrose, Tertullian, Lactantius, Eusebius, Sulpitius
Severus.

Salmeron in the second prolegomen acknowledges that the Fathers have often
dissented among themselves, Multa disputavit Cyprianus cum Cornelio Papa,
Origines cum Africano, etc.
Cyprian (says he) had many disputes with Pope Cornelius (he would say Steven)
Origin with African, Chrysostom with Theophilus Alexandrinus, Epiphanius with
John of Jerusalem, Ruffinus with Hierom, Hierom with Austin, Austin with
Simplicician, Prosper with Hilary, Gregory with He would say John.
Eutyches of Constantinople, and each of them made good his party.

And not only he says, that the Fathers dissent among themselves about the
exposition of Scripture, but also every one with himself. Salmeron Prolig. 2..
Quinta. Nam dum quisque eorum diversi ab alio unum locum exponit imo etiam unus
and idem vario modo.
Every one of them (says he) expounds a text otherwise then another does, yea
the same Doctor expounds a text diversely.

In the 51. dispute upon the Epistle to the Romams, treating of the conception
of the Virgin without sin, he alleges against himself a multitude of Fathers,
that hold that she was conceived in sin. To which he answers, that
Respondemus locum ab authoritate esse infirmum, etc. Ibid. Denique contra hanc
quam objiciunt multitudinem respondemus in verbo Dei, Exodus 23. In judicio
plurimorum non acquiesces sententiae ut a vero declines. Missam facio Augustini
and Innocentii I. sententiam quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia,
Eucharistiam etiam infantibus necessariam.
the proof by authority is weak, and that reason must go before authority. And
in the same place, Against that multitude [of Fathers] which is objected to us,
we answer by the Word of God, Exodus 23. Thou shall not speak in a cause to
decline after many to wrest Judgment.

The Jesuit Maldonat in his Comment upon the Gospel, disputes everywhere
against the exposition of Fathers. As upon Matthew. 6. treating of the
supersubstantiall bread, he confutes the opinion of Tertullian, Cyprian,
Ambrose, Victorinus, Athanasius, Juvencus, Hierom. And upon the 6. of John.
Respondemus locum ab authoritate esse infirmum, etc. Ibid. Denique contra hanc
quam objiciunt multitudinem respondemus in verbo Dei, Exodus 23. In judicio
plurimorum non acquiesces sententiae ut a vero declines. Missam facio Augustini
and Innocentii I. sententiam quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia,
Eucharistiam etiam infantibus necessariam.
I leave the opinion of Austin and Innocent the I. which reigned for 600.
years, that the Lords Supper is necessary to children.

The famous Bishop of Bitonto speaks very ingenuously to that purpose, upon
Romans 14. p. 606. where setting the Pope in the place of God, and comparing his
authority with that of the Fathers, he speaks thus, Whatsoever is spoken by him
whom we account for God in the things of God, we must hearken to it as to God
himself. As for me (that I may confess it ingenuously in the things that
concern the mysteries of God) Cornelius Mus. Episc. Bitontinus in Epist. ad
Romans c. 14. Quem pro Deo habemus in his quae Dei sunt quicquid ipse dixerit
tanquam Deum audire debemus: Ego ut ingenue fatear) plus uni summo Pontifici
crederem in his quae mysteria fidei tangunt quam mill Augustinis, Hieronimis,
Gregoriis, ne dicam Ricardis, Scotis, Gulielmis. Credo enim and scio quod
summus Pontifex in his quae fidei sunt errare non potest quoniam authoritas
determinandi quae ad fidem spectam in Pontifice residet.
I would give more faith to the only sovereign Bishop, then to a thousand
Austins, Hieroms, Gregory's, that I speak not of the Richards, Scotuses, and
Gulielmuses; for I believe and know that the Sovereign Bishop only cannot err
in the things that are of the faith, because the authority of determining
matters of faith resides in the Pope.

Petavius in his Notes upon Epiphanius, freely acknowledges the errors of the
Fathers, saying, page 205, and 244. We do not so much seek the errors of these
divine men, as set them forth when they present themselves. Yea he says, that
if one would examine many things in the Homilies of Chrysostom upon the rule of
truth, he should find neither sense nor reason in it.

The Jesuit De praesentia Christi in Eucharistia, Disp. 6. q. 3. Puncto 11..
quod si.
Gregorius de Valentia, in the Book of Transubstantiation, chapter 8. to rid
himself of Theodoret, who in his Dialogues confutes Transubstantiation,
Theodoret (says he) has been noted of other Errors in the Council of Ephesus.
The like will be found in the Preface upon the Dialogues of Theodoret printed
in Greek at Rome. And the same Gregorius de Valentia, says in the same place,
that Minime mirum est si unus aut alter aut etiam aliqui ex vtteribus minus
considerate and recte hac de re senserint and scripserint.
We must not wonder, if some of the Ancients have believed and written
inconsiderately of this matter.

Wherefore our Adversaries in their Comments, and in their Books of
Controversies use to allege diverse opinions of the Fathers, and to chose that
which pleases them best, and sometimes they reject them all. Bellarmine in the
Book De Monachis, chap. 9.. Praeterea and seq.
Five Expositions present themselves, which we must confute. The first is of
Hierome and Beda, etc. and soon after, Hieroms memory failed him.

The Jesuit Maldonat upon Matthew. 20. after a long enumeration of the opinions
of Fathers, freely declares that he does not acquiesce to any of them. And
upon Joh. 6. rebuking Austin, as one that had not apprehended in what sense
Jesus Christ says himself to be the Bread, says, I am persuaded that if
Austin had lived in our time, he would have been of another of opinion. And
upon the same chapter upon these words, They shall be all taught of God;
Chrysostomi interpretationem multo magis probo quam illum Augustini.
I do approve (says he) the interpretation of Chrysostom much more then that
of Austin. And upon Matthew. 11. after he has alleged diverse opinions of the
Fathers, he adds, To speak freely, none of these contents me.

Pope Gelasius by Papal authority in the Canon, Sancta Romana, Did. 15.
bears himself as Judge of the writings of the Fathers, and makes an
enumeration of those that must be suspected, and names them Apocryphal. Among
others he rejects Cassianus, the History of Eusebius, Clemens Alexandrinus,
and Cyprians Opuscules, who are nevertheless authors of good note, and have
their rank among the Fathers.

Alphonsus de Castro, c. 9. of the 1. Book against Heresies, shows that the
Fathers will often contradict one another. That Hierom says, that Paul rebuked
Peter fainedly only, not in truth: Austin on the contrary maintains, that he
was truly and justly reproved. -- That Hierom holds, that he that had two wives
before Baptism, may be promoted to the Priesthood after he is baptized; which
affirmation Ambrose, and Austin, and all the other Fathers do resist. That
Austin holds that the whole world was built in a moment of time, and interprets
that circuit of days to be alternations of Angelical knowledge, but that all
the others contradict that interpretation.

But Salmeron alone may serve for all. That Jesuitie in his thirteenth Tome in
the sixth Dispute about St. Paul's Epistles, makes himself Judge of the Fathers
with great authority, and makes a Collection of the Errors of the Fathers in
these words. Such is that which Irenaeus says concerning the age of Christ,
that he attained unto forty years; and that the Name of Jesus is compounded of
two letters and a half. And the Monogamy of Tertullian; and what he says, that
the death of Christ happened about the thirtieth year of his age. The opinion of
Papias, of the Resurrection at the end of a thousand years, which Nepos,
Cantor, and Lactantius have followed. Austin and Origene, and the Platonicians
have said, that the Angels are made of airy and subtle bodies. And our Gregory
in the Homily of the Epiphany of the Lord, calls an Angel a reasonable animal.
The Doctrine of Cyprian, of the rebaptization of those that have been baptized
by Heretics, which has been determined by three Councils of Carthage, and
confuted by the Church. The opinion of Eusebius Cesariensis, that the Son of
God, who is the Word of the Father, is inferior to the Father, has been
rejected as most false. The opinion of Basil, that the roof of the Firmament is
flat, that it may hold water, as he says upon Genesis. Himself upon the 14.
Psalm, maintains that under the New Testament, it is not at all permitted to
swear, no more then it is permitted to circumcise. Which nevertheless Euthymius
and Theophylactus upon Matthew. 5. have followed. Yet this has not been followed
by them that are come since. Also it is a hard opinion of Nazianzenus, that he
holds second marriages to be unlawful, and the third to be a prevarication, us
he testifies in the thirtieth Oration. This also is hard in Gregorius
Nyssenus, to hold that in the state of Innocence, there should have been no
generation by copulation of sexes, no more then in the Resurrection, as he
testifies upon Genesis 17. Euthymius teaches the same upon Psalm. 50. And
Damascenus in the Book of Orthodox Faith, although the command of increasing
and multiplying, and filling the earth had preceded. And so this in the same
Book of Nyssenus, c. 30. that the reasonable soul is made by traduction, is
absurdly said; although he contradicts himself in the second Book of the soul,
c. 4. This also is hard in Athanasius, that our soul is drawn from the power of
the matter; and that the souls of the Saints do not see God till the day of
Judgment, in the 16. and 20. questions to Antiochus, if yet those questions be
not falsely ascribed to him. It is a hard and unworthy saying of Chrysostomus
upon these words of Joh. 2. They have no Wine, and upon these words of Matthew.
12. Behold thy Mother and thy Brothers are without: and upon this sentence of
the Psalm, There is none that does good, no not one: That he says, that the
Blessed Virgin was ambitious and desirous of vainglory. Which Theophylactus
has followed, and Euthymius upon Matthew. 12. and Mark. 3. and Luke 2.
Tertullian says worse things yet of the Virgin Mary, in the Book of the flesh
of Christ, which have not been believed by posterity, but have been reproved.
It is likewise a hard saying of Arnobius, that the souls are descended into the
bodies by necessity of nature, and that pains come not by the Providence of
God, but by the necessity of the matter, as he teaches in the 2. Book against
the Gentiles; and that the souls differ not in reason: and that the souls of
the damned are reduced to nothing by their suffering. Lactantius teaches, that
the sin of the Devil is the envy of the first Angel that was made, or rather of
the Holy Ghost, whom he seems to make a Creature, Book 1. chap. 9. It is a hard
opinion in Hilary, that Christ did not fear death, and felt no pain in his
passion, as he teaches in the 10. Book of the Trinity. The opinion of Ambrose
is singular, whereby he prays that the Emperors, Gratian, and Valentinian,
may rise from the dead more early. And in another place he says, that
whenever we celebrate the Feast of the Resurrection of the Lord, always some
rise again, etc. Hierom in a certain Epistle, says, That Christ is come out
bloody out of the Virgins womb. Austin did retract himself in many things. And
in the Book of the City of God he denies Antipodes. In Bernard we could desire
more perspicuity in that Doctrine, That the souls do not receive the glory of
blessedness until the day of Judgment. In Damascenus we observe a Doctrine,
which the Church admits not, That the Holy Ghost proceeds not alike from the
Son, and from the Father; wherein he is followed by Theophylactus upon Joh. 3.
and by Michal Syngelus in the Book of the praises of Denis. It would be indeed
a very long thing, if I would run over all the Doctors, and all the particular
opinions of every one, whose belief the Church has not approved. So speaks
that Jesuit.

Villavincentius an Augustinian Monk, in the fourth Book of of the manner of
well ordering the study of Divinity, cap. 5. makes the like enumeration of the
Errors of the Fathers, and adds to those that Salmeron has observed, that
Epiphanius in Anchoratis has interpreted these words, My Father is greater
then I, as true even of the Divine Nature. That Jesus Christ praying that this
Cup should pass from him, spoke not in good earnest, but to abuse the Devil.
That Ambrose is excessive in Allegories, going far from the sense of Scripture.
That he excuses Peter's denial of his Master, saying, that he denied only Jesus
Christ Man, not Jesus Christ God. That Hierome contending for Virginity, uses
Marriage unworthily, and puts the second and third marriages almost in the same
rank as fornication. That the Learned agree not with this Doctrine of Austin,
that children dying without Baptism are eternally damned. And that the Church
has abolisht the custom approved by St. Austin, to give the Lords Supper to
little children. Above all he is angry with Hilary, for attributing and
impassible body unto Christ, which has suffered not pain in his Death.

Thus our Adversaries are become Judges of the Fathers, and confute them with
much liberty: and by consequent receive not the Fathers for Judges, since they
make themselves Judges of the Fathers, and hold them to be erroneous and impure
in the Faith.

CHAP. 48. That the Roman Church opposes her self to the consent of ancient
Doctors.
When we put our Adversaries in mind of the liberty which they give to
themselves to reprove the Fathers, they will answer, that indeed every Father
has his Errors, but that their consent is an infallible rule; and that the
Roman Church follows the Fathers when they agree among themselves. This
deserves to be examined.

First, If to come out of a difficulty in Religion, and to attain to Salvation,
we must have the consent of all the Fathers, I know not who can be saved, since
of twenty thousand Christians, hardly shall one be found that has read one
half of the Fathers; and of those that read them, few understand them. Besides,
Many Fathers of exquisite learning and goodness have written no Books, whose
opinion therefore is not known unto us upon every point of Religion. And of
those that have written, not one shall be found that says his opinion upon the
fourth part of the points which are now adays controverted: For they are
questions which for the most part are sprung since their death. Yet let us see
whether the Roman Church keep to that rule, and whether they contradict not
many times a multitude of Fathers consenting in one point?

I. Is there any thing in all Antiquity upon which the Ancients consent more
then upon the Communion of the People to the Sacrament under the two kinds? Can
one example be found in all Antiquity of the Sacrament administered in the
Church to a multitude of people, without administering the cup to any one of
them? Shall it be found that ever they refused the Cup to any of the people
that required it? Of that it were superfluous to bring proofs, since the
Council of Constance, which made that abominable Law, acknowledges in the
XIII. Session, that in the ancient Church that Sacrament was received by the
people under the two kinds, and that Jesus Christ has instituted it so.

II. How great is the consent of the Fathers to put the Book of Maccabees among
the Apocrypha, and to deny them a place among the Canonical Books? So did the
Council of Laodicea determine it, and Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, and
Melito Bishop of Sardis, and Ruffinus in the Exposition of the Symbol, and
Athanasius in his Synopsis, and Eusebius in his Chronicle upon the 117.
Olympiad, and in the 3. Book of his History, chap. 10. And Hierom in his
Preface upon the Books of Solomon, and in his Prologus Galeatus, and Hilary in
his Preface upon the Psalter; and Gregory Nazianzen in his Verses; and
Epiphanius in the Book of measures, and Pope Gregory the I. in the 19. of the
Morals upon Job; and many more, as we shall show it Infra c. 55.
hereafter more exactly.

That consent so general has not hindered the Roman Church of our days to
receive the Maccabees among the Canonical Scriptures.

III. The words of the Jesuit Maldonat upon Joh. 6.53. are notable. Missam
facio Augustini and Innocentii I. sententiam quae sexcentos circiter annos
viguit in Ecclesia Eucharistiam etiam infantibus necessariam.
I leave (says he) the opinion of Austin and Innocent the III. an opinion
which had reigned in the Church for 600. years, or thereabouts, that the
Eucharist is neccessary to Infants. Then an opinion received in the Church of
Rome for the space of six hundred years, is now rejected by the same Church.

To the works of Hinckmarus, an Epistle of Jesse Bishop of Amiens is added,
Novissime corpore and sanguine Christi confirmatur infans ut ejus possit esse
membrum qui pro eo passus est.
whereby it appears that at that time, that is, in the ninth age, that custom
was yet practiced in Gauls, to give the Lords Supper to little children,
presently after Baptism. In the same place there is a Constitution of Riculfus
Bishop of Soissons of the same time, that such as are baptized, should receive
the Lords Supper presently after Baptism, because the Lord says, unless you
eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. The Council of Trent, in the XX. Session,
made no difficulty to pronounce anathema to them that hold that opinion,
without respecting Pope Innocent the I. and Saint Austin, who have been of that
opinion. Cassander in his consultation to Ferdinand and Maximilian, p. 936.
says, that he has often observed that practice in Antiquity; and M. du Perron
acknowledges, that this practice continued yet in the time of Charlemagne and
Lewis the Meek. Nicol. de Lyra in Joh 6. etc. Jeremias Patriarch. Constable. lib.
ad Germanos.
The Greek Churches to this day observe that custom; and Francis. Alvarez.
hist. Aethiop. c 20.
so do the Abyssine Churches.

IV. Six hundred and thirty Bishops assembled in the Council of Chalcedon, who
have judged by an express Can. 22. Council. Chalcedon.
Canon; that the Bishop of Constantinople must be equal in all things to the
Bishop of Rome, are I hope a sufficient number to authorize such an order; yet
that order was opposed by the ambition of the Popes.

V. How famous and received by the common consent of ages, were the Letters
Those Letters are inserted in the Codex of the Canons of the African Church,
and in the first To^e of the Councils, in the end of the sixth Council of
Carthage, and in Balsamon, and Zonaras.
of the sixth Council of Carthage? wherein the Bishops assembled out of all
Africa, write to Celestin Bishop of Rome, that from thenceforth he would
abstain from sending Legates into Africa, and meddle no more to judge the causes
already judged in Africa, or to receive appeals coming from Africa, because
causes ought to be judged in the places where they begun; warning him not to
bring the famous pride of the world into the Church; and telling him that the
pretended Canons of the Council of Nice, upon which he grounded his authority,
are supposititious, and are not found in the Original. Nevertheless the Roman
Church did oppose that. Baronius in the year 419.. 78. says, that the things
contained in that Epistle, Sunt subduriuscula, praecupue vero quae dicunt
Patres de non mittendis Legatis in Africam.
are somewhat hard, especially that which the Bishops say of sending no more
Legates into Africa. Bellarmine in the twenty fifth chapter of the second book
de Pontifice, speaking of those African Bishops, says, that Respondemus
Africanos Patres ex ignorantia deceptos, p. 476.
those African Fathers were deceived through ignorance. And Cardinal du Perron
chap. 57. of the first book against his Majesty of Great Britain, says, that
the wrath of contention has fetched so much out of their mouth.

VI. All the Fathers with common consent exhort the people to read the holy
Scripture carefully. Hierom in his Epistle to Lea, will have her Daughter Paula
to read diligently the Old and the New Testament. Chrysostom in the third
Homily concerning Lazarus, exhorts to that Lecture the Tradesmen, the Women,
and the least of the people. Athanasius is very express for that in the second
Tome, p. 248. and Austin Epist. 146. to the Virgin Demetrius, and in the sixth
book of his Confessions, chap. 5. The Roman Church by an example without
example opposing that consent has forbidden the people to read the holy
Scripture. We will hereafter set down the very terms of the prohibition.

VII. Generally the Fathers before Austin, and Austin himself in the beginning,
believed, that God had predestined men to salvation according to his
foreknowledge, that such and such should do good works, and have says. To that
consent, the Jesuit Pererius upon Romans 8. opposes himself boldly, speaking
thus in his twenty second Dispute; The Greek Fathers and many Latin Doctors
have believed and written, that the cause of the predestination of men to
eternal life, is Gods foreknowledge from eternity of the good works which they
should do, cooperating with his grace, and of the faith whereby they should
believe, etc. Nevertheless it is easy to show by many and evident Texts of
Scripture, that Gods foreknowledge of faith is not the cause of the
predestination of men. Bellarmine and the Jesuits are of the same opinion.

VIII. It was a common opinion among the Ancients, that the Angels are fallen
from their purity, by cohabiting with Women. It was the opinion of Justin.
Apol. 1. (...).
Justin Martyr in his second Apology, and of Clemens Alexandrinus, Clem. Alex.
Strom. 3. (...).
3.5 and sexto Stromaton, and of Angeli qui ad filios hominum de coelo ruerunt;
item l. 5. Ambros. de bono mortis.
Tertullian in the book of the behavior of women, chap. 2. And of Austin, in
the third book of the City of God, chap. 3. And of Cyprian, in the book of the
behavior of Virgins, chap. 11. and of Ambros. l. 1. de Virginibus; Castitas
Angelu^ facit; qui eam servavit, sanctus Angelus est; qui perdidit, Diabolus.
Ambrose, in the first book of Noah and the Ark; And of Irenaeus in the first
book, chap. 70. and of Lactantius, chap. 15. of the second book.

IX. Sixtus Senensis in the sixth book, in the annotation, 345. says, that
Justin Martyr, Lactantius, Victorinus, Prudentius, Aretas, the Pope John XXII.
have held, that the souls of the righteous shall not before the day of
Judgment enjoy the sight of God. He might have added Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Prudentius, Ambrose, Austin, Chrysostom, and almost all the Grecians. He
adds, that it is the error of the Armenians, condemned by the Decretals of
Innocent the II. and Benedictus the XI. and by the Council of Florence. See the
Questions to the Orthodox, ascribed to Justin Martyr in the answer to the sixty
and seventy fourth Questions.

X. In nothing the Fathers agree better, then in the opinion that all Tertul.
lib. de Idololat. c. 11. Taceo de perjurio, quando ne jurare quidem licet.
Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 4. Hieron in Mat 5. Chrysostom. Hom. 8. and 9. in Acta
Victor. ^ticensis, l. 3. Nazianz. (...) sub finem Athan. lib. (...). Justin.
Dial. cum Tryphone, p 239. and 307. Vide Sixtum Senens lib. 6. Annot. 26.
oaths are unlawful, and that no Christian ought to swear for any cause
whatsoever. The Roman Church swears not only by the name of God, but by the
Saints and their relics.

XI. Almost all the Fathers of the first ages, were Chiliasts, that is,
defining the duration of the reign of Christ to the space of a thousand years,
with feasting and earthly dainties; Pamelius in his notes upon the book of
Cyprian, of the exhortation to Martyrdom, says, that Tertullian, Lactantius,
Victorinus, Severus, Papias, Justin, Irenaeus, Apollinaris, were of that
opinion. Justin Martyr goes so far, as to say, that they that are truly
Christians, were of that belief. See Hierom in the book of Ecclesiastical
Writers, where he speaks of Papias. Sixtus Senensis says of Hierom, in the
fifth book in the annotation 133. that he has been doubtful about that point,
and that Austin has sometimes inclined to that opinion, as it appears by the
twentieth book of the City of God, chap. 7. The Church of Rome has departed
from that consent.

XII. The Ancients believed, that the souls while they are separate from the
bodies, cannot be tormented. A certain proof that they believed not Purgatory,
which the Roman Church now believes. Tertullian, in the 48. chapter of the
Apologetick, Neque pati quicquam potest anima sola sine stabili materia.
The soul alone cannot suffer any thing without solid matter, that is, without
flesh. He says the same, in the book of the testimony of the soul, chap. 4.
Gregory Nyssen in the third Oration of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Animam
per se separatam ignis nunquam attigerit, nec tenebrae quidem ei molestae
fuerint, utpote quae oculis caret.
The fire can never touch the soul separate, and darkness cannot be troublesome
to it, seeing it has no eyes. By these convenient reasons, we are induced to
believe the resurrection of the dead. Ambrose in the book of Penance, c. 17.
Neque animam sine carne, neque carnem sine anima, cum sint sibi gestorum operum
consortio copulatae, sine consortio vel poena esse vel praemii.
The soul without the body, and the body without the soul, cannot be partakers
of punishment and reward, seeing they are fellows in their actions.

Chrysostom says the same, hom. 39. upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
(...).
The soul (says he) shall not be punished without the body. Against that
consent, the Roman Church has forged her Purgatory.

XIII. It was a generally received belief in the ancient Church, that the
consecration is done in the Eucharist by Prayer, not by speaking to the bread,
but by speaking to God. Justin Martyr in his second Apology, calls that which is
received in the holy Communion, a food consecrated by prayer. Origin in the
eighth Book against Celsus, We eat bread which by prayer is made a body, which
is some holy thing. Basil in the book of the holy Ghost, chap. 17. The words of
invocacation, when one shows the bread. Theodoret in the second Dialogue,
introduces the Heretic speaking thus; The signs of the body and the blood,
are others before the invocation of the Priest, but after the invocation they
are changed. The Roman Church in our days, makes consecration by speaking unto
the bread, not unto God; contradicting her own Canons; Especially the Canon
Corpus and sanguinem Christ's dicimus illud quod de fructibusterrae acceptum,
and prece mystica consecratum.
Corpus Did. 2. of the Consecration. We call the body and blood of Christ,
that which being taken from the fruits of the earth, and consecrated by
mystical prayer, is duly taken by us for the spiritual salvation in memory of
the passion of the Lord.

XIV. It is the general opinion of the Ancients, that as soon as the dead are
raised, they shall pass through the flame, and shall be purged by the fire of
the last Judgment, which they call a Baptism of fire, and the flaming sword
set at the gate of Paradise. Hilary upon Psalm 118. upon the Letter Gimel,
makes the Virgin Mary to pass through that fire. And Ambrose in the twentieth
Sermon upon the same Psalm, and in the third Sermon upon the thirty sixth
Psalm, makes the Prophets and Apostles to go through it. Origin, Lactantius,
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Austin, Cyril of Jerusalem, say the same: Of whom, we
have In the Buckler of the Faith, Sect. 86.
in another place set forth the words; and we shall speak of this matter again
In the third controversy of the seventh book.
in the last book of this work. But the Roman Church has put out that fire,
and kindled another more lucrative to the Pope and his Clergy.

XV. It was a received opinion by most of the Ancients, that children dead
without Baptism, are eternally tormented in hell. Austin in the first book, de
bono perseverantiae, cap. 13. says, that Parvulos non regeneratos, ad aeternam
mortem; alios autem regeneratos ad aeternam vitam duci de hac vita.
little children unbaptized, are led unto eternal dead. And in the first book
of the merits of sins and of remission, chap. 28. dispusing against the
Pelagians, who put the unbaptized children in a middle condition between hell
and heavenly glory, he says, Nec est ullus ulli medius locus ut possit esse
nisi cum Diabolo qui non est cum Christo. Hinc and ipse Dominus volens auferre
de cordibus male credentium istam nescio quam medietatem quam conantur quidam
parvulis non baptizatis tribuere, etc. ait, Qui mecum non est, adversum me est.
There is no place between both, where he that is not with Christ, may be in
another place from the Devil. Wherefore also the Lord willing to take off from
the hearts of the half believers, I know not what middle most condition, which
some endeavor to attribute to unbaptized children, said, He that is not with
me, is against me. For at that time they did not believe the Limbus of children
dead without Baptism. His Disciple Fulgentius speaks the same language, in his
book of faith to Peter the Deacon, c. 27. Firmissime tene, and nullatenus
dubites, non solum homines ratione utentes, verum etiam parvulos qui sive in
uteris matrum vivere incipiunt and ibi moriuntur, sive cum de matribus nati
sine Sacramento sancti Baptismatis de hoc saeculo transeunt, ignis aeterni
sempiterno supplicio puniendos.
Believe steadfastly (says he) and doubt not at all, that not only men that
have not the use of reason, but also the little children, which either have
some beginning of life in their Mothers womb, and there die, or being born from
their Mothers, go out of this world without the holy Sacrament of Baptism,
shall be punished with the pain of everlasting fire. That opinion has long
prevailed, and was also followed by Pope Gregory the I. who (if our Adversaries
may be believed) could not err in the faith. In the ninth book of his Morals
upon Joh, chap. 16. he speaks thus of little children dead without Baptism,
Nonnulli prius praesenti vitae subtrabuntur, quam ad profe^enda bona malave
merita activae vitae perveniant. Quos quia a culpa originis, Sacramenta salutis
non liberant, and hic ex proprio nihil egerant, and illuc ad tormenta
perveniunt.
Some are gone out of this present life, before they can attain to the time of
doing the good or evil merits of an active life, who because they are not
delivered from the original offense by the salutary Sacrament, and have not
done here any good of their own, go yonder to be tormented. And a little after,
By an occult and just judgment of God their plagues are multiplied without
cause. That opinion is displeasing to the Roman Church of this time, which
makes these children to suffer an eternal punishment which they feel not, and
in the day of Judgment puts them neither among the goats, nor among the Lambs.
These Doctors have not considered, that since Jesus Christ has satisfied for
original sin by suffering torments, it follows, that original sin deserves
to be punished with pains which be really felt.

XVI. It is the general belief of the Fathers, yea of most part of the Doctors
of the Roman Church which are not of this last age, that Jesus Christ was the
only man that ever was free of original sin, and that even the Virgin Mary was
not free of it. Austin in the second book of the merits of sins, chap. 24.
Solus Christus homo factus, manens Deus, peccatum nullum habuit unquam, neque
sumpsit carnem peccati, quamvis de natura carnis peccati.
Jesus Christ alone being made man, remaining God, never had any sin, neither
did take the flesh of sin, although he had taken [his flesh] from the nature of
the flesh of sin, speaking of the flesh of his mother. And upon the 34. Psalm.
Sermon, 2. Maria ex Adam mortua propter peccatum; Adam mortuus propter peccatum.
Mary come from Adam, is dead by reason of sin. Adam is dead by reason of sin,
and the flesh of the Lord come from Mary is dead to take away sins. Leo the I.
in the first Sermon of the Nativity of Christ; Christus sicut nullum a reatu
liberum reperit, ita pro liberandis omnibus venit.
Solus per omnia ex natis de foemina D. Jesus terrenae contagia corruptela,
immaculati partus novitate, non senserit.
As Christ found no man free from guilt, so he is come to deliver them all.
Ambrose upon Luke 2. Jesus Christ is every way the only among them that are
born of women, that has not felt the contagion of earthly corruption, by the
newness of an immaculate birth. We shall see hereafter how Chrysostom accuses
the Virgin Mary of rashness and ambition. And Eusebius Emissenus in the 2.
Sermon of the Lords Nativity, chap. 4. as Cajetan alleges him, says, Ab
originali nemo nexu liber extitit, neque ipsa genetrix Redemptoris.
None has been free from the original bond, no not the mother of the Redeemer.
Bernard bestows a whole Epistle upon that, which is the 174. to the Canons of
Lions, where he proves that the Virgin Mary was conceived in sin, and that the
Feast of the Conception of the Virgin was ill-instituted. And which is more,
Hilary upon Psalm. 118. on the Letter Gimel, says, she must pass through the
fire of the day of Judgment, by which sins shall be purged. Anselmus in the 2.
Book, that shows why God is man, chap. 16. Virgo tamen ipsa unde assumptus
est Christus, in iniquitatibus concepta est, and in peccatis concepit eam matter
ejus, and cum originali peccato nata est, quia and ipsa in Adam peccavit.
The Virgin herself from which Christ is sprung, was conceived in iniquity, and
her mother conceived her in sin, because she also has sinned in Adam. Their
reason is, because Scripture has concluded all under sin, saying, that there
is no man that sins not. And because Christ is dead for her, and she had
need of the remission of sins, and that she is dead; now she is not dead for
the sins of others; then for her own. Wherefore Austin in the Book of the
perfection of righteousness gives this rule; Quisquis esse vel fuisse in hac
vita aliquem hominem vel aliquos putat, excepto uno Mediatore Dei and hominum,
quibus necessaria non fuerit romissio peccatorum, contrarius est divinae
Scripturae.
Whosoever thinks that there is or ever was in this life any man or men,
excepting the only Mediator between God and men, to whom the remission of sins
was not necessary, contradicts the holy Scripture. And Fulgentius in the Book
of the Faith to Peter the Deacon, Believe firmly and doubt not at all, that
every man conceived by the copulation of man and woman, is born in original sin.

That consent of Ancient Doctors has not hindered the Roman Church of our time
to hold the contrary, and to celeberate the Feast of the immaculate conception
of the Virgin Mary, though Bernard condemned that celebration. The Council of
Basil in the year 1439. in the 36. Session, determines and declares, that the
Virgin Mary was conceived without sin, forbidding expressly the holding of the
contrary, and renews the Order for celebrating the feast of her Conception.
Since in the year 1483. Sixtus IV. in Bulla cum Praecucelsa.
Pope Sixtus the IV. grants to them that have heard Mass or caused Masses to
be sung on the day of the Feast of the Conception of the Blessed Virgin,
instituted by Mr. Leonard de Nogarolles Clark of Verona, the like indulgences
as to those that celebrate or say Mass on Monday, Thursday, or Gods Feast. In
which Bull the Virgin is called the Queen of heaven and the Mother of grace. By
another Bull the same Pope declares those Heretics, that say that the Virgin
Mary was conceived in sin, and excommunicates them, thereby excommunicating all
the Ancients that have spoken so. Wherefore the Jesuits, although they say
sometimes that the Roman Church has decided nothing as yet upon that point,
yet maintain stiffly that the Virgin was conceived without sin. Salmeron in c.
5. Ep. ad Romans Disp. 51. Vasques in 3 am Thomae, Tom. 2. Disp. 117. c. 1.
Bellarm. De amiss. gratiae, and statu peccati. lib 4. c. 15.
Salmeron, Vasques, and Bellarmin, insist much upon that, not fearing to oppose
antiquity. Bellarmin saying that the Church of Rome has defined nothing about
that (although the Council of Basil has decided it, and the Feast is
celebrated) yet gives one Chapter to that opinion. The title of the Chapter
is, That the Blessed Virgin Mary was conceived without original sin.

XVII. Hardly in any thing do the Fathers consent more then in the enumeration
of the Commandments of the first table of the Law; for (excepting Austin) no
ancient Author of any authority shall be found, that puts not four Commandments
in the first Table, making of the Commandment about the images a Commandment by
it self, distinct from the first, Thou shall have none other Gods before me.

The Jews writers that lived in the time of the Apostles, Philo and Josephus,
are in this point idoneous witnesses; for they relate the Belief of the Church
of the old Testament. Philo in the book of the Decalogue, (...), etc. (...),
etc. (...).
The first five are the more worthy; The other five less. Those first five more
worthy, speak of the Empire of one God over the world. 2. Of images and
statues, etc. 3. Of not taking the name of God in vain, etc. (...), etc. (...).
Josephus in the 3. book of Antiquities, chap. 4. The first Commandment
teaches us, that there is but one God, and that we must serve him alone. The
second forbids to make any image of any animal, and to worship it.

Clement in the 2. Book of the Apostolical Constitutions, chap. 36. according
to the Greek, and chap. 40. in Latin, Have always the fear of God before thine
eyes, remembering his Commandments at all times. Love one only God with all thy
strength. 2. Apply not thy self unto idols.

Origin in the 8. Homily upon Exodus, The first Commandment is, Thou shall have
none other Gods then me. And after that follows, Thou shall not make unto thee
any image or likeness: Then he reproves those that of these two make but one
precept, saying, that by making these two precepts into one the number of ten
Commandments should not be complete.

(...).
Athanasius in his Synopsis, says, that the book of Exodus contains these ten
Commandments written in Tables. The first, I am the Lord thy God; The second,
Thou shall not make any idol or resemblance.

Gregory Nazianzen (...).
in his verses, has summed up the ten Commandments in verses, which begin
thus; God has graven his ten Commandments in tables of stone, but write them
in thy heart. Thou shall acknowledge no other God; for the service belongs to
one only.

Thou shall not set up vain resemblance nor inanimate image.

Thou shall never make mention of the great God in vain.

Cum constet primum mandatum ita contineri, Non sint tibi Dii alieni praeter
me. Deinde Non facies tibi similitudinem ullam, etc. Tertium, Non sumes nomen
Domini tui in vanum.
Ambrose upon Ephesians. 6. It is a received truth that the Commandment is thus set
down, Thou shall have none other Gods but me. And next, Thou shall not make any
likness of the things that are above in heaven, nor in the earth below. The
third, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Hierom upon the same Chapter says, that in the second Commandment, which
says, Thou shall make no idol, there is a promise added.

The same is found in the imperfect work upon St. Matthew, attributed unto
Chrysostom, in the 33. and 49. Homilies, and in the book of Questions of the
Old and New Testament, attributed to Austin, in the 7. chap. and in Severus
Sulpitius, in the first Book of the Ecclesiastical History. Clemens
Alexandrinus 7. Stromaton seems to confound the second Commandment with the
first; but he expounds himself afterward, saying, that the fifth Commandment
injoynes to honor father and mother, and that the tenth is of all sorts of
coveting.

From that consent of the Ancients the Roman Church of this time is departed;
for her Doctors not contenting themselves to mingle the first and the second
Commandment, endeavor to abolish the second, having utterly Unum cole Deum,
ne jures vana per ipsum. Un seul Dieu tu adoreras and aimeras parfaitement.
Dieu en vain ne jureras ni de pensee seulement. See the Hours of our Lady, and
the Catechism of the Jesuits.
razed it out of the Hours, Offices, Brevaries and Catechisms, which are given
to the people for their exercise and instruction. In the Council of Auspurg
held in the year 1548. the Commandments of God are put in German, where the
second Commandment is suppressed, in which God forbids to make and worship
images. These men that make images of the Trinity, and bow down before the
images of creatures, think to cover their crimes by suppressing Gods Law. But
the original of the Law is in the Counsel of God, and cannot be blotted out by
men. By that shall they be judged in the last day.

XVIII. This proposition that man is justified before God by faith only, is
odious unto the Roman Church, as a doctrine that slackens the zeal, and averts
men from good works as useless. Yet it is the ordinary language of the Fathers.
Origin upon Romans 3. says, that Apostolis dicit sufficere solius fidei
justificationem.
the justification by faith only is sufficient. Basil in the Sermon of
humility, (...).
Paul did acknowledge himself poor in true righthteousness, and that he was
justified by the only faith in Jesus Christ. Hilary 8. Canon upon St. Matthew,
Fides sola justificat, Faith only justifies. Hierom upon Gal. 3. Quia nemo
legem servat, ideo dictum est quod sola fide justificandi essent credentes.
Because no body keeps the Law, therefore it is said that the believers must be
justified. And in the same place, Vobis ad justitiam sola fides sufficit, To be
righteous, faith only is sufficient to you. And a little after, Ut sola fide
benedicerentur gentes in Christo.
That the nations might be blessed in Christ by faith only. Ambrose upon Romans
4. Quomodo ergo Judaei per opera Legis justificari sese putant justificatione
Abrabae, cum videant Abraham non ex operibus legis sed sola fide justificatum?
How do the Jews think to be justified by the works of the Law with the
Justification of Abraham, since they see that Abraham was justified, not by the
works of the Law, but by faith only? and a little after, Impius sola fide
justificatur apud Deum, The wicked is justified before God by faith only.
Chrysostom upon Gal. 3. (...).
They said, that he that stands upon faith only is execrable. But St. Paul
shows, that he that stands upon faith only is blessed. Austin 68. Sermon. de
Tempore, Ecce sine operibus justificatur ex fide, and quicquid illi legali
posset observatione conferri totum credulitas sola donavit.
Abraham has been justified by says without works, and that only belief has
given him that which might be conferred upon him by the observation of the Law.
Theodoret, We have not obtained the mystical goods by works, but by faith only.
Bernard 21. Sermon. upon the Canticles. Being justified by faith only he shall
have peace with God.

These Fathers teaching that man is justified before God by faith only, did
nevertheless exhort unto good works; for they spoke of another faith then that
of the Church of Rome, which our Adversaries say to be a belief that whatsoever
God has said is true; a faith which the Devils also have. But they spoke of a
lively faith working by charity, fruitful in good works; whereby a man resting
upon the promise of God in Jesus Christ our Lord, is thereby induced to love
and serve God.

XIX. We will show hereafter, that in the thee first ages of the Christian
Church, and more then the half of the fourth, there was not any mention of
calling upon the Saints; and that Transubstantiation is contrary to the
doctrine of the Ancients, and that in the Temples of the first ages there was
no picture, or statue, or image of God, and that they worshipped not images.

XX. None that has some measure of knowledge in antiquity, but knows, that the
form and the degrees of Penance observed in the Ancient Church, are no more
observed in the Roman, and that all the ancient penitential Canons are
abolisht. Read the Epistle of Basil to Amphilochius, and the Decree of Buchard,
and all the penitential Canons that are found in the Councils, you shall find
nothing in them, of that the Roman Church observes in our days.

XXI We hope to show toward the end of this Book, that private Masses (that
is, without Communicants and assistants, and said to the intention of him that
pays for them) are not only without precedent in the ancient Church, but also
are generally condemned by the ancients, and by the very Orders of the old
Roman Church. Bellarmin in his second Book of the Mass, chap. 9. does freely
confess it, saying, That no express passage is found in all the Ancients, which
show that ever they offered sacrifice without the communion of some one or more
with the Priest.

XXII. Who knows not, that in the ancient Church the public service was
celebrated in Italy in Latin, in Greece in Greek, in Armenia in Armenian; and
that every one prayed in a language which he understood? That they made no
elevation of the host over the head, turning their back unto the people? and
that the people adored not the host; which was not a waser, but some quantity
of bread which was distributed unto the people? That in those days the Bishop
of Rome had no Court, and was subject to the Emperors and Kings? That the
Bishops in their reception took no oath of allegiance and obedience unto the
Pope? and that the Pope did not exercise a temporal domination over them by
Annats, and the like oppressions? That they did not know what the treasure of
the Church was, which now is made up with the overplus of the satisfactions of
Christ and of the Saints? That then the nations did not run from all parts to
Rome to gain pardons? That the prayers of the Ancients for the dead, were not
to draw souls out of Purgatory? That then the images of Saints were not
worshipped, and they represented not the Trinity in stone or colors? That the
Virgin Mary was not called Queen of heaven? In a word, that the face of the
ancient Church is altogether changed as well as the doctrine? How can now the
Popes adherents be so destitute of conscience, as to boast of the consent of
the Fathers after they have despised them and forsaken their doctrine?

The sight and consciousness of this, makes them hold forth this doctrine; That
the Roman Church can without the authority of the Fathers, and without the
example of the ancient Church, make new Laws about faith and manners; the
Church of this time having no less authority then the Old. This Bellarmin
teaches in his Book against Barcklay, chap. 3. He judges not aright of the
Church, that receives nothing but what he reads expressly to have been written
or done in the ancient Church: As though the Church of the last time had ceased
to be a Church, or had not the faculty of expounding or declaring, yea also of
ordaining and commanding the things that belong unto faith and manners. And the
Bull Exurge, which is in the end of the last Council of Lateran, puts this
among the errors of Luther, that he had said, That it was not in the power of
the Pope and the Roman Church to establish Articles of Faith. See Alphonsus de
Castro, a Franciscan, in the first book against heresies; where he maintains
that the Roman Church of this time is far more instructed and better then the
ancient Church. Should the Church (says he) be always in the same case, so
that she can never grow better? God forbid, for she is proficient as in virtue
and goodness, so in science and Doctrine. He adds, That now many things are
known of which the Fathers were altogether ignorant; and that because of the
Decrees which vary and alter, that which was in old time lawful, is not so
now. This is the esteem that this Doctor has of Antiquity.

CHAP. 49. Doctrines in which the Roman Church rejects every Father in
particular.
BEsides these Doctrines about which a great number of Fathers is consenting,
which nevertheless the Roman Church rejects and condemns: there are but few
Fathers but have some particular opinion, which the Roman Church disalloweth as
well as we, or which is displeasing to our Adversaries for speaking the truth
too plainly.

Justin and Clement.
Justin Martyr Dialogo de Tryphone. (...). Vide eundem Dialogum, p. 213.
Justin Martyr and Clemens Stromaton, lib. 6. (...).
Clement Alexandrin did believe, that God had given to the Gentiles the Sun,
and the Moon, and the Stars to worship, least they should be altogether
destitute of religion; and that by the adoration of the Stars they might go to
God. The Roman Church approves not that Doctrine.

Justin Martyr believed Justin Dialogo in Tryph. p. 260. and 33. (...).
that the souls of the Fathers under the Old Testament were in the Devils
power: And that Idem ibid. p. 279. (...).
the glory of the Father is greater then that of the Son; And that it was the
Son, who in old time came down and appeared to Abraham and to Moses, because
the Father does not come down, and is invisible, as though the Son as God, was
not of the same nature, and invisible alike. Himself in the Dialogue against
Tryphon, p. 307. says, that the Christians shall live a thousand years at
Jerusalem before the resurrection. He believed also that the Angels fell by the
love of women. And in the second Apology, p. 83 he thinks that Socrates and
Heraclitus were Christians. That Divinity is rejected by the Roman Church.

Clement Alexandrin
Clement Alexandrin repeateth often, that Clem. l. 2. Stromaton. (...).
before the Lords coming the Grecians were justified by Philosophy. Page 171.
(...).
The same puts four hypostases in God. Strom. l. 4. p. 217. (...).
He says that the afflictions of the faithful happen, and that the death of
Christ happened, not but by the will of God, but by his permission. And that
Strom. l. 5. p. 252. (...).
God has a body, and that Jesus Christ descended into hell to preach to the
Jews, and that the Strom. l. 6.
Apostles descended to the same place to preach to the Gentiles, and bring them
to salvation, even those who among them have lived righteously according to the
rules of Philosophy. The same holds, that Lib. 5. p. 227. (...).
the Angels are fallen from their purity, by falling in love with women, to
whom they did undiscreetly discover many secrets which were not to be divulged.
All these Doctrines are rejected by the Roman Church, and this Father is
condemned for them.

Clemens I. Romanus.
Our Adversaries have published some Epistles of Clement the I. Bishop of Rome,
in one of which he teaches that those words of mine and thine ought to be
banished, and that goods ought to be common. Then he adds, Therefore a certain
man who was the wisest among the Grecians, knowing these things to be thus
common, says, that All things are to be common among friends: In omnibus aute^
sunt sine dubio and conjuges.
Now under these terms, all things, no doubt but Wives also are comprehended.
That is found in the first Tome of the Councils, and in the Canon
Dilectissimis, in the first question of the twelfth Cause: The Roman Church
has rejected that Doctrine. For although the Popes establish Brothelhouses,
yet they would not have all Women to be common.

Ignatius.
Ignatius in the Epistle to the Philippians, says, (...).
that to fast upon Saturday or the Lords day, is to be a murderer of Christ.
Wherefore also the Church of Milan in Ambrose's time, did not fast upon
Saturday, but only upon Saturday before Easter, and upon Saturday before
Pentecost or Whitsunday. The Churches of the East, and that of Egypt, kept the
same custom. And Cassian book 3. chap. 10. reproves the Roman Church for
fasting upon Saturdays. And the VI. Universal Council assembled in the Palace
of Trulla, Can. 55. condemns the Church of Rome by name for that same reason:
Yet the Roman Church for all their order, has continued the observation of
Saturday to fast.

Tertullian.
Tertullian had many errors: He was a Montanist: In his Writings he calls
Montanus the Paracletus or the Comforter: He adhered to the Prophecies of
Priscilla and Maximilla: In the book of the soul, he maintains that the soul is
corporal, and grows with the body, and has a bodily figure; Yea that Lib. 2.
contra Marcionem, c. 16. Quis negabit Deum corpus esse, etsi Deus Spiritus est?
God himself is a body: Many others errors he has, too long to be related. He
believed also the Fall of Angels by the love of Women: Wherefore in his book,
where he teaches, that the faces of Virgins ought to be veiled, chap. 7. he
says, that such dangerous faces ought to be covered, which have darted up
scandals even to heaven. Himself as well as Irenaeus shuts Lib. de anima, c.
55, 56, 57, 58.
up the Souls of the Saints in an underground dungeon until the day of
Judgment: He was also a Chiliast, Lib. 3. in Mark c. 24.
giving to the Church a flourishing reign in Jerusalem for the space of a
thousand years: And he believed, that some would rise sooner then others:
modicum quodque delictum mora resurrectionis luendo; that is, that those that
have sinned more, shall pay even for the least sin, by the retarding of their
resurrection; as he says in chap. 58. of the book of the soul. Cyprian who
called him his Master, has followed him Lib. de Baptismo, c. 15. and 18.
in the rebaptizing of Heretics; Austin in the book of heresies, ad Quod vult
Deum, puts him among the Heretics. For the same causes the Roman Church
condemns him: But I find not, that ever any of the Ancients condemned
Tertullian for expounding these words, Acceptum panem and distributum
discipulis corpus suum fecit, dicendo Hoc est corpus meum, hoc est figura
corporis mei.
This is my body, by This is the figure of my body; speaking thus in his fourth
book against Marcion, chap. 40. Christ having taken bread, and distributed it
to his Disciples, made it to be his body, saying, This is my body, that is, the
figure of my body; And in the third book, chap. 19. Panem corpus suum
appellans, ut and hinc jam eum intelligas corporis sui figuram pani dedisse.
God has called bread his body, that thereby thou may understand that he
has given to bread to be the figure of his body: of which passages we shall
speak more fully hereafter.

Origin.
Origin is accused by Cardinal du Perron In the book without either head or
tail, entitled, Examination of the book of M. du Plessis, fol. 951. and in the
book of the Eucharist, against the same, book 2. chap. 7.
to have denied the Almighty power of God, and the Godhead of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, the resurrection of the flesh, and the eternity of Paradise and
Hell. Also to have forged many successive wordls, and affirmed, that the Devils
shall become Angels, etc. For these errors and many more he is placed among the
Heretics by Epiphanius and by Austin. But M. du Perron is not content to blame
him for the same causes that he was blamed for by Ancients; for he blames him
also and multiplyeth ill words against him, because he did not believe the
Transubstantiation of the bread into the body of Christ in the Eucharist, as
the words of Origin testify it upon Mat. 15. This food which is sanctified by
the Word of God, and by prayer, as for the matter thereof goes down into the
belly, and is sent down into the draught, and sanctifies not of its nature. In
the same place, he calls that which is received in the Eucharist, a Symbolical
and significative body. Upon these words of Origin, The whole passage is
alleged by Sixtus Senensis, book 6. annotation, 66.
that this food sanctified, is sent down into the draught, and sanctifies not
of its nature, M. du Perron cries out, Fol. 959.
Shut up your ears, Christians; and says, that Fol. 956.
Origin does purposely dispute against the Catholic Church, and that it is a
particular whimsie of the heretical Spirit of Origin. It is true, that Perron
against King James, fol. 961.
Theophilus of Alexandria blames Origin, for saying that the Spirit of God does
not work upon inanimate things: Which he confuteth by the example of Baptism,
whose water is consecrated by the coming of the holy Ghost; and of the bread,
whereby the body of the Savior is showed or represented: Which things (says
he) are inanimate, and yet are sanctified by the invocation and coming of the
holy Ghost. But in that Text, Theophilus condemns not Origin for denying the
turning of the bread into the body of Christ; since he puts the water of
Baptism in the same rank as the bread of the Eucharist. He says, that both the
water of Baptism and the bread of the Lords Supper are inanimate things, and
are sanctified by prayer and by the Holy Ghost. According to the Cardinals
interpretation we should say, that Theophilus condemns Origin for not
believing the transubstantiation of the water of Baptism into the blood of
Christ.

Irenaeus.
Upon that Irenaeus says, Book 2. chap. 39. that Jesus Christ has taught till
the age of 40. or 50. years, Doctor Fevardent, who has commented upon the
Book, has written in the margent Naevus de aetate Christi, It is a fault of
Irenaeus about the age of Christ. The same Father teaches Lib. 2. c. 62.
Characterem corporis in quo etiam adaptantur custodire eundem; and c. 65. Per
hoc manifestissime declaratum est and perseverare animas, and non de corpore in
corpus transire, and habere hominis figuram.
that the souls separated from the bodies have a bodily shape, and keep the
character or form of the body to which they were joined. Such was the opinion
of many Ancients, as of Theodotus, who is added to Clement Alexandrin, and of
Austin in the 4. book of the soul and her origin, chapter 19. Ergone non dicam
vera constantius? and habet anima oculum, and habet linguam, and habet digitum,
and habet caetera similia corporis membra, and haec tota est corporis
similitudo and non corpus.
The soul (says he) has an eye, and a tongue, and a finger, and such other
members of the body, and all that is a likness of a body, and not a body. Like
things to this he says in the 12. Book de Genesi ad litteram, chap. 32. and
33. The same Irenaeus in the 30. chap. of the 4. Book says, that the Law was
not given to the Fathers that lived before the Law, because they were
righteous, and there was no need that they should be warned by reprehensions;
But that this righteousness being worn out in Egypt, God then had given his
Law. The same Father in the 5. Book, chap. 33. and the following, brings after
resurrection bodily feasts, because Christ said, that he should drink of the
new fruit of the Vine in the Kingdom of his Father. And he esteems that it is
the promised retribution to them that shall invite the blind and the lame to
their table. That Fathers holiness did not make the Roman Church to follow his
opinion. See Hierom upon Matthew. 19. where he confuteth the doctrine of
Irenaeus, not naming the Author. M. du Perron makes bold to say, that Irenaeus
has said such things as would make one go for an Arian in these days. The
same Father opposes them as Heretics, that hold that the souls of the
faithful departed enjoy the heavenly glory. His opinion is, Manifestum est quia
and Discipulorum Christi propter quos and operatus est Dominus, animae abibunt
in invisibilem locum definitum eis a Deo, and ibi usque ad resurrectionem
commorabuntur.
that at their coming out of the body they go down into an invisible place
where they expect the resurrection.

Cyprian.
Cyprian believed and maintained against the Bishops of Rome, that those that
were converted from Heresies to the true Faith, were to be rebaptized. Austin
in the 1. Book of Baptism against the Donatists, chap. 8. and Si plenario
Concilio aut alia ratione fuisset edoctus, mutasset sententiam; and fortasse
factum est, sed nescimus. Et Epist. 48. Correxisse cum istam sententiam non
invenitur, etc.
Book 2. chap. 4. says, that it is not known, that ever Cyprian went from his
opinion. Agrippin Bishop of Carthage, predecessor of Cyprian, and the Council
which he assembled, had already established that doctrine in Africa. And
Dionysius in Cypriani and Africanae Synodi dogma consentiens de haereticis
rebaptizandis, ad diversos plurimas misit Epistolas.
Hierom in his Catalogue says, that Dionysius Alexandrinus was of the same
opinion as Cyprian, as also Firmilianus Bishop of Cappadocia, and many with
him. And the first Council of Nice, decreed that the Paulianists or
Samosatenians be rebaptized. And Basil in the Epistle to Amphilochius would
have the Saccofori, Encratites and Apotackticks to be rebaptized. And
Athanasius in the 3. Oration against the Arians, holds the Baptism of the
Arians to be void and unlawful, and says, that one is rather defiled then
washed in it. The Roman Church has always resisted that doctrine; so far that
Steven Bishop of Rome has for that cause called Cyprian false Christ, false
Prophet, and deceitful workman, as Firmilian witnesses in his Epistle inserted
among the Epistles of Cyprian. And Eusebius in the 4. chap. of the 7. Book of
his History says, that Steven for that reason separated himself from the
Communion of the Churches of Cilicia, Cappadocia and Galatia, and other
Churches near them. This Cyprian in a Council assembled by him against the
Church of Rome, and in the Epistle to Pompius, calling Steven Bishop of Rome a
defender of Heretics, did not believe that the Roman Church could not err.
Also one may see in that Father, that in his time the Lords Supper was given to
newborn infants. In the 59. and 63. Epistles.

Athanasius.
Athanasius in the Book of the passion of our Lord, says, that Jesus Christ
having overcome the Devil on earth, would also overcome him in the air, and for
that cause would be crucified, that he might have a combat in the air with the
Devil. And that these words, My God My God, why have thou forsaken me? were
fained words, whereby Jesus Christ made a show that he was afraid, that he
might draw the Devil to the combat. In that no more then in his affirming (in
the first Apoloy of his flight) that St. Peter Athan. p. 178. (...).
had his thoat cut, he is not approved by the Roman Church. Nor in that he
exhorts the people to read Scripture. Nor in that he puts the Maccabees,
Tobit, Judith, etc. out of the number of the Canonical Books.

Gregorius Nazianzenus.
The Roman Church approves not this Father Greg. Naz. Homilia. (...).
in that he condemns second marriages. Nor in that (in the 40. Oration, which
is about Baptism) he would have infants baptized when they are in danger of
death. But if there be no apparent danger, he would have the Baptism put off
till they come to age to answer for their own faith. Nor in that Greg. Naz. Ep.
ad Procupium. quae in Paris. codice est. in Basiliensi. 42. (...).
he rejects all Councils without exception, saying, that he never saw any
good end of them, and that the evils and discords of the Church are always
rather increased then diminished by their means. Nor in that he says in the
Oration upon his return from the Country, that he wishes that there were (...).
no difference of degrees among the Pastors of the Church, nor any precedence,
but that they should be distinguished only by their virtue.

Basilius.
Neither does the Roman Church approve Basil in many things, whom yet Gregory
Nazianzen holds to be inferior in doctrine to Greg. Epitaphio Basilii. (...).
none but Jesus Christ only, and compares him with the ancient Prophets and
Patriarcks. That Father in his Asceticks in the second interrogation of the
rules expounded at large, teaches, that the love of God is not got by
teaching, but that we have it by nature, as to love light. Himself in the
Treatise of the Judgment of God, Vide and regularum breviorum interrogat. 233.
c. 302.
makes the punishment of all sins equal; Wherein the Roman Church approves not
of him. No more then in that he would not have Regularum breviorum interrog.
302.
alms given to the poor that are without [the Church] because it is written,
Give not the bread of the Children unto dogs, And I am not sent but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. Nor in his opinion that those that have been
baptized by Heretics, should be rebaptized. Nor in his exacting a twelve
months penance of them that marry the second time, in the same Epistle, Canon
4. Nor in permitting to them that commit Fornication, to continue in the same
for fear of worse, in the same Epistle, Canon 26.

Hilarious.
The Roman Church approves no bettet of Hilary; who in the 10. Book of the
Trinity, and upon the 138. Psalm, and upon the 53. maintains that Hilar. de
Trinit. lib. 10. Opinionem nobis naturalis sibi in passione doloris invenit.
Ibid In quem quamvis aut ictus incideret, aut vulnus discenderet, aut nodi
concurrerent, aut suspensio elevaret, afferrent quidem haec impetum passionis,
non tamen dolorem passionis inferrent; Vt telum aliquod aut aquam perforans,
aut ign^m compungens, aut era vulnerans.
Jesus Christ in his death suffered no pain, but that only he would make us
believe that he suffered, and that the blows did not give him any pain, no more
then if an arrow pierced the water, or pricked the fire, or hurt the air; and
that Ibid. Virtus corporis sine sensu poenae vim poenae in so desaevientis
excepit.
the virtue of the body of Christ received the violence of pains without
feelings Ibid. Christus cum cibum and potum accepit, non necessitati sed
consuetudini tribuit. Vide Sixtum Senensem lib. 5. Annot. 186. and ipsum
Hilarium in Ps. 68.
The same Father says, that Christ ate and drunk, not out of any necessity,
but to complie with custom; for which doctrine he is reproved by Claudius
Bishop of Vienna, in the Book of the state of the soul. That error so gross and
ruining the whole work of our Redemption, has brought him to another, that in
these words of the Lord, Hilar. in Matthew. Can. 3. Transeat calix a me, id est
quo modo a me bibitur, ita ab iis bibatur sine spei diffidentia, sine sensu
doloris, sine metu mortis.
Father, let this cup pass from me, Jesus Christ desired his Father that his
Disciples also might suffer in the like manner. So that by his account St.
Peter felt no pain in suffering martyrdom. The same Hilary is not approved by
the Roman Church, in that he says, upon the Psalm 119. in the Letter Gimel,
that the Virgin Mary Si in judicii severitatem capaxilla Dei Virgo ventura est,
desiderare quis audebit a Deo judicari?
must undergo the judgment of the fire of the last day, by which sins shall be
purged. Hillar. in Matthew. Can. 5. Animarum species sive obtinentium corpora,
sive exulantium, corpoream tamen naturae substantiam sortiuntur.
It is also one of his opinions that souls are corporal.

Eusebius.
This Father is not approved by the Roman Church, because speaking of an image
erected unto Christ, he says, that Eusebius. lib. 7. Historiae cap. 7.
it was done by a Pagan custom. Nor in that having made the universal
Ecclesiastical history until the death of Constantine happened in the year of
Christ 337. in all that time he speaks never a word of the Popes primacy, and
no trace of that in all his works. And yet he is the only historian we have of
the 3. first ages; wherefore our Cardinal is angry with him, and accuses him
to have been an Arian, although his writings and actions witness the contrary,
as we shall show in the proper place. Neither is he approved for saying Lib. 7.
praepat. Evang. c. 6.
that the Fathers before the Law had (...), as though they were not subject to
any evil affection. Nor in that he advises to use sometimes lying, in the 12.
Book, chap. 29.

Ambrosius.
The Roman Church approves not that Ambrose with most part of the Ancients
believes Ambros. in Ps. 118. Sermon. 3. and 20. Omnes oportet per ignem probari
quicunque ad Paradisum redire desiderant, etc. Omnes oportet transire per
flammas, sive Johannes Evangelista sit, sive ille sit Petrus.
that all, yea and the Prophets and Apostles must pass through the fire of the
last Judgment to be purged from their sins. This the Fathers call the second
Baptism, and the flaming sword placed at the gate of Paradise. That was the
Purgatory of the ancient Church, where Indulgences have no place; for the
Fathers put off that purgation to the day of Judgment. This Father has
followed the errors of Tertullian, Ambros. in Ps. 8. Qui non veniunt ad primam
resurrectionem, sed ad secundam reservantur, isti urentur donec impleant tempus
inter primam and secundam resurrectionem.
that all shall not rise at the same time, and that they that have sinned most
shall rise later, carrying into a fire the slowness of their resurrection; for
which error he is blamed by the Jesuit Salmeron, in the 13. Tome. 6. Disput.
upon St. Paul's Epistles. Also for saying that at Easter always some rise again.

In one thing especially this Father dipleaseth the Roman Church, that he did
excommunicate the Emperor Theodosius without the advice of the Bishop of Rome
his neighbor; for it is now a maxim in the Roman Church, that none but the
Pope can excomunicate the Emperor. That rule is found in the Aphorisms of
Emanuel Sa in the word Reges a solo Papa excommunicantur and censuris ligantur.
Excommunicatus.

Also he is not approved for saying Ambros. lib. 2. de Patriarcha Abraham, c 4.
Consideremus primum, quia Abraham ante Legem Moisi and ante Evangeliu^ suit;
nondum interdictum adulterium videbatur. Poena criminis ex tempore Legis est,
quae crimen inhibuit, nec ante Legem ullius rei damnatio est, sed ex Lege. Non
ergo in Legem commisit Abraham, sed Legem praevenit. Deus in Paradiso licet
conjugium laudaverit, non adulterium damnaverat.
that Abraham lying with Agar sinned not, because the Law was not yet, and
adultery was not yet forbidden.

Augustinus.
Austin is not approved by the Roman Church, August. Ep. 107. and lib 28. de
civitate Dei, and saepe alibi.
for condemning Infants dead without Baptism to the torment of eternal fire.
Which was also the opinion of Fulgentius his Disciple. For Austin did not
believe the Limbus of Infants. He is no more approved for holding the
participation of the Lords Supper necessary for Infants to be saved. Nor for
making the souls in some manner corporal, as we have showed. Nor for holding
Idem. lib. 4. de Genesi ad literam.
that the world was created not in six days, as Moses relates, but in a
moment: Nor for being one of the Bishops, who in the Milevitan Council
prohibited the appeals from Africa to Rome, upon pain of excommunication. Idem
lib. 1. de moribus Ecclesiae orthodoxae, c. 34. Novi multos esse sepulchrorum
and picturarum adoratores.
Nor for condemning the worshippers of images and relics. Sixtus Senensis in
his Preface upon the fifth book of his Library, says, Austin seems sometimes
to attribute too little to the free Will of man. Baronius and Bellarmine
Bellar. de Pontifice, lib. 1. cap. 10.
reprove him for understanding these words, Super hanc petram, etc. not of the
person of Peter, but of his faith and confession. It was his opinion, that
Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 109.
the souls are shut up in hidden places until the day of resurrection. How
contrary he was to the Transubstantiation, we shall examine hereafter.

Johannes Chrysostomus.
Sixtus Senensis in the 107. annotat. of the fifth book, observes, that
Chrysostom toward the end of his book of Priesthood approves frauds, lies,
and impostures, and holds them sometimes necessary, when they are done without
an intention to do harm to any. Our Adversaries hold, that to do works of piety
acceptable unto God, we have need of the preventing Grace of God to move our
Wills; Chrysostom holds the contrary. Hom. 42. upon Genesis. That very thing
(says he) that this Patriarch Abraham, who lived before the time of grace, and
before the Law, has by himself, and by the knowledge that comes by nature,
attained to such a measure of virtue, will be sufficient to take away all
excuse. But perhaps some will say, that God took great care of that man, and
that the Sovereign God showed a great providence toward him. (...).
Indeed I confess it; but if he alone had not done that which was in him, he
should not have received the Graces of the Lord. And Hom. 16. upon S. John,
according to the Greek Text, (...).
Hence we learn, that God preventeth not our Wills by his gifts; but when we
have begun, and we have brought our Wills, then he does furnish us with many
means of salvation. Like things he says, Hom. 12. upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and in many other places.

The same Father in his Homily ad Neophytos; (...).
We baptize children (says he) though they be without sins: Then he adds to
which end children are baptized; Not for the remission of original sins; But
(says he) to add unto them holiness, righteousness, adoption, and inheritance.

Himself in the tenth Homily upon the Epistle to the Romans, expounding these
words of the fifth chapter, that by the disobedience of one man, many were made
sinners: By this word sinners, he understands not that by the sin of Adam we
are stained with original sin, and made prone to sin, but only that we are
subject to punishment. These are his words: What means this word sinners? (...).
I think it signifies as much as subject unto punishment, and adjudged unto
death: For he has showed prolixly, that Adam dying, we were all made mortal.
With these Texts the Pelagians armed themselves against the Orthodox, to deny
original sin. I believe not that any of the Roman Church will approve of him
for often blaming the Virgin Mary, accusing her of importunity, vain
ostentation, presumption and unbelief. Thus Hom. 45. upon Matthew, (...).
That which she undertook was out of an excessive ambition: for she would show
that she had authority and power over her Son, imagining yet no great thing
concerning him. Wherefore she came unseasonably: See then her rashness, etc.
Hom. 21. upon John, according to the Greek, he gives a reason why Jesus Christ
answered his Mother thus: What is there between me and thee, Woman? saying,
(...).
that when our Parents come to make unseasonable questions, and to hinder some
spiritual action, there is danger in obeying them: Wherefore Jesus Christ in
this place did so answer her: And thereupon he says, that Mary thought she
could command Jesus Christ in all things, as other Mothers, whereas she ought
to have served and reverenced him as her Lord. And reproves her for coming in
the presence of the people to hinder the utility of the Assistants. In the 28.
Homily, upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, (...).
and in the 39. (...).
upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, he teaches, that the souls of the
Saints have not yet received the reward, and shall not enjoy Glory till after
the resurrection.

Theodoretus.
The Roman Church approves not of Theodoret, for teaching (in the book of
divina dogmata, in the chap. of the Antichrist) that the (...).
Antichrist, shall be a Devil clad with humane flesh: Nor for saying (in the
same book, in the chapter that proves that he that is good is righteous also)
that the Law forbids not evil thoughts, nor evil desires: Nor for denying, that
(...).
Woman was created after the image of God in the twentieth question upon
Genesis: Nor for affirming, (in the book of Heresies, in the chapter of
Nestorius) that to Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople, (...).
the government of the Universal Church was committed; for the Bishop of Rome
will not allow that. Nor for saying, (in the second and third Dialogue) that
God has honored the bread with the name of his body, without altering the
nature of bread, and that the bread after the consecration, remains in its
first substance, which is overthrowing transubstantiation.

Gregorius Nyssenus.
The Roman Church likes not the opinion of Gregorius Nyssenus, Oratione 3. de
resurrectione Christi.
that the souls cannot be tormented without the bodies, and feel no pain before
the resurrection: For that opinion is repugnant to Purgatory; Nor his Doctrine,
that Lib. 2. Philosophiae seu de anima, c. 6.
God creates no more souls, for he holds them to have been created all at once
in the beginning of the world. It is he (that to find the three days in which
Scripture says, that Christ was in the womb of the earth) begins the three
days at the hour of the institution of the Lords Supper, as if Orat. 1. de
resurrectione Domini.
the body of the Lord had been from that time without a soul.

Epiphanius.
Nicephorus lib. 13. chap. 12. observes that he was an Anthropomorphite:
Sozomenus says the same in the fourteenth chapter of the eighth book, saying,
that Theophilus had reproved Epiphanius, that he believed that God had a humane
shape. That which confirms that opinion, is, that Epiphanius having made an
enumeration very exact of all the heresies, has not put that of the
Anthropomorphites among them. He is not approved by the Roman Church, because
in the herefie of the Collyridians, he condemns certain superstitious women
that worshipped the Virgin Mary, and called her the Queen of Heaven. And
whereas the Roman Church deferreth the cult of dulia to Angels, and to the
Virgin Mary the cult of hyperdulia, which is an higher kind of adoration;
Epiphanius makes her inferior to Angels, saying, If the Apostle prohibits to
worship Angels, how much more the woman born of Anna? so he calls the Mother of
the Virgin Mary. Neither is he approved by the Roman Church, for tearing a vail
or piece of hanging in a Church in the borough of Anablata, because there was
an image of Christ in it, or of some Saint; saying, that such images ought not
to be suffered in the Church of Christ; As himself says in an Epistle
translated by Saint Hierom. Lib. 4. de studio. Theologiae, c. 5.
Villavincentius an Augustinian Monk reproves him for many things, especially
because in the Ancorat he was so bold as to expound these words, My Father is
greater then I, as true even of the divine nature of Christ; And for saying
that Jesus Christ praying, Let this cup pass from me, did not speak in earnest,
but fainedly, to mock the Devil. The same Father puts off the day of Christ's
Nativity Epiph. haeresi Alogorum, quae est 51. p^g. 446 Tom. 1.
to the sixth of January: which was the observation of the Churches of Egypt;
as one may see in Cassian in the tenth Collation, chap. 2.

Cassianus.
He is not approved by the Roman Church, for Cassian. lib. 10. c. 3.
blaming the Roman Church about fasting upon Saturday: Nor for relating a
discourse of the Abbot Joseph, Idem Collatione 17. cap. 19.
whereby lying and hypocrisy are commended, when they are beneficial to our
neighbors, and not condemning that Doctrine: Nor for teaching after Abbot
John, Idem Collat. 21. c 5.
that the Law of God promises only temporal goods to the observers thereof.

Hieronymus.
In many things the Roman Church disliketh Hierom; As for saying, Hieron.
Praefat. in Danielem.
that the Histories of Susanna, and of Bell and the Dragon are fables. For
saying, Praefa. in Proverb. Salom. and prologo Galeato.
that the books of Tobit, Judith, Maccabees, etc. are not Canonical, and that
the Church acknowledges them not for true: for maintaining stiffly, In c. 1.
Habak. Absurdum est ad hoc Dei deducere Majestatem, ut sciat per momenta
singula quot nascantur culices quotve moriantur.
that God knows not how many Gnats and Flies are upon the earth, or how many
Fishes in the Sea; and he denies that Gods ptovidence extends as much upon
unreasonable as reasonable things, and calls fatuos adulatores, foolish
flatterers, those that hold the contrary. For calling marriage an ignominy, in
his books against Apologia pro libris in Jovinianum.
Jovinian, and married persons vasa in contumeliam, vessels to dishonor;
saying, that the end of marriage is death; and placing the Virgins with
Abraham, and the married persons with the rich Glutton: Alleging to that
purpose these Texts, They that are in the flesh cannot please God; and that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; as if married persons could
not be saved. In the Epistle to Salvina, he calls Widows that marry again, dogs
that return to their vomit. Going so far as to say, that Saint Paul permitting
wanton Widows to marry again, had given them praecepta non bona and
justificationes pessimas; precepts that are not good, and rules of justice most
evil. Wherefore also in his Epistle to Gerontia, he excludes such women from
the alms of the Church. And in the Epitaph of Fabiola, he praises her, because
she did penance in public in the Church for marrying the second time.
Wherefore Bovius in his Notes upon the fifth book of Clements Constitutions,
speaks thus; Tom 1. Council. Hieronymus durior fuit bigamis, ita ut nisi lenius
cum co agatur, vix possimus illu a reprehensorum criminationibus liberare.
Hierom was too hard against those that marry twice: So that unless he be
gently dealt with, hardly can we exempt him from the accusations of those that
blame him.

The same Hierom is reproved by Cardinal Bellarmine, Bellar. l. 2. de
Pontifice, c. 8.
for maintaining, that Priests are inferior to Bishops, not by divine right, or
by Gods Ordinance, but by an Ecclesiastical order.

The same Cardinal reproves Idem l. 1. de Clericis, c. 4.. Contra.
Hierom, because he believed that a man who has married a Wife before Baptism,
and another after, ought not to be held a by-game, that is, twice married.

In the first book against Jovinian, Hierom condemns the use of flesh as
polluted, saying, that the use of flesh was for wrestlers, and for Plow-men,
not for Christians.

Himself holds that all oaths are forbidden to Christians, saying upon Mat. 5.
Evangelica veritas non recipit juramentum, Gospel truth receives no oath.

He has written against Austin Letters full of Invectives. The subject of
their quarrel was, that Hierom maintains, that in Scripture there are sometimes
officious lies; that is, that the Holy Ghost lies sometimes for the good of
those whom he speaks to; and that Saint Paul rehearsing how he had reproved
Saint Peter, used lying and dissembling.

Epist. ad Evagrium.
But that wherein he is most displeasing to our Adversaries, is his making all
Bishops equal, and equalling the Bishops of Tanis and Rhegium, which are small
Towns, unto the Bishop of Rome; adding that pride came from the Church of the
City of Rome. And in his Preface upon the book of Didymus, he calls Rome Babylon
and the whore clad in purple, and the Clergy of Rome, the Senate of the
Pharisees. The like things he says in the Epistle to Marcella, under the name
of Paula and Eustochius.

Gelasius.
Pope Gelasius in the book against Nestorius and Eutyches, speaks things
displeasing to the Roman Church of this time, affirming, that in the Eucharist
the substance of bread and wine remains, and the image and likeness of the body
and blood of Christ is celebrated in the action of mysteries. It is he who in
the Canon Comperimus, in the second Distinction of the consecration, condemns
those that take the bread in the Eucharist, and abstain from the cup; and
says, that Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur: quia
divisio unius ejusdemque mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non potest provenire.
the division of this Sacrament cannot be done without a great sacrilege.
Wherefore he commands that one kind be not given without the other. The same
Pope in his Commonitory to Faustus his Legate, condemns all the indulgences
granted to the dead, because it is written, All that thou shall bind on earth,
and not under earth. And denies that a Bishop can give any absolution to the
dead, for they are no more of his flock. That Pope speaking thus, has
condemned his successors who give indulgences to the dead, and draw souls out
of Purgatory.

Lactantius.
Lactantius says, Institution. divin. lib. 4. c. 14.
that Jesus Christ is not God. He was a Chiliast. He says, Idem. lib. 3.
that God has divided the world into two parts, the East and the West, and
has reserved the East to himself, and left the West to the Devil; lib. 7. c.
20.
He holds, that the wicked shall not rise in the day of Judgment: Lib. 2. cap.
9.
He teaches, that God before he created the world, created two Spirits, the
one good, who is his Son; the other wicked, who is the Devil, to whom he has
given craft and dexterity to invent evil. He holds also, that Lib. 2. divin.
institut. c. 5.
Angels polluted themselves with women, and that out of that copulation came
the Demons. Hierom observes this error of his, Hier. Epist. 65. ad Pam.
that he denied the holy Ghost to be a person subsisting in the Godhead. We
shall see upon another discourse, that he shuts up the souls of the Saints in
underground places, and by consequent denies the invocation of Saints.

Arnobius.
Arnobius holds, Lib. 2.
that the souls of the wicked are mortal, and are brought to nothing: and in
the first book he says, that men were made subject to diseases, by a certain
importunate cruelty that would have it so: and often he sets up many Gods.

In all these things and many more, the Roman Church rejects the opinion of the
Fathers, and holds not her self bound to stand to all they say. For we have
made this Collection, not to lay open the errors of the Ancient Doctors of the
Church, whose holiness of life we praise, and admire their zeal, and make
profit of their writings, but to show how little our Adversaries deferr unto
them; and that in many things wherein they have well spoken, as well as in
others where they have erred, the Roman Church has made no difficulty to
depart from their opinion. Also that the Readers may acknowledge, how the
Writings of those that are called Fathers, are under the perfection of the holy
Scripture; and that the faith of the Christian shall never have any
stedfastness, till it be stayed altogether upon the Word of God. Yea I say,
that a Son that should see men honoring his Fathers memory with excess, and
making an idol of him, should be bound to lay open, though with grief, the
imperfections of his Father, that the honor of God might be maintained. Or if
a man could be of such a perverse disposition, as to delight, as Cham did, to
show to the world his Fathers nakedness, and lay the errors of the ancient
Doctors in open view, for no other end but to cast a reproach upon their
memory; yet that crime should be light, compared to the rash licentiousness of
Cardinal du Perron, who has made a chapter on purpose of the Texts of
Scripture which seem absurd unto humane reason; which he sets forth in such a
manner, that he makes his end evident, which is to find fault with the Word of
God, and expose it to derision, and plant unbelief in the Readers mind. To the
confutation of which collection, we reserve also a chapter on purpose.

CHAP. 50. How far the Ancient Church was from the belief which is now received
in the Roman Church. Observations upon the eighteenth Chapter of the Book of
Cardinal du Perron.
HIs Majesty of Great Britain had said, that there is a wide difference between
the Roman Church of this time, and that of the time of Saint Austin. And truly
who so will compare the Church from the Apostles to Austins time with the Roman
of our days, will find an extreme difference, and will wonder how the enemy of
our salvation could work so great an alteration.

I. For then the public service was celebrated at Rome in a known language; as
also it was in Greek among the Grecians, and is still to this day. In Armenia,
the service was in Armenian, in Italy in Latin, because Latin was the vulgar
tongue. Neither did they know then what it was to pray to God, and not
understand ones self.

II. Then Hieron. Prologo Galeato. Et praefatione in lib. Salomonis. Ruffinus
in Expositione Symboli Concilii Laodicensis.
the books of Judith, Tobit, and Maccabees, were held Apocrypha, not Canonical,
as we shall prove hereafter.

III. Then Aug. l. 2. de doctrina Christiana. Chrysostom. Hom. in 2 These. 2. and
in Psalm. 95.
they believed that things necessary to salvation, were sufficiently and
clearly contained in the holy Scriptures.

IV. Then Chrysostom. 3. Hom. de Lazaro. Hieron. Ep. ad Laetam.
the Pastors of the Church recommended to the people, Tradesmen, Husbandmen,
Women, and all, the reading of the holy Scripture.

V. Then Conc. Eliber. Can. 36. Placuit in Ecclesiis picturas esse non debere,
ne quod adoratur in parietibus pingatur. August. de consensu Evangelico, l. 1.
c. 20. Sic omnino errare merentur qui Christum and Apostolos ejus non in
sanctis codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt. Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c.
17. Epiphan. Ep. ad Johannem Ierosolom.
the Councils prohibited to have images in the Church, least that which is
adored, should be painted on the Walls. And the Fathers of that time, said, that
making images of Jesus Christ was a Pagan Custom; and those deserve to be
seduced, that seek Jesus Christ in painted walls, instead of seeking him in the
holy Scriptures. So contrary they were to images, that they would tear vails
and hangings where there was any image of Christ or of some Saint. So far were
the Christians of the two or three first ages from yielding any religious
service to images, that the very Clemens Alex. Protreptico. Tertul. in
Hermogenem.
trade of Painter was held unlawful and forbidden by God. Tertullian objects
it to Hermogenes as a crime and a reproach. How far were they from making
pictures of God and images of the Trinity?

VI. Then in the form of service and public prayers which were pronounced
before the table of the Lord these words were said, Ambr. l. 4. Sacram. cap. 5.
Fac nobis hanc oblationem ascriptam rationabilem acceptabilem, quod est figura
corporis Christi.
Make that this oblation may be put to our account, reasonable, acceptable,
which is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which words
have been taken away, and blotted out of the Mass to bring in the
Transubstantiation.

VII. The Fathers and Councils of that time Tertul. in Marcion. l. 3. c. 19.
and l 4 c. 40. Hoc est corpus meum, hoc est, figura corporis mei.
give the interpretation of these words, This is my body, that is, This is the
figure of my body, and say that August. in Adimantum. c. 12. Non dubitavit
dicere Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum corporis ^ui. Codex Can. Eccl.
Afric. Can. 37. Cypr. Epist. in Aquarios. Theod. Dial. 1. and 2.
Jesus Christ said, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body; And
expound these words, the body and the blood of Jesus Christ, by the bread and
the wine consecrated. They say that the thing which Jesus Christ called his
blood was wine, and that the nature and substance of bread remains after the
consecration.

VIII. Wherefore also in the ancient Church they did not adore the Sacrament
with cult of Latria; They spoke not of accidents without subject; They believed
not that the body was whole in every drop of the Chalice; They believed not
that mice could carry away, or gnaw the true body of the Lord.

IX. Then the people received the Sacrament in their hand, and sometimes would
carry it home. The Priest made no elevation of the host, showing it unto the
people over his head, turning his back unto them; There was then upon the table
not a little round wafer, but a quantity of bread and wine for the whole
assembly to communicate; The word of transubstantiation was not known, and no
more the signification now put upon it.

X. Then the consecration was made, not by these words, This is my body, but
Origin. l. 5. contra Celsum. Justin Mart. Apol. 2. Aug. l. 4. de Trinit. c. 3.
Basil. de Sp. S. c. 27. (...).
by prayer; Not speaking to the bread, but to God.

XI. Then they believed that Vigil. l. 4. contra Eutych. Quando in terra fuit,
non erat utique in coelo; and nunc quia in coelo est, non est utique in terra.
as the body of Jesus Christ was not in heaven when it was on earth, likewise
that now that it is in heaven it is no more on earth, and that we apprehend him
in believing, not in chewing; by faith, not with the teeth or belly.

XII. Then they believed August. in c. 6. Joh. and Tract. 26. in 1 John and
libro sententiarum Prosperi. Qui discordat a Christo, non manducat carnem ejus.
Epiph. haeresi 42. Aug. l. 2. contra Epist. Parmeniani. Basil. Epist. ad
Amphiloch.
that the wicked and unbeleevers do not eat the body of the Lord, although they
take the sign of it to their condemnation.

XIII. Then the whole faithful people did communicate under both kinds,
neither is there so much as one example found in all Antiquity of denying the
Cup unto the people, or of the holy Sacrament administered in the Church without
giving the Cup to any.

XIV. Then it was not lawful to women to administer the holy Baptism, as it is
usual now in the Church of Rome.

XV. Then they made no Masses without either Communicants or Assistants, and no
Masses were said for private men that paid for them.

XVI. For three hundred and fifty years since the birth of our Lord, all the
Fathers with one consent will have God alone invocated, and reject the address
of prayers made unto creatures. After that time some began to speak of it
doubtfully, as Gregory Nazianzen Orat. in Julian. and Orat. de sorore Gorgon.
the first Father that ever called upon Saints, and yet he declares that he
doubts whether the Saints understand him.

XVII. Then they believed Aug. de Spiritu and anima, and lib. de cura pro
mortuis. c. 13 Hier. Epitap. Nepotiani.
that the Saints departed know not and understand not the things that are done
here below.

XVIII. Then Aug. de vanitate seculi. tom. 9. c. 1. sermon. 4. de Conses.
mortuorum. sermon. 18. de verbis Apostoli. sermon. 232. adver. ebrietatem. Lib. de
meritis peccat. and de remiss. c. 28. Hypognost. l. 5.
they believed that there was but two places for the souls after death,
paradise and hell; and that for him who is not in Christ, there is no place
left but with the devil.

XIX Then they prayed for the dead that sleep in peace, that they might rise to
salvation, not to fetch souls out of Purgatory; The Mass it self has that
ancient prayer; for there they pray for the dead that sleep in a peaceable
sleep.

XX. Then they believed Tertul. Apol. c. 48. Nysse. Orat. 3. de resur. Christi.
Chrysostom. Hom. 39. in 1 ad Cor.
that the souls separate from the bodies cannot be tormented, and by consequent
they believed not the fire of Purgatory.

XXI. Then no Christian what authority soever he had in the Church, did boast
of releasing souls out of Purgatory, and to give Pardons and Indulgences to the
dead.

XXII. Then many Priests and faithful Pastors of the Church were married, and
their habitation with their lawful wives was called chastity. And still to this
day, in the Greek and Eastern Churches Priests are married.

XXIII. Then they held that S. Peter was the first and chief of the Apostles,
as for honor and precedence; Hieron. lib. 1. in Jo. vinian. Cypr. de unitate
Ecclesiae.
but that in power and jurisdiction all the Apostles were equal.

XXIV. Then they held that the multitude was no mark of the true Church, and
that the great number was often on the heretic side; And that Heretics and
Seducers are often they that make the greatest show of miracles, as we have
proved before by a multitude of testimonies.

XXV. See the Epistles of Sidonius Apollinaris to the Bishops of Gauls.
Then the Bishops that had any authority were called Popes, Irenaeus apud
Eusebium Victorem increpat. Epist. Synodi Africanae ad Caelestinum subiecta
codici Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae.
and writ Remonstrances to the Bishop of Rome, and being assembled in Council
without their leave, writ to him that they did not like that he should send
them Legates, or take notice of their businesses, or receive any appeal coming
from their countries, and pronounced Excommunication against any man who being
condemned by the Church of his Country, should appeal to Italy. Their election
was made by suffrages of the people. Cypr. Epist. 52. and 68.

XXVI. Formula juramenti Episcoporum in Pontificali.
Then the Bishop of Rome exacted not from the Bishops of Gauls, or Spain, or
Greece, or Asia, an Oath of Allegiance at the time of their reception; They
took no letters of investiture from him, They paid no Annats unto the Pope of
Rome. They feared not a sentence of lapse from Rome upon their Benefices.

XXVII. See the Epistles of Leo 1. and other ancient Popes.
Then the Bishop of Rome in his Epistles and Decrees took none of those Titles
which he assumeth now, and called himself only Bishop of the city of Rome.

XXVIII. Then the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch, had the
care of all the Churches of the Roman Empire, as well as the Bishop of Rome,
and were equally called Heads of the Universal Church, and of all the world
that is of the Roman Empire.

XXIX Codex Canonum Eccles. Africanae cap. 135. Theoph. Pascha. Epistolae.
Eusebius. de vita Constantini. l. 2. c. 67. Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. Ruff. l. 1. c. 1.
Then the Patriarchs of Alexandria sent to the Bishop of Rome every year to
point unto him Easter day; And the Bishop of Rome accounted it not an injury or
a contempt to receive that order from them.

XXX. Then the Universal Councils were convocated by the Emperors, who by
their imperial Letters called the Bishop of Rome to the Council. Theodoret de
haeres. c. de Nestorio. Basil. ep. 10. Nazian. Orat. de Athanas. (...).
We find not that the first Council of Nice was assembled by Constantine, by
the advice of the Bishop of Rome, or that he consulted with him about it: It is
found also, that the second Universal Council, which is the first of
Constantinople, was convocated by the Emperor Theodosius the I. without the
advice of Damasus Bishop of Rome; And that the same Council having met the
second year again, Damasus endeavored to transfer it to Rome, but could not
effect it. In that Council there was not any Legate of the Roman Bishop, and
there without his advice the order of the Patriarks was altered. And so for the
IV. Council, which was that of Chalcedon, which Leo Epist. 23. Omnes
mansuetudinem vestram cum genutibus and lacrymis supplicant sacerdotes,
generalem Synodum jubeatis intra Italiam celebrari. Can. 28. Council. Chalced.
Leo Bishop of Rome went about to hinder by humble supplications to Theodosius
the II. but he could not obtain it. In that Council, against all the efforts of
the Legates of Leo there present, the Patriarch of Constantinople was declared
equal unto the Bishop of Rome in all things; In the same manner as the City of
Constantinople was equal in all things to the city of Rome for the civil.
Neither shall it be found that before Charlemagne the Popes had Legates in the
Councils of Gauls, or that his leave was demanded to convocate them, or that
the causes of Bishops were evocated to Rome. That tyranny got footing in France
under Carolus Calvus toward the end of the ninth age.

XXXI. Then the Bishops of Rome were subject to the Emperors who have often
punished, expelled and deposed them, and often also have granted them graces,
immunities and privileges, and have imposed upon them certain sums of money
for their entry into the Bishopric. It was then very far from the Bishop of
Rome to think of degrading Emperors, and taking crowns from the heads of Kings.

XXXII. Then the Universal Church of all the world was not called Roman, and
the Christians of Syria or Egypt were not called Roman Catholics, but only
when by the word Roman the subjects of the Roman Empire were understood, or the
favorers of that Religion which was professed in the Roman Empire.

XXXIII. About the year of the Lord 300 began the profession of Hermites who
called themselves Monachi or Monks, living not in Cities but in Deserts, and
getting their living with the labor of their hands, without any necessity of
vow. The following ages have added to that profession the vow and the works of
supererogation, and the counsels of perfection, and diverse sorts of Monastical
Rules.

XXXIV. In the ancient Church they knew not what belonged to Papal Indulgences,
They knew nothing of the great Pardons of Rome, nor of the Jubilee, nor of the
treasure of the Church composed with the overplus of the satisfactions of Jesus
Christ and the Saints, nor of the Pardons of six hundred thousand years, nor of
the Popes power to draw souls out of Purgatory, and to put an interdict upon a
kingdom, and dispense from Vows and Oaths, and change that which God has
commanded in his word; Nor of Cardinals, nor of the Court of Rome. For then the
Bishop of Rome was not a Prince, and wore not a Triple Crown glittering with
diamonds. He gave not his feet to Kings and Emperors to kiss; He boasted not
that he could not err in the faith. He did not canonize the Saints, and caused
not himself to be adored.

XXXV. Then there was no mention of Gods Feast, nor of the Mass of such and
such a Saint, as now there is the Mass of St. Rock and of St. Genovesa, and of
St. Anthony, and of the holy Ghost. For of late they have judged it reasonable
that the holy Ghost should also have his Feast. Then the Altars were not
consecrated to such and such a Saint, whose Relics are hid under the Altar.

XXXVI. Then it was an impious language to call the Virgin Mary the Queen of
Heaven. They believed not her bodily assumption into heaven; They did not
defer unto her the cult of Hyperdulia. And the Church of that time gave no
charges unto Saints over a Trade, or a Town, or a sickness,

XXXVII. Then the Roman Indulgences were not in use, as Gabriel Biel
acknowledges Dicendum quod ante tempora beati Gregorii modicus vel nullus usus
fuit indulgentiarum. Nunc autem crebrescit earum usus.
in the 57. lesson upon the Canon of the Mass, and the Cardinal Cajetan in the
Book of Indulgences to Julius de medicis.

XXXVIII. In that time the public Service war pronounced aloud, and the people
answered Amen, because they understood that which was said. That part of the
Mass which is called Secreta, was a thing unknown to Antiquity.

XXXIX. The ancient Church carefully concealed the matter and the mystery of
the Sacrament, and would not celebrate it in presence of those that were under
penance, or of the Catechumenes. Now Jews and Turks, and Pagans may see what is
done in the Mass, and the Sacrament which they call the Host, is carried in
procession through the streets in open view.

XL. Then the Baptism was not ordinarily conferred but at Easter and
Pentecost; and the most part to avoid the rigor of the penitential Canons,
would defer the Baptism till they were at man's estate, and many even to the
hour of death.

XLI. We shall see hereafter that the whole doctrine, and the whole form of
Penitence, and all the Penitential Canons of the ancient Church are abolisht
in the Church of Rome.

In a word it is now quite another face of the Church, and another Religion. If
any of the Christians of the first ages did return into the world, he would
seek the Roman Church in the Roman Church, and should have much ado to observe
in it the Relics of Christianity.

I have been large upon this matter, to be even with Card. du Perron, who in
the 18. chapter of his first Book quoteth many testimonies of the Fathers in the
margin, whereby he pretends to prove the conformity of the Roman Church of this
time with the Ancient. All that to no purpose; for who knows whether these
passages be faithfully quoted? or whether the same Fathers speak always the
same language? or whether the words of these passages be not used in a sense
contrary to the Authors mind? or whether the signification of the words be not
changed? (As in effect the words of Pope, Merit, Sacrifice, Indulgence, Mass,
Consecration, Prayer for the dead, Satisfaction, etc. have lost their ancient
signification) Or whether the alleged Books be not supposititious? Or whether
the several ages have been uniform, and have altered nothing in these matters?
And after all, they are but men that speak, such men as the Roman Church
condemns in many things, and that will not be believed without the Word of
God.

In effect, whosoever will examine the authorities quoted in the Cardinals margin,
and consult the authors themselves, shall find that of those passages some
are taken in a wrong sense, some are of suspected Authors, some are out of
purpose, and touch not the question, or they are about trifles and petty
ceremonies not worth the staying upon, or that a Father having spoken thus has
spoken otherwise afterward, and has retracted his doctrine.

For example, he goes about to prove by the Fathers, that in the ancient
Church they adored the Eucharist, not only with words and inward devotions, but
even with gestures and outward adoration: Upon that he quoteth in the margin
Cyrillus of Jerusalem in the fifth mystagogicall Catechesis, which is a
suspected book, whose style is different, and more concise then the other
precedent Catecheses of Cyrillus, of which we shall say more in another place.
He quotes also Chrysostom upon the 1. Ep. to the Corinthians, hom. 24. Austin
upon Ps. 98. Theodoret dialogo 2. All Texts that say not, that the Eucharist
was adored with adoration of Latria. The passage of Theodoret is this, The
mystical signs do not change nature after the Consecration, for they remain
in their first substance, figure and form, and are visible and to be handled as
before: But they are understood to be the things which were made, and they are
believed and adored as made that which they are believed to be.

Theodoret says. That (...).
the mystical signs are adored; He speaks not then of the adoration of Latria
due unto God alone; for the signs must not be thus adored. Besides, the word
(...) which Theodoret uses, does many times simply signify to venerate and
make obeisance or a congy. The testimony of Austin upon Psa. 98. is this, That
none eat this flesh unless he has first adored it; Where Austin speaking of
manducation by faith, will have the flesh of Christ adored in the celebration
of the Eucharist, but he says not, Let the Eucharist be adored. It is one
thing to worship Christ in the Lotds Supper, and another to worship the Lords
Supper, or to adore the Sacrament which is set upon the table; The Father also
is adored in the Eucharist, although he be not enclosed under the accidents of
bread. Chrysostom says the same in the alleged place, and will have all
those that partake of the Sacrament to worship Christ, which we acknowledge to
be necessary. But he speaks not of the adoration of the Sacrament.

In the same Chapter also to defend the Communion under one kind, he quoteth
in the margin such passages as say, that in old time they carried the bread
home, that it was brought to the sick, carried upon the sea, and sent to remote
Countries. Who sees not that this does not touch the question? The question
is, Whether in the ancient Church the Eucharist was celebrated in the Temple
without giving the cup to any of the Assistants; or whether the cup was ever
denied to any of the people that required it, or whether it was interdicted to
the Laity, as it is now in the Roman Church.

Also for the invocation of Saints, he quoteth in the Margin the book of
Ambrose concerning Widows. But he says not, that the same Father retracted his
opinion; and that in the oration upon the death of Theodosius written many
years after, he said, that God alone must be prayed to, and invocated.

But of all these Texts we shall speak in their proper place, for the Cardinal
brings forth the same Texts, and many more in the Chapter, when he speaks of
every question by it self.

CHAP. 51. Of the pretended power and authority of the Church to add unto
Scripture. And of the unwritten Traditions. And why the Pope not only equalleth
them unto, but prefers them before the holy Scripture.
ONe of the chief proofs that our Adversaries bring to raise the authority of
the Church above the holy Scripture, is the power which they ascribe unto the
Church to add unto Scripture, and to make Laws (which concern faith and
manners) not contained in the Scripture. The Jesuit Gregorius de Valentia
says, that the Greg. de Valentia Analys. l. 5. c. 3. in titulo Scripturam non
esse sufficientem regulam fidei.
Scripture is not a sufficient rule of faith, because it contains not all
things. The Jesuit Bail in the ninth question of his Catechism, I will make
you (says he) palpably discern, that Scripture is not sufficient. And so
Charron in the fourth chapter of the third verity: Scripture is but a very
little parcel of the revealed truth. Salmeron gives a reason why God would not
have all the Mysteries of Religion to be written, namely, Salmer. Tom. 13.
Disp. 8.. Quinto opus. Hoc litteris consignari minime debuerat, ut servaretur
praeceptum Christi, Nolite dare sanctum canibus.
That the Commandment of Christ should be kept, Give not holy things unto Dogs.
So that in his account, the holy Scripture is for Dogs: Coster. Praefat.
Enchirid. In ea tamen omnia contineri valde impudenter affirmare non verentur,
etc. A Christo videtur cautum ne omnia fidei dogmata Scriptis commendarentu^,
dum ait, Nolite dare sanctum canibus.
Costerus says the same.

And that one may not think that the Traditions which the Church adds unto
Scripture, be of small concernment; Thomas 2a. 2ae. quaest. 1. art. 10. Ad
solam authoritatem summi Pontificis pertinet nova editio symboli.
Thomas Aquinas says, that the Pope can make a new Edition of the Symbol. Upon
which Text, Andradius in the second book of the defense of the Tridentine
faith, says, Andrad. Romanos Pontifices multa definiendo quae ante latitabant,
symbolum fidei augere consuevisse.
The Roman Popes by defining many things which had been hidden before, use to
augment the Symbol of the Faith. Whence the Council of Florence, in the last
Session attributes to the Pope and to the Roman Church the power of adding to
the Symbol. The Bull Exurge, which is at the end of the last Council of
Lateran, condemns Luther for saying that it is not in the power of the Pope
and the Roman Church to stablish new Articles of Faith.

Hence it appears, that our Adversaries hold, that unwritten Traditions which
are wanting unto Scripture, are not only light things and indifferent customs,
but such as are held to be Articles of faith, essential points, and necessary
to Christian Religion, as the Jesuit Salmeron says, Salmer. Tom. XIII. part.
3. Disp. 6.. Est ergo. Doctrina fidei admittit additionem in essentialibus.
The Doctrine of faith suffers addition in essential things. Whence it
follows, that Christian Religion had not yet all her essential Doctrines in the
time of the Apostles, and was wanting in things necessary. For the same Jesuit
in the same place is prolix in maintaining, that Salmer. ibid.. Tertio varia.
Hinc colligi potest non omnia tradita esse ab Apostolis, sed ea quae tunc
temporis necessaria and quae ad salutem credentium idonea erant.
there are many Traditions, even in things essential, which the Apostles have
not taught, neither by word nor writing. So that by a great abuse, they call
all traditions Apostolical, there being many Doctrines of which the Apostles
have neither written nor spoken. For (says he) all things have not been taught
by the Apostles, but such as were then necessary and fit for the salvation of
Believers. By that reason there are some Doctrines that now are necessary and
essential to faith, which were not so in the Apostles time. It were good to
know when Christian Religion shall be perfected, and whether the Popes shall
have always the power to add new Articles of faith.

M. du Perron in the fifth observation of the second book, chap. 3. is very
ample upon that point. And as in the third observation, he maintains that the
Church can change the Scripture, and make other Laws; so in this place he
maintains that the Church can add to Scripture, and make traditions of equal
authority to Scripture.

To this Tradition our Adversaries have recourse, when Scripture fails them.
So did the old Heretics, as Irenaeus says in the third book, chap. 2. When
one convicteth Heretics by Scripture, they will accuse the Scriptures as not
being in good form, and having no authority, and diversely spoken, and because
truth cannot be found in Scripture by those that know not tradition, because it
was not given in Writing, but viva voce. For which cause, Paul said, We speak
Wisdom among the perfect. Lib. de Monogam. c. 2.
Tertullian being turned Heretic defended his error by tradition, alleging
these words of the Lord, I have yet many things to say unto you, but as yet you
cannot bear them. Which Text Bellar. l. de verbo Dei non scripto, c. 3.
Bellarmine and other defenders of traditions, make use of to establish them;
as also of this Text alleged by Irenaeus, We speak wisdom among the perfect. A
little after the Apostles, Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, applied his mind to
unwritten traditions, which were parables, and strange Doctrines, and other
fabulous things, as Eusebius says in the last chapter of the last book of his
history.

Clemens Alexandrinus, who among many virtues had also his defects, was much
given to traditions not contained in Scripture. He Strom. l. 1. and 6.
taught that the Pagans were justified by Philosophy, and that it was necessary
before the coming of the Lord, and that it was a Schoolmaster unto Christ. That
Christ had prescribed to the Jews twelve years for a term of repentance; Strom.
6.
That not only Christ, but the Apostles also descended into hell to preach
repentance, and many such Doctrines, which the Roman Church of our days does
not receive.

Within these traditions our Adversaries entrench themselves when they are
pressed by the Scripture, and say that this unwritten word is found in the mouth
of the Church, that is, that it depends from the will of the Pope, and of those
that govern the Roman Church under him.

Now although the Sess. IV. Pari pietatis affectu and reverentia^.
Council of Trent equal those traditions with the holy Scripture, commanding
that they be received with the like reverence and affection of piety as the
holy Scripture; Nevertheless traditions have really a greater authority with
the Roman Church then the holy Scripture; Since the Romanists ground the
authority of Scripture upon tradition, and upon the testimony of the Church.
Certainly if the tradition of the Church can change that which God commands
in Scripture (as the Cardinal will have it) it follows, that Tradition has
more authority then Scripture. Or if Scripture must be believed, because the
tradition of the Church prescribes it, what follows but that the tradition of
the Church is more to be believed then Scripture? Whence also the Jesuit
Costerus in his Manual, chap. 1. calls the tradition printed in the heart of
the Church, another kind of Scripture. Hujus Scripturae praestantia multis
partibus superat Scripturas quas nobis in membranis Apostoli reliquerunt, etc.
The excellency of that Scripture (says he) far surmounteth the holy
Scriptures, which the Apostles have left in parchments; First, because that is
written by the finger of God, the other is written with the Pens of the
Apostles. Salmeron in the third part of the XIII. Tome, in the 8. Dispute,
pronounces this goodly Aphorism, Tradition has all things necessary to
salvation, yea more then Scripture.. Secunda. Traditio est scriptura antiquer.
He adds, Tradition is more ancient then Scripture. Again, Scriptura dubiorum
quae pullulabant judex esse non poterat, etc. Tum quia difficilis est and quia
muta est, etc. Non mittitur ad Scripturas quae instar nasi cerci ducuntur, quo
quis vult, etc.
Scripture cannot be Judge of doubts, because it is hard and dumb, and like a
nose of wax which is drawn any way, etc. Wherefore such as will be insolent,
cannot be convinced by Scripture; but with the only tradition we must cut their
throats. Again, Tradition is more firm then Scripture. And a little after,
Tradition is far more universal then Scripture, and extends to a longer time,
and has more matters, and more persons then Scripture; Yea that Jesuit goes
so far, as to say, that Salmer. 2. Proleg.. Septimo. Non mirum si Ecclesiae Dei
quae Spiritum habet, subjiciatur Scriptura.
Scripture is subject unto the Church which has the Spirit. Now to be subject
unto the Church, and unto the tradition of the Church, is all one. Which is the
same thing that Lindanus says in Panoplia, In Indice titulorum, l. 5. c. 5.
Ecclesiam non esse ex voluntate Christi Scripturae alligatam.
The Church was not tied to Scripture by the Will of Christ. And the Jesuit
Costerus in his Manual, Christus nec Ecclesiam a chartaceis Scriptis pendere,
nec membranis sua mysteria committere voluit.
Christ would not have his Church to depend from Scriptures of paper, and would
not commit his mysteries to parchment. And Stapleton in the second book of the
authority of Scripture, chap. 11. Stapl. Dixi and dico, non tam ipsius fidei
regulam in se esse Scripturam, quam ipsarum Scripturarum regulam esse fidem
Ecclesiae.
I have said, and say again, that Scripture in herself is not so much the rule
of Faith, as the faith of the Church is the rule of Scripture. Now by the Faith
of the Church, the tradition of the Church is understood; and by the Church,
they understand the Roman; and by the Roman, they understand the Pope, in whom
resideth the whole authority of the Roman Church. So the Pope is set above God,
speaking in the Scriptures; Wherefore they are gravelled, when they are asked
whether the Pope be subject to the holy Scripture?

Did ever any of their Doctors say of the Traditions, that which they say of
the h^ly Scriptures? Did they ever call the Traditions a piece of a rule, a
nose of wax, a stumbling block, a dumb rule, a sword for both hands, an obscure
and ambiguous Doctrine which cannot be judge, etc? In a word, they will have
Tradition, not Scripture to be Judge. And their practice justifies it; for in
the Roman Church, the people is a thousand times more carefully instructed in
the tradition, then in the Doctrine of salvation contained in the holy
Scripture. The very idiots among them know what belongs to Lent and Emberweeks;
what meats are forbidden on certain days; and speak of Holy days, Vigils,
Pilgrimages, Relics, great Pardons, Obits, Beads, Rosaries, etc. But many that
go for learned, are ignorant in the Doctrine of our Redemption, and free
Adoption, and Justification by Faith, and about the Offices and Natures of our
Redeemer, and about the relation between the New and the Old Testament, which
are the funmentals of Christian Religion. Confirmation being of humane
invention, is more honored then Baptism, which is instituted by Christ. For
Confirmation is not conferred but by the Bishop; But Baptism may be conferred
by a Woman, yea by a Pagan Woman, yea by a Pagan Whore. Of sins against Gods
Law, as Fornication, Murder, Perjury, Adultery, Priests and Bishops give
absolution; but they cannot absolve them that have molested those that go to
Rome to gain pardons, or robbed the victuallers that carry provision to the
Court of Rome, nor Princes and Magistrates that levy Tenths upon the Clergy,
nor them that appeal from the Pope unto the future Council. These are cases
reserved unto his Holiness, except only in the Article of death. They are
traditions, which to transgress, is a greater sin then to transgress the Law of
God. If a Priest marry for a remedy to his incontinence, according to the
Apostles command, he falls into irregularity, and becomes unable to sing Mass;
but not for keeping many Concubines, or for being a Sodomite, as we learn of
Pope Innoc. III. Extra. de bigamis, c. Quia circa. Postulasti per sedem
Apostolicam edoceri si Presbyteri plures concubinas habentes, bigami
censeantur. Ad quod duximus respondendum quod cum irregularitatem non
incurrerint cum eis tanquam simplici fornicatione notatis poteris dispensare.
Innocent the III. and of Navar. Tom. 2. cap. ad inferendam 23. qu. 3. de
defensione proximi, c. 35.. Decimum. Respondendum est crimen Sodomiae non
comprehendi in criminibus quae irregularitatem inducunt.
Navarrus the Popes penitentiary.

It is no wonder that in the Roman Church Tradition has more authority then
Scripture. For the Popes succession in Saint Peter's Primacy, is a tradition,
which is the foundation of his Empire. He has then a great interest to exalt
tradition, upon which his domination is founded.

Besides, all traditions are lucrative unto the Pope, and serve to exalt and
enrich the Pope and his Clergy. He draws great profits from Indulgences,
private Masses, Dispensations, Annals, Suffrages for the dead, and from
Purgatory. By the confessions the Confessors know the secrets of families, and
the intentions of Princes, and have a King kneeling before them, confessing his
sins, and craving pardon, and undergoing penances at their discretion.
Clergymen reserving to themselves and Kings the Cup in the Sacrament, raise
themselves above the people, and make themselves fellows to Kings. By the
Transubstantiation they arrogate to themselves the power of making God with
their word, and hold Jesus Christ shut up in a box. By the sacrifice of the
Mass they make themselves Priests after the order of Melchisedeck, and
sacrifice Jesus Christ unto his Father, having no command of God for that. The
images of God the Father arrayed like a Pope, make the ignorant to believe that
the Pope is like unto God. By holy days the Pope usurpeth the power of
shutting up the Shops, and hindering the sitting of Courts of Justice and
Councils of State. By the distinction of meats, the Pope rules the markets, and
the kitchins, and the bellies, and the Tables of Kings. By the canonization of
Saints h^ gives his servants to be adored by the Nations, and raises to heaven
such as have faithfully served him: By the Sacrament of Penance he chastiseih
Kings and Princes, imposing corporal and pecuniary punishments, and changing
when he lists the corporal into pecuniary: By the Absolution Priests forgive
sins, and bear themselves as Judges in Gods cause; For God is the offended
party, and the Priest is the Judge. By the adoration of Images, and the
prohibition of reading Scripture in the vulgar tongue, the Pope keeps the
people in ignorance, that they may not know the abuse and the tyranny. By the
service in the Roman language the Pope tameth the people to the Roman
Religion, and gives his language to the nations which he has subdued. The
dispensations which the Pope gives to Princes, of marrying in the forbidden
degrees and unlawful by the Word of God, oblige the children born of those
marriages to maintain, the Papal authority; for if that authority were shaken,
one might doubt whether they were lawful. The power which the Pope usurpeth to
take from Kings both their Crowns and their lives, and to dispose of Kingdoms,
makes him King of Kings, and Monarch over the whole temporal of the earth. Who
shall wonder now that the Pope labors with all his power to raise the
authority of Traditions above that of the Law of God, since they are so
lucrative unto him? And whereas he is Master of Traditions, and having made
them he can change them, no wonder if he sticks to them, but he can neither
abolish Scripture, nor make another at his pleasure.

For our part, we know no other word of God but that which is contained in the
Old and New Testament, which God has inspired unto his Prophets and Apostles.
And holding that word for a perfect Rule of our faith, we reject all additions
unto the doctrine of salvation contained in the holy Scriptures, either in
express words or in equivalent terms.

Yet do we not absolutely reject all traditions, since Scripture it self is a
tradition, as Cyprian says in the 74 Epistle to Pompeius. Whence comes this
tradition? does it come from the authority of the Lord and the Gospel, or from
the doctrine and Epistles of the Apostles? And a little after, If it be
commanded in Scripture, or in the Epistles, or in the Acts of the Apostles, let
that holy and divine tradition be observed. Besides there be many things that
concern Ecclesiastical policy and outward order, which we would not reject,
although they be not in Scripture; so that there be nothing in them against
good manners, and that they exceed not in number, and that they be not given as
necessary to salvation, and equalled to the doctrine of faith contained in the
Scripture. Also if there be any tradition which adds nothing to the holy
Scripture, but be an acknowledgement of the perfection of the same, and bar
all addition to it; as that such and such books are sacred and Canonical,
which is a tradition arising from the nature it self of Scripture, we receive
it willingly. Moreover, if one call traditions the doctrines which are not
found in formal texts in the Scripture, but are found in it in equivalent
terms, or are drawn out of it by necessary consequence, we reject not those
traditions. We reject those only that cannot be received without admitting some
defect in Scripture, as if it contained not the whole doctrine of salvation. As
Hierome says, Hier. in Ps 98. Omne quod loquimur, debemus affirmare de
Scripturis sanctis.
Whatsoever we say, we ought to affirm it by the holy Scriptures. And Austin,
Let us hear no more among us, This I say, and that thou say, but the Lord
says this. We have the books of the Lord, to whose authority both of us
consent, and believe it, and serve it: There let us seek the Church, there let
us decide our cause. Again, Aug l. de unitate Ecclesiae. Auferantur illa de
medio quae adversus nos invicem, non ex divinis Canonicis libris sed aliunde
recitamus.
Let us remove all that we bring, the one against the other, from any other
place but the Canonical Scriptures.

CHAP. 52. That the holy Scripture contains the whole doctrine necessary to
salvation. Examination of the Cardinals answers.
1. IN this Question we lay for a foundation, that true Religion comes from
God, and must be ruled by the word of God. Now we have no other book that may
challenge that Title but the holy Scripture, and our Adversaries produce none.
Whence it follows that the Traditions not contained in the holy Scripture,
though backed with testimonies brought from other books, are drawn not from the
Word of God, but from the word of men.

If the Word of God contained in the holy Scriptures should want any thing
necessary for salvation, whence or by what means should that defect be
supplied? Should it be from the Decrees and Decretals of the Popes? but the
Roman Church receives them not for the Word of God. Should it be by the
ancient Councils? but they speak not of the Traditions which the Roman Church
has added since, and they condemn the Roman Church in many things. Wherefore
the Roman Church receives not the Councils for the Word of God; Neither does
she hold her self subject to Councils, but attributes to her self the power of
altering that which was decreed by the Universal Councils. And before the
Councils, the Scripture for many ages was held in the Church the only rule of
faith.

2. The very title of the holy Scripture is a proof. For it bears on the front
the title of Testament and Covenant of God. We ask then whether the Testament
of our God be whole there, or whether there be but part of it? If it be whole,
nothing must be added to i^; but if there be but a part of it, we must correct
the title, and write, Part of the Testament or Covenant of God. And indeed our
Adversaries were not so bold yet as to affirm that the traditions which they
hold forth make part of Gods Covenant.

3. The same may be said of the title set before the New Testament, that it is
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Which Gospel if it be whole, it follows that the
unwritten Traditions are no part of the Gospel: If it be not whole, the title
must be corrected, and our Adversaries must supply that defect, and give us a
list of the unwritten traditions, that the people may have the whole body of
Christian Religion.

4. Now if the Church of this time, and that which shall come after, has the
authority to add more unto Scripture, Christian Religion shall never be
entire, and there will be still a power to make additions to it, which
presupposes imperfection.

5. Moreover, how shall the people be able to learn these Traditions, and know
the goodness of them? Shall they learn it from the mouth of the Church? but
before that they must be assured, that it is an orthodox Church and sound in
the faith; A thing impossible for the people to know, since the reading of holy
Scripture is forbidden to the people, from which Scripture only the doctrine of
salvation is drawn. And there being many contrary Churches, as the Roman, the
Grecian, the Armenian, the Ethiopian, etc. how shall the poor people know,
which of all their diverse traditions they must stand to?

If one say that the good traditions are learned by the consent of the Fathers,
the Fathers are things hidden from the people, who never read them, because
they are Greek and Latin, and of an endless length. And if one should read
them all, he should find a great number of traditions in the Roman Church, of
which the Fathers say nothing, and some which the Fathers contradict. Can any
man find in the Fathers of the four first ages any mention of the power of the
Pope to send souls out of Purgatory? or to give and take away Kingdoms? Do they
speak of Roman Indulgences? or of the Jubilee every twenty fifth year? or of
the adoration of Images? or of denying the Cup in the Lords Supper unto the
people? or of private Masses? or of forbidding the people to read Scripture?
and many the like things.

6. If the Church of Israel has lived many ages having no other doctrine of
salvation but the five Books of Moses, of which God speaks thus, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye
shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall you diminish
ought from it: Is it credible that now that we have these books of Moses, the
books of the Prophets, of the Apostles, and of the Evangelists, that these
sacred books are not sufficient, and that we need yet besides them great number
of doctrines? In vain M. du Perron answers, that in that place adding and
diminishing signify transgressing the Commandments of God, or omitting to
fulfill them, for he that kills or steals, adds nothing to the Law of God.

The Cardinal says also, that in the alleged place, by the word which I
command you, the unwritten word is understood also; and he brings many
commandments practiced by the Israelites, of which no mention is made in the
books of Moses; A reason which shall be examined in the following Chapter. That
Moses gave no unwritten Traditions to the people, but set down in writing the
whole Law of God, himself testifies it, Deuteronomy. 31.24. And it came to pass when
Moses had made an end of writing the words of this Law in a book until they
were finished, That Moses commanded the Levites which bare the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord, saying, Take this book of the Law, and put it in the side
of the Ark.

7. I add that the whole Service of God consists in two points, well-doing
and well-beleeving: Of the first we have a summary in the Law, of the second in
the Symbol. Many persons are come to salvation with less knowledge then that:
Jonas did not propound all these things to the Ninivites, to whose conversion
nevertheless Christ bears witness, Matthew. 12.

8. Luke 16.29. The rich Glutton being in hell, desires Abraham that some of
the dead be sent to his brothers to warn them of their duty, lest they should
fall into the like torment; To whom Abraham answers, They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. Abraham will have them to be content with the
doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, which was read every Sabbath in the
Synagogues, without expecting other revelation. For Christ speaks of that rich
glutton as of a man that had lived under the Old Testament, under which the
Church had no other doctrine but that of the Law and the Prophets: Chrysostom
understood it so upon Gal. 1. (...).
Abraham (says he) being required to send down Lazarus, answers, They have
Moses and the Prophets, if they will not hear them, no more they shall hear
dead men raised again. Now Jesus Christ brings in Abraham speaking thus,
showing that he will have us to give more faith to Scripture then to dead men
risen again.

9. S. John chapter 20. ult. speaking of his Gospel, says, that these things are
written that we may believe in Jesus Christ, and that believing on him we may
have life through his Name. We grant to the Cardinal, that these words contain
not a demonstrative proof of the perfection of Scripture, but it is a very
probable argument, since God has inspired many of his servants to write the
doctrine of salvation propounded by Jesus Christ, that he has indicted and
inspired unto them, all that he knew to be necessary to save us. For that which
is committed to the simple word of men, and to unwritten tradition, is subject
to be altered and corrupted: Which appears in that Churches have contrary
Traditions, though they have the same holy Scripture. The Ancients made use of
that Text to prove the perfection of Scripture; So did Austin, Aug. de consensu
Evangelistarum. l 1. c. ult.
All that the Lord would have us to read about his words and deeds, he
commanded them to write, they being as his own hands. And in another place,
Idem Tract. 49. in Johan. Evangelista testatur multa Dominum Christum and
fecisse and dixisse quae scripta non sunt; electa autem sunt quae scriberentur
quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur.
These things were chosen to be written which seemed to be sufficient for the
salvation of believers. And Cyrillus, Johan. l. 12. c. 69.
All that the Lord has done was not written, but that which the writers
thought to be sufficient, that shining by the right faith, and by works, we may
attain to the Kingdom of Heaven.

10. The Apostle says to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. From a child thou have known
the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation. It
matters to whether the word (...) be translated to make wise, or to instruct,
as the Cardinal will have it. For the Apostle speaks not of an imperfect
instruction. It is hard to say certainly, whether by the holy Letters or
Scriptures he understands only the books of the Old Testament, or whether part
of the New was already written. Only I say, that if Saint Paul speaks only of
the Old Testament, the argument is so much the stronger; For if the Old
Testament alone can make us wise unto salvation, how much more the Old and the
New?

Page 783.
But (says M. du Perron) where is the Ordinance for Baptism, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, found in the Old Testament; and
the Ordinance for distributing the body and blood of the Lord? I answer, that
the knowledge of these things was not necessary under the Old Testament; And
that even in the beginnings of the Christian Church, that which is revealed in
the Old Testament about Jesus Christ, might be sufficient to salvation, to him
that had wanted means to receive a more ample instruction. Besides, the Old
Testament does instruct us in these things, inasmuch as it sends us to Christ,
and commands us to hearken to him, and by consequent to receive his Ordinances.
And this is it that the Apostle adds, saying, the holy Letters are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, through the Faith which is in Christ Jesus; that
is, These holy Letters address thee to go unto Christ, and will have thee to
believe in his Word.

To confound the Reader, he will have that word (...) to be translated in the
Praeterit, to have instructed, being ignorant that the infinitive Aorist is
taken almost always in the present tense. See Act. 13.44. and 14.1. and 15.10.
Hardly is there a chapter in the New Testament without an example of this.

11. The same Apostle, Acts 20.17. says, that he has announced to the
Ephesians the whole counsel of God. Then the traditions added since by the
Popes, are not of the counsel of God. And Acts 16.22. He witnesses both to
small and great, that he said none other things then those which the Prophets
and Moses did say should come. Then he restrained his preaching to the
Scriptures.

12. Mat. 15.3. The Lord Jesus said to the Pharisees, Why do you transgress the
commandment of God by your tradition? The word transgressing, (...), is
overpassing. He says not, Why do you contradict? but why do you overpass the
commandment of God? as in effect the Pharisaical traditions were, for the most
part, simple additions unto the Law of God, having an appearance of devotion;
Not otherwise forbidden, but as much as God forbids to add unto his Word: as
to fast twice in the week, to make broad their phylacteries or fringes of their
garments, to wash themselves returning from the Town Hall or Market, to make
pots clean in a superstitious way, to number their steps on the Sabbath day.

13. The Apostle Ephesians. 2.20. foundeth our faith upon the Prophets and the
Apostles. Being (says he) built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets. If our Adversaries say, that our faith is founded upon the Word both
written and unwritten of the Apostles, they must say, also, that it is founded
upon the word both written and unwritten of the Prophets. Now we have no
unwritten Word of the Prophets, and our Adversaries produce none.

14. Saint Paul 1 Cor. 4.6. speaks thus; These things I have (...), In have
transfigured.
transferred in a figure to my self, and to Apollo for your sakes, that ye
might learn (...).
not to think to be wise above that which is written. The whole context takes
away all doubt of the sense of these words: For the Apostle in the precedent
chapter, v. 5. and 6. and in this chapter, called himself an Architect, and a
Minister of Christ, and Steward of the Mysteries of God; and had said, that
Paul had planted, Apollo had watered, but that God gives the increase; and he
had sent us to Christ, who is the only foundation, of the building. Now in this
Text, he says, that he has transferred those things to his person, and to
that of Apollo, that by that example, the Pastors of the Church might learn not
to assume to themselves more then the Scripture attributes unto them; for their
charge and their authority must be limited by the Word of God. Whence we infer,
that since Scripture sets a rule to the charge of Pastors, and puts limits unto
them, which they cannot overpass without offending God, then we must make no
doubt, but that the same Scripture prescribes unto Pastors that which they must
teach, and limits their preaching. Whereby the Peoples duty is also limited;
For the faithful must not presume to be wise beyond that which is written. This
Text seems to have been purposely made against the Roman Church; in which, the
Pope and the Priests assume titles beyond that which is written, as the titles
of Vicar of God, and head of the Universal Church, and sacrificers of Christ's
body.

15. The same Apostle Gal. 1.8. speaks thus to the Galatians, Though we or an
Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you then that ye have received,
let him be accursed. The dispute is vain, whether (...) in Greek signifies
besides or against; for who so teaches besides the Gospel, teaches also
against it: And adding to the Gospel is gain saying the Gospel. Hence it is,
that the word transgressing signifies not only overpassing, but violating and
breaking the Law. Chrysostom upon Gal. 1. expounds that Text in this manner.
(...).
Paul says not, if they announce things contrary to the Gospel, or if they
overthrow all, but if they preach never so little besides the Gospel which you
have received, if they shake any thing never so little, let them be anathema.
Theophylact. in Ep. ad Galat. Neque enim si contraria solum praedicaverin^
praeter id quod ipsi evangelizavimus, hoc est, si plusculum quippiam adjecerint.
And Theophylactus after him, The Apostle has not said, Hoc prius credimus non
esse quod ultra credere debeamus.
If they preach only things contrary, but if they preach besides that which we
have preached our selves, that is, if they add never so little more.

Tertullian in the Book of Prescriptions, Chap. 8. speaking of Scripture, Hoc
prius credimus non esse quod ultra credere debeamus.
First, we believe this, that there is nothing that we should believe besides.
And Chap. 14. Nihil ultra scire, omnia scire est.
To know nothing besides that, is to know all. And truly reason in this is
evident: For if S. Paul has taught both by word and writing all that is
necessary to salvation, it follows that he forbids to add to that which he
has taught, and not only to contradict it.

The Roman vulgar version is express to this purpose, translating thus, Licet
nos aut Angelus de coelo evangelizet vobis praeterquam quod evangelizavimus
vobis, anathema sit: For although the adverb (...) in Greek, and praeter in
Latin, signify sometimes against, yet praeter quam quod cannot be so taken,
and cannot signify but besides that, or otherwise then.

It is vain to reply, that S. Paul since that Epistle was written, has added
many Epistles, and that S. John after him has written his Gospel, and the
Revelation; For it will not be found that S. Paul in his last Epistles, or S.
John in his Books have added anything to the doctrine of salvation, which S.
Paul had written and preached before, and which was already contained in the
other Gospels.

It will not serve to answer, that Paul forbids to add to that he had taught,
but that he did not write all that he had taught. For we have heard the Jesuits
saying before, that there are many things essential unto Christian faith,
which the Apostles neither writ nor taught, so that they find a defect not
only in the writings, but also in the preaching of the Apostles. Besides, those
that speak this language, oblige themselves to specify unto us which are those
points necessary to salvation, which the Apostles would not set down in
writing, and to prove to us by good proofs, that S. Paul having preached the
invocation of Saints, and the service of Images and Relics, and the Popes
Succession in S. Peter's primacy, God forbad him to write these things.

16. In the last Chapter of the Revelation, S. John says, I testify unto
every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this Book; If any man shall
add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in
this book. The Council of Friuli approved by the Roman Church, says, that this
Text is to be understood of the whole Scripture, not of the only Book of the
Revelation.

17. Generally humane traditions are forbidden in the holy Scripture, Mat. 15.
where Christ speaks thus to the Pharisees: In vain they do worship me, teaching
for doctrines the Commandments of men. And the Apostle, Col. 2.8. Beware lest
any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit after the tradition of
men. And it is very considerable that in that Text the Apostle specifieth and
condemns especially certain traditions, which the Roman Church of our time
observes, namely, the service of Angels, the observation of holy days, and
the distinction of meats: Not because they that taught these things (saying,
Eat not, touch not, handle not) thought the Angels to be evil, or the meats to
be of their nature unclean, but (says the Apostle) in will worship and
humility, and not sparing of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh.

M. du Perron answers, that Christ Matthew. 15. speaks not of the Mosaicall and
Prophetical traditions, but of the Rabbinicall institutions of Rabbi Sammay,
and Rabbi Hillel, Page 803.
heads of the order of the Scribes and Pharisees. Here he would make a show of
his great reading; yet they that have taught him this, have cosened him; for
the order of the Scribes comes not from these Rabbis, seeing that Ezra was a
Scribe, who was none of their disciples, and was more ancient then they. He is
abused also by them that made him think that the Scribes and Pharisees were one
and the same order: For the Scribes had charge in the Church: but the Pharisees
as Pharisees, had none. Pharisaism was a voluntary devotion, and a fraternity
of professors of works of supererogation, and of an austere life. The
difference between a Scribe and a Pharisee, is such as is in the Roman Church
between a teaching Priest and a Lay Friar, whom to conceive to be all one order
would be a great ignorance: It is another mistake of the Cardinal, to put
Sammay before Hillel, seeing that Hillel is far more ancient. See Drusius in
his second Book of the three Sects, of the Jews. Cha. 10.

But to answer the main Question, The words of our Lotd cannot be restrained to
the Pharisaical Traditions, since to condemn those traditions he makes use of a
Text of Isaiah more ancient then the Pharisees, a Text that condemns
Traditions in general. It matters not upon what occasion Jesus Christ
condemns traditions which add unto the Word of God, since he condemns them
all without exception.

The same I say of the Text of Col. 2. where by the Traditions of men, one
ought not to understand the Ceremonies of the Law, since God was the author of
them: And by consequent, even after their term was expired, they must not be
called traditions of men, but Gods laws, which God himself had abolished.
Besides the Apostle adds, that those that observed these traditions, did it
out of a voluntary submission, and with a show of humility: whereas they that
observed the Ceremonies of the Law in S. Paul's time, pretended to do it out of
necessity, holding themselves obliged to it by Gods commandment.

In this Question our Adversaries use to say, that their Traditions are not
contraventions unto the holy Scripture, but simple additions. But by speaking
so, they contradict themselves. For we have seen before the Cardinal and a
number of Doctors affirming, that the Pope and the Roman Church can alter, and
have really altered Gods Ordinances contained in the Scripture. And we shall
see in this whole Book, that their Traditions are mere contraventions under
color of addition: Consider also that going about to add unto Scripture some
doctrine necessary for salvation, is going against Scripture, since God forbids
us to add unto it.

CHAP. 53. Testimonies of Fathers of the sufficiency of Scripture against
unwritten Traditions.
THE Ancients abound in testimonies for the perfection of Scripture. Thus
Tertullian against Hermogenes, Cap. 22. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem.
I adore the perfection of the Scriptures. And in the same book, Scriptum esse
doceat Hermogenis officina. Si non est scriptum, time at Vae illud
adjicientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum.
Let the shop of Hermogenes show that it is written, otherwise let him fear the
woe denounced to them that add or diminish. It would be impertinent to object
here that Tertullian writ this book being a Montanist; for the Orthodox never
accused the Montanists of too much adhering to Scripture, or rejecting the
unwritten Traditions.

The whole Antiquity commends the words of Constantine in the Council of Nice.
Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. 1. cap. 7.
That the books of the Gospels, and Oracles of the Apostles and of the ancient
Prophets, do clearly instruct us of the opinion we ought to have of divine
things. Wherefore all perverse contention being laid aside, let us fetch the
solution of doubts from the words divinely inspired. To which Bellar. l. de
verbo Dei non scripto. cap. 11.
Bellarmin answers, that Constantine was a great Emperor, but not a great
Doctor.

Athanasius in the beginning of the book against the Grecians, speaks thus,
(...).
The holy and divinely inspired Scriptures are sufficient to make the truth to
be understood. And in the Treatise of the Lords incarnation, (...);
If you will bring other things besides, that which is written, why do you
fight against us who are persuaded neither to hear nor to say any thing besides
that which is written? And in the same place, You are so exceedingly idle (...).
as to say things that are not written, and to have tenets remote from piety.

Gregorius Nazianzenus in his oration upon Athanasius praises him because he
presented to the Emperor (...), written piety against unwritten novelty.

Cyrillus of Alexandria in the two books of his Treatises upon Genesis, (...),
etc.
How could we receive that which holy Scripture has not said, or put it in the
rank of true things? And in the seventh book against Julian, The holy
Scriptures are sufficient to make wise and most approved and sufficiently
understanding, those that are bred and instructed in it.

Theodoret in the first Dialogue, entitled The immutable; Bring me not humane
reasons, (...).
for I believe none but holy Writ. And in the second Dialogue, (...).
I am not so rash as to affirm a thing of which the holy Scripture is silent.

Chrysostom upon the second chapter of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians,
(...).
All things that are in the divine Scriptures are clear and straight. All that
is necessary is clear. And upon Psalm. 95. (...).
When one says something that is not written, the hearers mind is halting.

Basil toward the end of his Ethics, which are among his Asceticks, (...).
If (says he) all that is not of faith is sin, as the Apostle says, and faith
is of hearing, and hearing of the word of God; all that is without the divinely
inspired Scripture, being not of the faith, is sin. Note that he says without,
not against Scripture. One cannot doubt but that these Asceticks are of Basil;
for Gennadius Archbishop of Constantinople has compiled common places, or
short Homilies drawn out of Basil: where there is a great number of passages
out of the Asceticks. And the style of Basil is evident in them where the
florid fluidity is inimitable. And Photius in his Library puts that book among
Basils works.

Hierom upon the first chapter of Haggai. Sed and alia quae absque authoritate
and testimoniis Scripturarum quasi traditione Apostolica sponte reperiunt atque
confingunt, percutit gladius Dei.
All things that men invent of themselves, pretending Apostolical tradition,
without authority and testimony of Scripture, are smitten by Gods sword. And
upon the Prophet Micah, book 1. chap. 1. Ecclesia Christi non est egressa de
finibus suis, id est, de Scripturis sanctis.
The Church of Christ is not come out of her limits, that is, the holy
Scriptures. And writing against Helvidius, Quae non sunt scripta, rejicimus.
We reject that which is not written.

The life of St. Antony attributed to Athanasius, says, (...), that the
Scriptures are sufficient for instruction.

Cyrillus of Jerusalem in his fourth Catechesis (...).
Concerning the divine and holy mysteries of faith, the least thing must not be
taught without the holy Scriptures. Believe me not saying these things to thee,
unless I show thee what I say by Scripture. Salvation and the preservation of
our faith consists not in invention of words, but in demonstration by the
divine Scriptures.

Austin Epist. 14. chap. 9. By the Per solas Scripturas potes plenam Dei
intelligere voluntatem.
Scriptures only thou can fully know the will of God. And in the book De bono
viduitatis, chap. 1. Let my teaching be nothing else but propounding the words
of the Doctor. And in the third chapter of the book de unitate Ecclesiae,
Auferantur illa de medio quae adversus nos invicem non ex divinis Canonicis
libris, sed aliunde recitamus. Let us take away all that we bring the one
against the other, out of other places then the divine Canonical books. This
Father receives no proof but out of Scripture. Himself in the second book de
doctrina Christiana, chap. 9. In his quae aperto posita sunt in Scriptura,
inveniuntar illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi.
In the things which are clearly set down in the Scriptures, all things are
found that concern faith and manners. And against the letters of Petilianus,
book 3. chap. 6. Read us this out of the Law, out of the Prophets, out of the
Psalms, out of the Gospel it self, out of the writings of the Apostles, and we
will believe it. And in the second book of the merits of sins, and of pardon,
chap. 36. When the dispute is about a very obscure things, without help of
clear and certain instructions out of the divine Scriptures, presumption must
stay. Most pregnant of all are this Fathers words in the fifth chapter of his
book of the unity of the Church Quaeque aperta and manifesta deligamus, quae si
in sanctis Scripturis non invenirentur, nullo modo esset unde aperirentur
clausa and illustrarentur obscura.
Let us pick the clear and manifest texts, which if they were not found in the
holy Scriptures, no way should be left to open the things that are shut up, and
to clear those that are dark: That holy man finds no other way of clearing
doubts and difficulties in religion, then by clear texts of the holy
Scriptures. A thousand the like passages might be produced.

This so great a consent of the ancients, has extorted from the most violent
enemies of the perfection and authority of Scripture, notable confessions.

The Jesuit Salmeron told us befores that the Scripture was subject unto the
Church, and that Scripture is a nose of wax, and a Judge incapable to decide
any difference, and that Tradition goes beyond Scripture in excellency;
Nevertheless in the first Prolegomen he speaks thus of Scripture,. nunc jam.
Scriptura tradit omnem veritatem, arcet ab omni vitio, stimulat ad omne opus
bonum, etc.
Scripture teaches all truth, disswadeth from all vices, encourages to all
good works, exhorts to all virtue. And a little after Scriptura sic est a
Spiritu Sancto concinnata atque contexta, ut omnibus locis, temporibus,
personis, difficultatibus, periculis, morbis, malis pellendis, bonis
accersendis, erroribus jugulandis, dogmatibus statuendis, sit accommodata.
Scripture is so formed and woven by the Spirit of God, that it is fitted for
all places, times, persons difficulties, to expel all dangers, sicknesses, and
sorrows; to bring in all good, to cut the throat of errors, to establish
doctrines, to plant virtues, and drive vices away. And he alleges Basil, who
compares it unto a complete Apothecaries shop, affording remedies for healing
all sicknesses.

Bellarmine, who in the first book of the unwritten word, chap. 3. and 4.
denies the Scripture to be sufficient without the traditions, and calls
Scripture a a part or a piece of a rule, not a whole rule; yet maintains the
contrary in the sixth book de amissione gratiae and statu peccati, chap. 3.
Respondeo. Non est de rebus quae pendent a divina voluntate aliquid asserendum,
nisi Deus ipse in Scripturis sanctis tale aliquid revelaverit.
We must not (says he) affirm any thing concerning the things which depend of
the will of God, if God himself has revealed no such thing in the holy
Scriptures. So grew is the strength of truth.

CHHP. 54. The Cardinals reasons for Traditions against the perfection of
Scripture. And first of the Traditions which he calls Mosaical and Patriarchal.
THE Cardinal in the second chapter of the third book brings many unwritten
traditions not contained in the five books of Moses, which nevertheless the
Church was obliged to believe under the Old Testament. The Reader is desired to
remember, that by Traditions, are understood commandments which must be
observed, and doctrines which must be believed, belonging unto salvation and to
the ordinary service of God. Now the Traditions which he brings are Histories
or commandments addressed to some particular person, not to the Church. Such is
the commandment made to Joshuah of carrying the Ark in procession, which the
Cardinal brings for example; for that never was done but once, and was no Law
in the Church. Also the transporting of the Ark from Shiloh into another place.
And the commandment to Solomon of building the Temple, and making another
brazen Altar, and the molten Sea with brazen Bulls, and Cherubims embossed on
the walls and pillars. All that cannot be put among the Traditions which the
Church was to practice. They were particular commands to Solomon, not rules of
religion. And I wonder how the Cardinal would put these things among the
unwritten Traditions; seeing that Josh. 3.8, 9. it is spoken of the bearing of
the Ark, marching before the people, as of a thing commanded by God; As also
the transportation of the Ark from Shiloh to another place is mentioned, Psalm.
78.60. and 67. and Jer. 7.12. as a thing done by the express will of God. And
as for the command to Solomon to build a Temple, it is formal in many places;
especially 1 Kings 5.5. where Solomon speaks thus; Behold I purpose to build a
house unto the name of the Lord my God, as the Lord spoke unto David my Father,
saying, thy Son whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an
house unto my name. Sure, the Cardinal had read Scripture very negligently,
since he knew not these things, and would put them among the unwritten
Traditions.

He does also ask where it is read in the Pentateuch, that God had commanded
the Ark to be adored, as David commands in these words, Worship his footstool:
But that text is falsified. There is according to the Hebrew Worship toward
his footstool; in the same manner as it as said a little after, Worship toward
the mountain of his holiness. The Chaldaick Paraphrasts translate it so, and
Pagninus, and Arias Montanus, and Lyra, famous Translators in the Roman Church.
It was the custom of the Israelites to worship with their face toward the
Temple; This is that which David commands in that text; for by Gods footstool,
his Sanctuary is understood, which for this cause is called the place of his
rest, Psalm. 132.8. The same words are found Psalm. 132.7. where the Vulgar
translates, we shall worship in the place where his feet staid. The Septuagint
have translated (...), not (...).

In the same chapter he brings forth diverse points of doctrine, Page 774,
which he affirms not to be written in the books of the Law, as the
immortality of the soul, the doctrine of the final judgment, of Paradise and
of Hell. One may wonder how this Prelate is so diligent to mark the defects of
Scripture; and it is more to be admired how he has not seen clear proofs of
the immortality of the soul, in the books of Moses.

We have Numb. 23. these words of Balaam, Let me dye the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his. He that acknowledges the death of
the righteous to be happy, acknowledges a happiness after this life. Besides,
what we translate their end, in the Hebrews is their departing. He that calls
death a parting, acknowledges a going to another place.

The Patriarch Jacob was saying, being near his death, I have waited for thy
salvation O Lord, Genesis 49.18. The same Patriarch calls his life, and that of
his Fathers, a pilgrimage on earth, and acknowledges himself a stranger in the
world. Genesis 47.9.
Now the Apostle, Heb. 11.14. says, that they that say such things, declare
plainly that they are seeking a country, their proper country.

Genesis 35.18. It is said of Rachel dying in labor, that as her soul was in
departing, she called her son Benoni. Indeed death should not be a departing of
the soul, if the soul did not outlive the body. And the transportation of
Enoch to heaven is a proof of his immortality. What meant that expression of
death usual among the Ancient, that a man slept with his Fathers, but that
they that sleep are not brought to nothing, and that they look for the awaking
of the resurrection? So God spoke to Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.16. Behold thou shall
sleep with thy Fathers. All the promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
should have been deceitful, if they had concerned their present life only,
since the posterity of Ismael and Esau was in a flourishing state, and reigning
in Arabia and Idumea, while the posterity of Jacob was in bondage in Egypt.
What had Abraham, Isaac and Jacob but affliction according to the world? And
the promise made unto Adam, that the woman's seed should bruise the Serpents
head; and the promise made to Abraham of the blessed seed, are they not
promises of the coming of Jesus Christ, and of the vocation of the Gentiles,
which are spiritual promises that concern salvation? Finally, Christ himself
out of these words of God, Mat. 22.32.
I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, draws this consequence, that
these Patriarchs are living, because God is not the God of the dead but of the
living. If none before Christ drew that consequence (which yet does not appear
to us) it follows not that it should not have been drawn. And if by these
texts the felicity of the Saints is proved, may not one gather thence that the
wicked shall not have the like usage, but that God will judge them after this
life, although the words of Paradise, and Hell of the damned be not found in
the five books of Moses?

The Cardinal goes on, and finds many histories of which no mention is made in
the books of Moses, 2 Timothy 3.
as that the names of the Magicians that resisted Moses were Jannes and
Jambres: That Moses being at the foot of the mountain, said, I exceedingly fear
and quake, etc. But in vain does he heap up histories; for when we say that
Scripture contains all that is necessary to salvation, we understand all the
rules and doctrines necessary to that end, not the names of all the persons,
nor all the histories and circumstances of things happened, of which one may be
ignorant without peril, and without diminution of the doctrine of salvation.

The same I say of many small ceremonies which M. du Perron finds in the New
Testament, as the washing of feet before Easter, and the custom of releasing a
fellon at Easter, and many the like things, which were civil customs, or
indifferent observations, not Laws of religion, or necessary customs. The
Cardinal was grossly mistaken when he put the custom of releasing a malefactor
at Easter among the Traditions of the Church; for it was a wicked custom,
whereby they saved the lives of murderers; of which we have an example in
Barabbas, against the express prohibition of God to spare a murderers life,
Number. 35.31, etc. Yea God will have a murderer plucked off from his very Altar,
Exodus 21.14.

As for the form of blessing used among the Jews before they ate the Passover,
since God had prescribed none, the Jews had the liberty to make one; and that
cannot be put among the Mosaical Traditions, to which the Church was of
necessity subject.

To say with the Cardinal that in the figure of the Manna, and the Paschal lamb
it was necessary to understand that Christ was signified, and that without that
one could not be saved, is a rash affirmation. God forbid that we should
exclude from salvation all the Israelites that understood not the figures of
the Old Testament.

That which the Cardinal adds, that the continual fire which was upon the
Altar was preserved by a miracle during the transmigration, is a Jewish fable.
And it is much more credible, that as many other prerogatives and ornaments of
the first Temple (among others, the Ark and the Oracles) have been wanting to
the second Temple; that also this fire lighted from heaven was not there. But
howsoever this is a story, not a doctrine or a precept. It is easy to prove
that the fire came down from heaven that consumed the sacrifices in the
dedication of Solomon's Temple (as it is related, 2 Chronicles. 7.) was not long
preserved, and was out many years before the destruction of the Temple. For 2 Chronicles. 29.7. King Ahaz shut up the Temple, and 2 Chronicles. 35.4. King Manasseh
sacrificed unto false Gods in the two Courts of the Temple. At that time, Gods
service ceasing, and the Temple being shut up, how could that continual fire
be maintained upon the Altar?

The walking of two thousand paces and no more upon the Sabbath day was a
Jewish superstition, Page 778. Josh. 3.4.
grounded upon that Joshuah crossing Jordan kept the people two thousand cubits
from the Ark; It was not a divine rule, or a necessary Tradition.

In the sixth chapter of the same book the Cardinal says that Jesus Christ
has preached the kingdom of heaven and the resurrection, not contained in the
ancient Law. As for the Kingdom of heaven, we have proved that it is clearly
taught in the books of Moses. And as for the resurrection, we have showed that
Christ proved it by the words of God himself contained in the Law.

He alleges also the mingling of water with blood, Page 803.
for the purifying of the people, Heb. 10. of which no mention is made in the
books of Moses. I answer, that Moses did so once, and made no Law about it in
the Church; and by consequent this ought not to be put among the Traditions,
which we have to do with in this place, namely such as are Laws and Rules of
religion. The same of the putting of a censer in the Ark, and of the combat of
the Angel Michael with Satan for the body of Moses, which are histories not
rules. Here the fault of the Cardinal is pardonable, when he Book 3. chap. 6.
p. 104.
says that Moses fought with the Angel, whereas it was the Angel that fought
with Satan. See the Epistle of Jude, ver. 9. (...).


CHAP. 55. Texts of the New Testament which Cardinal du Perron brings for the
Traditions not contained in the Scripture.
HE brings for the Traditions these proofs from the New Testament. Page 754.
First he makes a show of this text of 2 These. 2.15. Hold the Traditions which
ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle. The word (...) signifies
every doctrine given to some body. The vulgar version 1 Cor. 11.2. translates
(...) praecepta. And the Apostle, Gal. 1.14. says that he had been zealous of
the tradition of his Fathers, calling thus the Law of Moses of which he had
been a zealous abettor. In that sense Scripture it self is a tradition. Thus
the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.23. speaking of the institution of the holy communion, I
received of the Lord (...), that which I delivered or taught you. It is then a
tradition, though it be contained in Scripture.

In this text the most advantageous sense for our Adversaries of this word
Tradition is to take it for doctrines not written in the Epistle of St. Paul to
the Thessalonians, and by consequent this text is not to the purpose. For our
difference is not whether the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, but whether
the Old and the New Testament contain all the doctrines necessary to salvation.
And although the Apostle had said, Receive the traditions which you have
learned by our word, or by the holy Scriptures, it would not follow that the
things which he had told them were any thing else but what is contained in the
holy Scriptures; for one may teach the same thing several ways. Moreover, if
one will know what those traditions or doctrines were, which Saint Paul had
given by word unto the Thessalonians, let him read the fourth chapter of the
first Epistle, beginning at the second verse, where he makes unto them a
repetition of those things: There you shall find none of the Traditions of the
Church of Rome.

In another place the Cardinal repeateth the same objection, then adds; You
must not cavil that St. Paul speaks of the Tradition unwritten at that time,
but written since. For the Tradition after which and for which he pronounces
that general precept, was a Tradition which neither then nor since was ever
written, namely the cause why the coming of Antichrist was delayed.

The Cardinals blindness is extreme, to say that the causes of the delay of the
coming of the Antichrist were never written, whereas they are written in the
same text, 2 These. 2.7.
where the Apostle says, Only he who now lets will let until he be taken
out of the way; And then shall that wicked one be revealed; which the Ancients
understand of the ruin of the Roman Empire, before the Antichrist (who was to
come in his place) should be revealed. Which experience also has confirmed. So
Tertullian understands it in the book of the resurrection of the flesh, chap.
24. Tantum qui nunc tenet teneat, donec de medio fiat, quis nisi Romanus Status
cujus abscessio in december reges dispersa Antichristum superducit?
Only let him that holds now, hold still, until he be abolisht. Who is that
but the Roman Empire, whose departure dispersed into ten Kings will produce
Antichrist, etc. Chrysostom in the fourth Sermon, upon the second Epistle to
the Thessalonians speaks to the same purpose, in these words, (...).
What is it that hinders him to be revealed? Some say that it is the Roman
Empire, to whose opinion I rather incline. Austin in the twentieth book of the
City of God, chap. 19. That which the Apostle says, Only let him that holds
now, hold till he be taken away, is not without reason esteemed to be said of
the Roman Empire, as if it was said, Only let him that reigns, reign until
he be abolisht. Primasius upon this place says the same, and Ambrose in his
Comment upon this text. And Hierom in the eleventh question to Algasia, where
he says that St. Paul durst not say openly that the Roman Empire must be
destroyed before the Antichrist come, for fear of drawing persecution upon the
Church; and upon 2 These. 2. he says that the revolt that St. Paul speaks of in
this place, est discessio Gentilium a Rege Romano, the revolt of the Gentiles
from the Roman Emperor.

The Cardinal brings another text for Traditions; 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the
form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, in faith and love, which is
in Christ Jesus. Keep the good depositum (or that good thing committed unto
thee) by the Holy Ghost. This text does nothing for him; for the Apostle says
not that the things which Timothy had heard of St. Paul were diverse from those
which he writ to him, or which are written in the holy Scripture. It is
remarkable that Tertullian in the twenty fifth chapter of Prescriptions says,
that the heretics alleged these texts for their traditions. O Timothy keep
that which was committed unto thee, and again keep that which was trusted unto
thee. Thus the Cardinal makes himself a disciple to those heretics.

To the same purpose Bellarmin in the fifth chapter of his book of the
unwritten word, alleges for the Traditions our Saviors words, John 16. I
have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now. But
Tertullian in the twenty second chapter of the same book, says, that the
heretics defend their traditions with that text.

To the same purpose the Cardinal brings these words from the second chapter of
the same Epistle, ver. 2. The things that thou have heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who, shall be able to teach
others also. To which text we make the same answer, as to the precedent, Why
will he have the things which Timothy had heard to be diverse from those that
are written? But with what rashness does the Cardinal presuppose without proof
that those things heard in the presence of witnesses, are the invocation of
Saints, the service of Images, the Succession of the Pope in St. Peter's
primacy, and the like things?

He alleges also 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church is the pillar and ground of truth.
That proof has neither color nor likelihood. For the Church is the pillar and
ground of truth, when it defends the truth contained in the holy Scriptures,
not when she adds unto Scripture. Thus Gregory Nazianzen in the beginning of
the Oration upon his Fathers death, calls Basil the pillar and ground of the
Church. And in the Oration upon Athanasius he gives to Athanasius the same
title of honor. Whereby he understands not that Basil or Athanasius had the
power to give new Laws unto the Church, or to add unto her doctrine. I leave
also to the judgment of the Reader, well read in the Greek tongue, whether in
these words, [that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the
house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of
truth] the last words, the pillar and ground of truth, may not be applied unto
God, rather then to the Church; supplying the word (...) and translating thus,
the house of the living God, who is the pillar and ground of truth. For to
speak properly, God and true doctrine are the pillar and ground of the Church.
So speaks Chrysostom upon 1 Timothy 3. (...).
Truth is the pillar and ground of the Church. And Irenaeus, book 3. chap. 11.
Columna and firmamentum Ecclesiae Evangelium.
The pillar and ground of the Church is the Gospel.

CHAP. 56. Doctrines held in the Christian Church, which the Cardinal says are
not contained in Scripture.
BUT that upon which the Cardinal insisteth most, is to seek some doctrines in
Christian religion which he holds necessary unto salvation, which yet are not
found in Scripture. And he finds four of that nature. The first is the
admission or acknowledgement of the Baptism of heretics for a true and real
baptism, of which no mention is made in Scripture, and yet he holds that it is
a doctrine necessary to salvation.

By speaking thus he condemns Cyprian and the whole African Church of his
time to Hell, for they did err in that point. Certainly many were saved that
never heard of that question.

That which he adds [that if the doctrine that both we and they hold in that
point be not true, the Protestants which were baptized by Catholics (whom they
hold for heretics) have no true Baptism] has no strength against us, who
think not that any person is excluded from salvation for not being baptized,
when that happens not through his fault, but by some impediment which could not
be removed. Yet it will be found that Scripture decideth that question; for we
see that the circumcision of the ten tribes, that were idolaters, was received
among the Jews, there being no Law that obliged them to be circumcised again.
Now Circumcision was unto them that which Baptism is unto us now.

The second Tradition which he says is not contained in Scripture, Page 809.
is the Baptism of little children. Upon which he confesses that the Roman
Church disputing against the Anabaptists, brings may texts of Scripture, which
he produces, and endeavors to confute, making himself the Advocate of the
Anabaptists. Yet not daring to condemn his own Church, he holds those texts for
good and useful, which is sufficient to us. For what need we to prove to the
Roman Church by Scripture that children ought to be baptized, since she her
self baptizeth them, and discharges us of that labor?

The third point is the Article of the procession of the Holy Ghost, Page 816.
about which we dissent with the Grecians. Which controversy is rather
imaginary, and fed by the animosity of the parties, then a true controversy.
The Grecians saying that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father through the
Son; and the Latins saying that he proceeds from the Father and the Son. For I
hold that he that says that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father through
the Son, says also by consequent that he proceeds from the Father and the Son.
As for the manner of proceeding, it is better in such a high matter to be
ignorant then too great a disputant. The Cardinal acknowledges that the Roman
Church disputing with the Grecians, alleges texts of Scripture, which texts
he goes about to weaken thereby disputing not with us, but with the Roman
Church. By overthrowing the doctrine of his Church he makes himself incapable
to dispute with us.

The fourth and last unwritten Tradition is the removing of the Sabbath day to
the next day, Page 819.
that is, from the last day of the week to the first; Of which he says that no
mention is made in Scripture. The Jesuit Ribera in his Comment upon the first
chapter of the Revelation, expounding these words, I was in the Spirit on the
Lords day, speaks thus, Here we see that the solemnity of the Sabbath has been
changed to the [now] Lords day in the time of the Apostles.

Thomas says the same in the second lesson upon 1 Cor. 16. And Estius upon the
same Chapter of the alleged text of the Revelation gathers, that we must not
doubt but that the name and institution of the Lords day must be referred to
the Apostles. And as for not observing the old Sabbath, St. Paul dispenses
Christians of that observation, Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meat or in
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath day,
which are a shadow of things to come. He teaches that Christians ought not to
be condemned for observing no more the Jewish distinctions of meats, or the
holy days and Sabbaths of that Church. By Acts 20.6. and 1 Cor. 16.2. it is
made evident that on the first day of the week solemn Assemblies did meet, and
collections were made for the poor. And though all these proofs should fail,
yet observation of days is no point of doctrine, and is not an Article of its
nature necessary to salvation. It is necessary for salvation to sanctify the
Lords day, and to be employed that day in holy actions in holy Assemblies, not
because that day is of its nature better then another, but because it is
necessary for salvation, not to be contentious, and not to separate from the
union of the Church.

Then of these four points, as of many others, I say that either they are found
in Scripture in express or equivalent terms, or by good consequence, or they
are not found in Scripture. If they be found, we have what we ask; If they be
not found, they are not necessary to salvation.

CHAP. 57. Of the Traditions which the Fathers allow.
WE have brought many testimonies of the Ancients, wherein, as for matter of
salvation, they reject all doctrines not contained in the Scriptures. To those
texts the Cardinal opposes other texts, of Tertullian, of Basil, of
Epiphanius, of Austin, in which they approve unwritten traditions. But who so
will narrowly examine of what kind of traditions they speak, shall find no
difficulty in that seeming difference. For either they are traditions about
Ecclesiastical policy and things of indifferent nature, or they are traditions
grounded upon holy Scripture; For they ate traditions which the Roman Church
approves not, and which consequently by the confession of our Adversaries are
not Apostolical traditions, unless they will confess that they are departed
from the Ordinances of the Apostles. See Tertullian in his book de corona
Militis, chap. 2. and 3. And the book concerning the Holy Ghost attributed to
Basil, chap. 27. And Nam and multa alia quae per traditionem in Ecclesia
observantur, etc. Velut in Baptismo ter caput mergere, lactis and mellis
praegustare concordiam. See also the Epistle to Lucian.
Hierom in his Dialogue against the Luciferians; And Austin Epist. 118, 119.
There you have a great list of unwritten traditions; as to be dipped three times
in Baptism, to taste in Baptism milk and honey mingled in sign of concord; Not
to wash that day nor the whole week after; to sign ones self in the forehead
with the sign of the cross at every action, to pray standing from Easter to
Whitsunday, to celebrate on certain anniversary days the passion, the
resurrection, and the ascension of Christ: To pray with the face turned
Eastward, the anointing with oil, the form of prayer whereby consecration is
made: To which one may add, prayers for the dead, the admission of the Baptism
of heretics; And the tradition of which Tertullian speaks in the alleged
place, that it is not lawful for a Christian soldier to be crowned with
flowers and leaves, when the army is mustering. Of which traditions some are
contrary to the custom of the Apostles, as the custom of not kneeling at
prayers from Easter to Whitsunday. For Acts 20.16. and 21.5. the Apostle Paul
prays kneeling, and that a few days before Pentecost.

Most of these traditions are rejected by the Roman Church, although the
Ancients give them for Apostolical as the custom of fasting upon Wednesdayes
and Fridayes, which Epiphanius in the heresy of Aerius Epiphan. heresi 75.
(...).
will derive from the Apostles. The custom of tasting milk and honey. Not to
wash for a whole week after Baptism. Not to fast upon the Lords day. To pray
standing from Easter to Whitsunday. Never to pray but being turned Eastward. To
pray for the dead as the ancient Church did, which prayed not to fetch souls
out of Purgatory, but that the dead might rise again to salvation, or that they
might rise betimes, or that they might be but gently touched with the purging
fire of the day of the resurrection; or that in the receptacles of the souls
where they slept, they might reeive some comfort.

Chrysostom Hom. 4. upon the second Epistle to the Thessalonians seems to
favor our Adversaries, saying that the Apostles have not taught all by
Epistles, but have taught many things without writing, and that these things as
well as those are worthy to be believed. But in the homily before, he shows
evidently that he means unwritten traditions not necessary to salvation. For
as for things necessary to salvation so he speaks, (...).
All that is in the divine Scriptures is clear and right; All things that are
necessary are therein clearly set down. And Hom. 13. upon the second Epistle to
the Corinthians, he calls Scripture (...).
an exact balance for all things, a square and a rule. And upon Psalm 95. When
one says that which is not written, the hearers mind is halting.

Besides these traditions which the Roman Church has left, the Fathers speak
of traditions that are founded in Scripture, although they be not found in
express terms. As the tradition which Basil brings in the same place, that the
Father and the Son must be glorified with the same glorification. For since
Scripture says that Jesus Christ is God, and that he thinks it not robbery to
be equal with God his Father, and that he is one with the Father, it follows
that the same glorification must be rendered unto him. Upon which we have an
express text, John 5.23. That they all honor the Son as they honor the Father.

Irenaeus in the third book, chap. 4. says, that if the Apostles had not left
us the Scriptures, we should have recourse to tradition. But what is that
tradition? Is it the invocation of Saints, the worshipping of images and
relics, the succession of the Roman Bishop in St. Peter's primacy, the
Communion under one kind, the celibat of the Clergy, the service in an unknown
tongue, the Roman Indulgences, the Transubstantiation? Nothing of all that; but
the doctrine concerning the nature and Office of Christ, and the Articles of
the Symbol, of which he makes an enumeration in the same place.

As for the admission of the Baptism of heretics, Austin puts it among
traditions. And yet in the first book of Baptism against the Donatists; and in
the second book, chap. 14. And in the fourth book, chap. 7. And in the fifth
book chap. 4. and 23. he endeavors to prove it by texts of Scripture, which he
says to be certain and clear. Whence it appears that by the unwritten things,
he understands the things not contained in the holy Scriptures in express
terms, but deduced from the Scriptures by consequence. And indeed we have
showed before that the admission of the Baptism of heretics is not without
foundation in Scripture. And though it were not grounded upon it, that would
not prejudice us in any thing; for the knowledge of that point is not necessary
for salvation. Hierom upon 2 These. 2. (if these comments be his, not of
Pelagius) puts Baptism among the Apostolical traditions. Apostolica traditio
est quae in toto mundo praedicatur, ut Baptismi Sacramenta. It is an
Apostolical tradition which is preached over all the world.

In general, almost all these traditions are either light things, of their
nature indifferent, and infinitely under the divine doctrine concerning faith
and the service of God contained in the Scripture; or they are points contained
in the Scripture, if not in express words, at least in equivalent terms, or by
necessary consequence.

Note, that M. du Perron could not bring any testimony of the Ancients which
put among Traditions any of the doctrines about which we dissent with the Roman
Church, excepting only prayers for the dead, about which the Roman Church
dissents with the Anctient Church, as we will show hereafter. But they shall
not find one of the Ancients that puts among the Apostolical traditions, Roman
Indulgences, or the Popes power to release souls out of Purgatory, and to give
and take away Kingdoms, and to canonize Saints, or the adoration of images, or
the images of the Trinity, or the title of Queen of heaven bestowed upon the
Virgin Mary, or the Limbus of infants, or the celibat of Priests, or prayers in
a language which he that prays understands not, or the public service in an
unknown language, or the prohibition made to the people to read Scripture
without an especial leave, or the communion of the cup denied to the people:
for they are Papal not Apostolical traditions.

We must not dissemble that Austin in the one hundred and nineteenth Epistle
complains that already in his time humane traditions did multiply, and were
often preferred before the word of God. That (says he) grieveth me much that
many most wholesome precepts of divine books are neglected, and that all is
full of so many presumptions; So that he is more sharply reproved that trod
barefoot within the octave, then he that has buried his understanding in
drunkenness. He adds, That men had so laden religion with servile burdens,
that the condition of the Jews was more tolerable then that of Christians.

Iren. l. 2. c. 62. and l. 5. c. 5. and l. 4. c. 30. and l. 5. c. 12, 14. and
35.
Wherefore the Roman Church has rejected with just reason the traditions
believed by Irenaeus, who believed that the souls separate from the bodies have
hands and feet; and that the souls coming out of their bodies go not into the
heavenly glory, but into an earthly Paradise; And that the Fathers before the
publishing of the Law by Moses were without Law: And that Christ must reign a
thousand years in earth: In which reign there will be feasts and bodily
delights; and the traditions of Clemens Alexandrinus who believed that the
Grecians were saved by Philosophy. That there is in God four hypostases. That
the Angels fell by cohabitation with women. That the death of Christ no more
then our afflictions, happened not by Gods will, and many the like traditions.
And that of Ambrose and Tertullian, who hold that some shall rise again sooner
then others. And the tradition held by the Ancients that souls shall be purged
by the fire of the day of judgment, of which we shall speak hereafter.

CHAP. 58. Of the prohibition of reading holy Scripture. Shifts of Cardinal du
Perron.
IT is one of the accusations of his Majesty of Great Britain against the
Church of Rome, that they have deprived Christians of the understanding of the
holy Scripture, and forbidden the reading of it unto the simple people. This Du
Perro in the last book, chapter 4. p. 1095, etc
the Cardinal does not absolutely confess; for he denies that it is forbidden
to the people to read the Bible in Hebrew, or Greek, or Latin, that is, that
the simple people are not allowed to read the Bible, but in the tongues which
they understand not. They give leave to women and tradesmen to read the Hebrew
Bible. He says also that they forbid only the reading of corrupt and not
approved versions. Thereby he seems to mean that the Roman Cuhrch gives leave
unto the people to read the good and approved versions. But there is no such
thing. For the Roman Church approves no version in any vulgar tongue, and
there is none allowed by public authority. If any private man has translated
the Bible into French as Rene Benoist Parson of St. Eustache in Paris, his work
has been presently censured and condemned by the Popes authority, as M. du
Perron acknowledges, page 1103.

But this matter deserves a careful examination: for it is a new tyranny, and
a custom without example in all antiquity.

It must be known then that in the Council of Trent, Prelates and Doctors in
good number were appointed to make an Index or Catalogue of books, the reading
whereof ought to be prohibited. That Index has been published by the authority
of Pope Pius the IV. and confirmed and augmented by Sixtus the V. and Clement
the VIII.

Their first prohibition begins at the holy Scripture; of which they say in the
fourth rule prefixed before that Index, that Index libror. prohibitorum cum
Regulis confectis per patres a Synodo Tridentina delectos Regula IV. Cum
experimento manifestum sit si Biblia vulgari lingua passim sine discrimine
permittantur, plus inde ob hominum temeritatem detrimenti quam utilitatis
oriri, hac in part, judicio Episcopi vel inquisitoris stetur ut cum consilio
Parochi vel Consessarii bibliorum a Catholicis authoribus versorum lectionem in
lingua vulgari concedere possint, etc.
the reading thereof in the vulgar language being indifferently allowed, does
more harm then profit, by reason of the rashness of men. Wherefore they forbid
the traductions of the Bible made by Authors which are not Catholic. And as
for the versions made by Authors that are Catholic and approved, they permit
the reading of them, so that one get a written permission from the Bishop, or
from the Inquisition, or from the Parson; Qui ubique tali facultate ea legere
vel habere praesumpserit, nisi prius Bibliis ordinario redditis, peccatorum
absolutionem percipere non possit.
Adding, that who so without that permission will have a Bible, or read in it,
his sins shall not be forgiven him, till he has delivered his Bible to his
Parson. Whereupon it is to be observed, that when this Decree was made, there
was not any version of the Bible in Italian, or Spanish, or French, or German,
that was approved in the Roman Church. And that since that time the Pope caused
no version to be made in any vulgar tongue. It is known that in all the
Countries where the Inquisition reigns, there is none to be found. To permit
the reading of the Bible translated into the vulgar tongue by Catholic
Authors, and in the mean while to give leave to none to translate it, is it not
an abusive permission? For it is giving leave to the people to read a book
which is no where to be found, and permitting that the people read the approved
versions, while they approve of no version.

Nevertheless the Popes were afraid that some would think that this permission
was given in good earnest. Wherefore to that fourth rule they have added
another, that speaks more roundly, and absolutely forbids the reading of
Scripture in the vulgar tongue. That prohibition is set down in the same book
immediately after the forementioned rule. Thus Animadvertendum est circa supra
scriptam quartam regulam felicis recordationis Pii Papae IV. nullam per hanc
impressionem aut editionem de novo tribus facultatum Episcopis vel
Inquisitoribus vel Regularium superioribus, concedendi licentiam emendi,
legendi, aut retinendi Biblia vulgari lingua editarum hactenus mandato and usu
sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, and universalis Inquisitionis sublata eis fuerit
facultas concedendi hujusmodi licentiam legendi vel retinendi Biblia vulgaria,
aut alias sacrae Scripturae, tam Novi quam Veteris Testamenti parts, quavis
vulgari lingua editas, etc.
It must be observed concerning the IV. Rule above written, made by Pope Pius
IV. of blessed memory, that by this impression or edition no new power is given
to Bishops or Inquisitors, or Superiors of the Regulars, to give permission to
buy, read, or keep the Bible in the vulgar tongue, seeing that hitherto by the
commandment and use of the holy Roman Church, and universal inquisition, power
is taken from them to grant such permissions of reading or keeping such vulgar
Bibles, or some parts of the holy Scriptures, either of the Old or of the New
Testament, printed in any vulgar language whatsoever. Or even any Summary or
abridgement of the histories of the Bible, or of the books of the holy
Scripture, written in any vulgar language whatsoever. This to be inviolably
kept.

Nothing can be more express then that prohibition. Wherefore in the Countries
where Inquisition reigns, as in Spain, Italy, Sicily, Corsica, the East and
West Indies, one shall as soon find an Alcoran as a Bible in the language of
the country, unless some have secretly brought in a Bible from England, or
Netherlands, or Geneva, which is a crime punishable by the fire if it be
discoverd. But all kinds of unchaste and profane books are impunedly read. No
book forbidden but the word of God.

But Gods command is more regarded by us then that prohibition; for he
recommendeth to the faithful the reading of his word, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he
that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy. And Deuteronomy. 17.18,
19. Kings are commanded to have the book of the Law in their hand, to read in
it all the days of their lives. Which command, if the Kings that reigned since
seven or eight hundred years had kept, their crowns should not have been
subjected to an outlandish Priest, and Popery had not so disfigured Christian
Religion. Because in the Church of Thessalonica there might be some that could
not read, the Apostle commands that his Epistle be read to all the holy
brethren, 1 These. 5.27. He praises Timothy, (2 Timothy 3.15.) that from a child
he had known the holy Scriptures. And the Eunuch of the Queen of Candace was
reading in his charet the Prophet Isaiah, Acts 8.28. The faithful people of
Berea, (Acts 17.10, 11.) having heard St. Paul's preaching, searched the
Scriptures daily whether those things were so. For a Preacher that would
deceive and seduce the people, should have fair play if he were allowed to
allege Scripture in his Sermons, and the people were not allowed to consult
Scripture and confer the text, to see whether the Preacher had faithfully
alleged them.

This also is very considerable, that the Apostle St. Paul writ long Epistles
to the people of Corinth, of Ephesus, of Philippi, etc. not fearing that the
reading of them should do harm to those he writ them to. And St. Peter, and St.
John have written Catholic Epistles to all the faithful, and by consequent to
those of this time. Why then should they not read the Epistles written to them?
Why should not the things which God says unto his people, be read by the
people to which God is speaking? And whereas they that instruct the people are
sinful men, apt to draw religion to their profit, shall the people have no way
to know whether they be taught the truth? Why shall God be suspected by men, as
if his word were a dangerous book, doing more harm then good, as the Tridentine
Fathers speak?

The reason given for this is full of impiety. They say that it belongs to none
but the learned to read Scripture. Now we thought that Scripture must be read
to get learning. But these men will have a learning in Religion without
Scripture, and before the knowledge of Scripture. Whereupon we would gladly
know of them what kind of learning one must have before he can read the holy
Scripture. Must one be learned in Greek and Hebrew? But the Popes themselves
that give these rules, are unskilful in these tongues; As Innocent the III.
who deriveth Innoc. III. Sermon. 1. in Conc. Lateran. Tom. IV. Council. genesis
the word Pascha from the passion; And the Decretal of Anacletus, who says
that Cephas signifies a head. Besides, one cannot become learned in Hebrew, but
by the reading of the Old Testament. Must one have read the Poets full of
fabulous combats and amorous passions? But many are corrupted by those studies.
Must one be versed in Philosophy? But the Apostles had not studied that kind of
learning, and Philosophers have been mortal enemies to Christian religion.
They were the men that called St. Paul a babbler. What then can that learning be
which is requisite before the reading of Scripture? I know none, unless it be
that one must be strongly forestalled with Popery as a preservative against the
doctrine contained in the Scripture. But a man that believes that the Roman
Church cannot err, shall believe also that Scripture is not a competent Judge,
and that the reading thereof is not necessary. And in vain should he ask
license to read Scripture in the vulgar tongue; since no Bible is found allowed
by the Roman Church in the language of the country.

To excuse that prohibition, they allege also the rashness of men that abuse
Scripture. But because of the indiscretion of some men we must not abstain from
good things, such especially as God has commanded. By the same reason the word
of God should not be preached to the people because many abuse it. And the
Bishops and Parish Priests to whom that lecture is permitted, are no more
exempt from rashness then the rest of the world; For in effect all heresies are
sprung not from the people, but from the Pastors. Few examples or none shall be
found of any of the people who by reading Scripture have brought in any heresy
into the Church.

But this is not the true reason of that prohibition. For if the holy Scripture
were favorable unto the Roman Church, they would not hide it from the peoples
eyes. Such as find themselves guilty, are afraid of the Law, and wish that
there were none. Thieves will blow out the candles for fear of being perceived.
To the same end, to weaken the strength of this Scripture, they have forged
another unwritten word more favorable unto the Pope, of which the Pope
disposes at his pleasure. To the same end, the Roman Church bears her self
as an infallible Judge of the sense of Scripture. By that means she shall never
be condemned by Scripture.

As for that frandulent permission to read Scripture, so that the version be
made by Roman Catholics, the Popes had just reason to revoke and disannull it.
For it is a manifest impiety to give a man leave to do that which God has
commanded him; as if the Pope said to one, I give thee leave to obey God, or I
permit thee to believe in Jesus Christ. By that account God shall not be obeyed
unless the Pope consent to it, and cannot be served without leave. Or if he
have the luck to find some servants, he shall be obliged for it to his Papal
holiness. Certainly to command disobedience unto God, is a less evil then to
permit obedience to his commandments. For he that commands that God be
disobeyed; does not only oppose himself unto God and contradict him, but he
places himself above God, and grants to him, as to an inferior, that some
persons may yield him obedience.

Upon this his Majesty had said that the Ancients did constrain every one to
read at home continually the sacred books, which the people is now forbidden to
touch without especial leave, upon pain of Anathema. The Cardinal omitting all
the rest of the Fathers, answers for Chrysostom only, who many times exhorts
his hearers to the reading the holy Scriptures, and says that Chysostom did so
because he had to do with learned hearers, skilled in Philosophy, and with
Courtiers whom by the reading of Scripture he labored to turn away from the
reading of Philosophers: But if he had brought the very texts of Chrysostom, it
had been evident that he made that exhortation to tradesmen, and to the lowest
and most ignorant of the people.

In the third Homily concerning Lazarus, he speaks thus, I do exhort you
always, and never give over exhorting, that not only you hearken to that I
say, but also that when you are at home you diligently tend the reading of the
holy Scriptures; A duty which I have not ceased to press upon those that have
resorted to me in private. For one must not tell me, There is but little savor
in these words, and we may well be without many of these things: I am tied to
my law businesses, I have my hands full with the affairs of the public. I have
my trade, I have a wife, I must provide meat for my children, I must take care
of my family, I am employed in the world, and therefore it belongs not to me to
read the Scriptures, but to those that have taken their leave of the world,
that dwell in the top of mountains, leading an austere life. What say thou
man? Must thou not peruse the Scriptures because thou art distracted with many
businesses? Nay, it belongs more to thee to read the Scriptures then to those
[that have left the world] For they need not so much the help of Scripture, as
you that are tossed among the waves of businesses, etc. Again, It is
impossible, yea, I say impossible for any man to obtain salvation, unless he be
perpetually employed in the spiritual reading. And a little after, The grace of
the Spirit has so dispensed and fitted the Scriptures, that publicans,
fishermen, tent-makers, Pastors and Apostles, ignorant and unlettered men can
be saved by these books; least that some idiot excuse himself about the
difficulty; to the end that the things herein said might be easy to perceive,
and that the tradesman, the servant, the widow, and the most unlearned of men
may get some profit by the hearing of that lecture. The like things he says,
in his second Homily upon St. Matthew, and in the third upon the second Epistle
to the Thessalonians. Perron p. 1056.
This discourse is very far from the opinion of Sixtus of Siena, a Carmelite
Friar, in the sixth book of his Library, in the 152. annotation, where he says
that to permit the reading of Scripture unto Shoomakers, Fullers and Curriers,
is giving holy things unto dogs, and pearls to swine.

Because the Cardinal by this answer endeavors to persuade that none but
Chrysostom speaks so, and that other Fathers, Hierom especially, speak to the
contrary, let us see what Hierom and the other Fathers say.

Hierom then in the Epitaph of Fabiola speaks thus of that holy woman; Jesu
Bone, quo illa fervore, quo studio intenta erat divinis voluminibus!
O good Jesu! with what fervor, with what study was she bent upon the divine
books; as desirous to satiate her hunger with the Prophets, the Gospels, and
the Psalms! And in the Epistle to Salvina Semper in manibus tuis sit divina
lectio.
Let the sacred lecture be always in thy hands. And in the Epistle to Furia
Post Scripturas sanctas, doctorum hominum tractatus lege.
After the holy Scriptures, read the Treatises of learned men. Himself in the
Epistle to Laeta touching the Instruction of her daughter Paula, Instead of
jewels and silk, let her love the divine books; loving in them not the
checkered picture of Babylonian leather, but the learnedly correct and distinct
Scripture. Let her first learn the Psalms. Let her recreate her self with the
Canticles. Let her learn to live well in the Proverbs of Solomon. Let her learn
to tread worldly things under by the Ecclesiastes. Let her follow the examples
of virtue and patience in Job. Thence let her pass to the Gospels, and have
them in her hands always. Let her learn the Prophets by heart: Let her abstain
from all the Apocrypha.

Athanas. Tomo 2. page 248. Edit Paris.
Athanasius disputing against those that held it the safer course to abstain
from the Scriptures, and simply to believe, speaks thus, Shall I neglect the
Scriptures? Whence then shall I get knowledge? But by what means shall I have
faith? And soon after, Reverence that studious Eunuch who being set over the
Queens treasure, even in his way did not leave reading.

In the Epistle to the Virgin Demetrias, which was set the one hundred forty
second among Austins Epistles, chap. 23. Ita Scripturas sanctas lege, ut semper
memineris Dei illa verba esse.
So read the holy Scripture, that thou remember always that they are the words
of God.

Austin in the sixth book of his Confessions, chap. 5. Authoritas quae and
omnibus ad legendum esset in promptu, et secreti sui dignitatem in intellectu
profundo servaret.
That (says he) Scripture might be easy to he read of all, and yet should
keep in a deep intelligence the dignity of her secrets, etc. And in the second
book of Christian doctrine, chap. 9. In these books they that fear God and the
meek seek the will of God. Yea he advises them that cannot read, to learn them
by heart.

Gregory Nazianzen in the Epitaph of his sister Gorgonia, puts among her
virtues, (...), that she acquainted her self with the word of God and turned it
over.

Athan. Tom. 2. 148. (...).
Athanasius says that heretics turn the people away from the Scriptures,
saying that they are not accessible, but (says he) the truth is, they fly to
be condemned by them.

Wherefore also the holy Scripture was translated in all languages. Socrates
lib. 4. cap. 27. And Nicephorus lib. 11. cap. 48. does witness that Vlfilas had
translated Scripture in Gothic language. And Hierome in his Preface upon the
four Gospels says, that before the time of Lucian and Hesychius Multarum
gentium linguis Scriptura translata.
Scripture had been translated into the languages of many Nations. And
Chrysostom in the first Homily upon St. John's Gospel says, that Syrians,
Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Ethiopians, and many other Nations had St. John's
Gospel translated in their languages Sixtus Sen. l. 6. An. 152.
. The same Father has translated the New Testament and the Psalms in Armenian
language. Hierome has translated the whole Scripture in the Dalmatick tongue.
Theodoret Sermon. 5. de natura hominis. (...).
in his book of the cure of the sicknesses of the Grecians, speaks thus; The
Hebrew language (so he calls the old Testament) is not only translated into
Greek, but also into the tongues of the Romans and Egyptians, and Persians, and
Indians, and Armenians, and Scythians, and Sarmates; in a word, in all the
languages, which all the Nations continue to use. At that time they did not put
the holy Scripture in the Index of the prohibited books: For they had not
translated it into all languages, but that all Nations, even the most barbarous
should read it: and they that read it, asked leave of no body, there being then
no Inquisition set up, nor any penalty against those that labor to instruct
themselves in Gods knowledge by his word.

In all this the end of the Pope is to keep the people in ignorance, whilst he
builds up his Empire. To the same end the Council of Trent, Con. Trid. Sess. 4.
Sacrosancta Synodus statuit and declarat ut haec ipsa vetus and vulgata editio
etc. pro authentica habeatur, and ut eam nemo quovis praetextu rejicere audeat
aut praesumat.
of all the Latin versions approves none, but that which is commonly called
the Vulgar; and they will have it authentical, with prohibition to contradict
it under any pretense whatsoever. For this serves for the raising of the
Empire of the Latin Church, to establish that Bible alone which the Roman
Church uses in the public service. This they do against the authority of all
the Latin Fathers that have written of that matter. Hilary upon Psalm. 118.
Littera Lamed frequenter admonuimus non posse satisfactionem intelligentiae ex
Latinitatis translatione praestari.
We have often given warning, that no sense which may give satisfaction, can be
drawn from the Latin version.

Hierome in his Epistle to Sunia and Fretella In Novo Testamento si quando apud
Latinos quaestio exoritur, and est inter exemplaria varietas, recurrimus ad
fontem Graeci sermonis quo novum scriptum est Testamentum.
. In the New Testament, if sometimes there is any question and variety found in
the Latin copies, we have recourse to the spring, even to the Greek language in
which the New Testament was written. And in his Preface to Damasus upon the
four Gospels Si Latinis exemplaribus fides est adhibenda, respondeant quibus?
tot enim pene sunt exemplaria, quot codices; sin autem veritas est quaerenda de
pluribus, cur non ad Graecam originem revertentes quae a vitiosis interpretibus
male sunt reddita corrigimus?
. If we must believe the Latin copies, let them answer me which? for there are
wellnigh as many diverse exemplaries as there are copies. But if among many
copies we must seek which of them is the true one; why do we not correct the
things that have been ill translated by faulty interpreters, returning to the
Greek originals? And in the Epistle to Lucinius Ut enim veterum fides de
Hebraeis voluminibus examinanda est, ita novorum Graeci sermonis normam
desiderat.
As the purity of the books of the Old Testament must be examined by the Hebrew
books, so the purity of the books of the New Testament must be examined upon
the rule of the Greek text. The same he says in his Preface upon Joshuah, and
in the Epistle to Marcella.

Austin in the second book of Christian doctrine, chapter 11 Latinae linguae
homines duabus aliis ad Scripturarum divinarum cognitionem habent opus, Hebraea
scilicer and Graeca, ut ad pracedentia exemplaria recurratur, si quam
dubitationem attulerit Latinorum interpretum infinita varietas.
Men whose natural language is Latin, have need of two other tongues for the
knowledge of the holy Scripture, the Hebrew and the Greek, that they may have
recourse to the precedent [Hebrew and Greek] copies, when the infinite variety
of the Latin interpreters brings some doubt.

It would be an infinite thing to produce the faults of the Latin vulgar
version, the only approved by the Council of Trent. Sixtus Senensis
Library Keeper to Pope Pius the fifth, does freely acknowledge it, saying,
Vulgata nostra editio quae Hieronymi esse dicitur, in multis a Graeca veritate
distat.
Our vulgar Edition which they say to be of St. Hierome, is remote from the
Greek truth in many things. And shortly after; Although this Edition be not of
Hierome, and that many things that are there, agree not with the truth of the
Greek text, etc. In the same place he maintains, that the Latin version of the
Roman Church is not of Hierome, but a mingled version. The Jesuit Maldonat
upon Luke 16. says the same. The Novum Testamentum ab Hieronymo conversum non
esse, sed veterem tantum versionem multis in locis emendatam.
New Testament was not translated by Hierome, but only the old version has
been corrected by him in many places. And Hierome himself says the same in his
Preface to Damasus: that he does not own it, nor greatly approve it, he shows
in his works, where he alleges many texts out of the Old Testament, otherwise
then they are found this day in the vulgar version: And which is more, he
disputes against it. For example, Heb. 11.21. the vulgar version which they say
to be of St. Hierome, translates thus, Jacob adoravit fastigium virgae ejus,
Jacob adored the end of Joseph his staff. A text which our adversaries use to
maintain the adoration of creatures. But Hierome rejects that version in the
book of the Hebrew questions upon Genesis, in these words, Israel worshipped
the end of his staff. Et adoravit Israel contra summitatem virgae ejus: and in
hoc loco quidam frustra suadent adorasse Jacob summitatem sceptri Joseph, quod
videlicet honorans filium, potestatem ejus adoraverit, cum in Hebraeo multo
aliter legatur, Et adoravit (inquit) Israel ad caput lectuli.
In that place some do in vain make the world believe that Jacob worshipped the
end of Joseph's scepter, as if by honoring his son he had adored his power;
whereas in the Hebrew text it is read quite otherwise, namely that Israel
worshipped toward his beds head.

Nevertheless the Council of Trent preferrs the Vulgar version full of
corruptions and depravations, before all other translations made after the
Hebrew verity (such as is among others, that of Pagninus a friar of Luca) and
by consequent before the Hebrew and Greek Originals. Of which it seems that the
Popes, Sixtus the fifth and Clement the eighth were ashamed, having since the
Council of Trent published an edition of that Vulgar version where many things
are altered, and many faults corrected.

But Bellarmine is so rashly bold, as to offer to prefer the Latin version
before the Greek and Latin Originals: as if one would make us forsake the
source and send us to the myrie brook. Cardinal Ximenes Archbishop of Toledo
does worse. For in his prologue upon the Bible of Complute, he gives a reason
why he put the vulgar version between the Greek and the Hebrew texts. Mediam
autem inter has Latinam beati Hieronymi translationem velut inter Synagogam and
Orientalem Ecclesiam posuimus, tanquam duos hinc and inde latrones, medium
autem Jesum, hoc est Romanam Ecclesiam.
We have (says he) put between both the Latin version of St. Hierome, as
holding the middle between the Synagogue and the Eastern Church; like the two
thieves, the one on the one side and the other on the other, and Jesus Christ
between both; that is the Roman Church, for she alone is built upon the stone.

Thus that venerable Prelate revileth and debaseth the Original texts of
Scripture, comparing them to two thieves, and blaspheming against the holy
Ghost, who has spoken both in the Hebrew and in the Greek tongue, by the mouth
of his Prophets and Apostles, and has inspired them to write in those
languages. As for the Latin version which that Cardinal compares to Jesus
Christ placed between two thieves, among a thousand corruptions it has no
good, but that wherein it is conformable with the Greek and Hebrew Originals,
upon which it has or ought to have been translated.

Out of all this it appears that the Roman Church forbidding the people to
read the holy Scripture, opposes Scripture, since Scripture it self
recommendeth the reading of the same; and likewise opposes the consent of all
the Fathers, who are all of one mind in this point, to recommend the reading of
Scripture unto all, even unto the least of the people. The evidence of this
truth fetches from the Jesuit Salmeron these words of anger against the Popes
that have forbidden the reading of Scripture; Salmeron Prolog. 7.. Praeterea.
Et qui a sacris arcet libris, in quibus leges Dei sunt conscriptae, exleges and
filios Belial facit homines.
Wherefore has not David chosen another rule to conduct his life then
Scripture? Thy word, says he, is a lamp unto my feet and a light unto my path:
And whosoever hinders men to read the sacred books where the laws of God are
written, exempteth them from all law, and makes them children of the Devil. And
why should he commend the Thessalonians that perused the Scriptures and searched
them every day (Act. 17.) if things went so?

The ordinary excuse is, that Scripture is dark, and that the ignorant might be
seduced by it. But they that speak so, not only accuse Scripture of obscurity,
but of untruth also. For Scripture bears witness to it self, that it is clear
and made to give light to the understanding, Psalm. 19. The commandment of the
Lord is pure inlightning the eyes, and Psalm. 119. 2 Pet. 1.19.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light unto my path. The books of the
Prophets are of all Scripture the most obscure, yet St. Peter says that they
are like a light shining in a dark place. They accuse then Scripture of
untruth, when they accuse it of darkness; and together cast a great reproach
upon God, as if he had dug a pit to make men fall into it in the dark, and
hidden the doctrine of salvation under obscure terms to lead men into error;
like one that makes his will in ambiguous terms, purposely to sow strife among
his heirs. Should the Father of light study obscurity? He that gave his Son to
save his enemies, should he be envious of the salvation of his children? If
Scripture must be forbidden to the people least they fall into heresy; by the
same, yea by stronger reason it ought to be forbidden to Bishops and Priests,
since from them, not from the people, all sorts of heresies are come: Read the
Catalogues of ancient heretics made by Epiphanius, Philastrius, Theodoret,
Austin, etc. you shall find, that almost all the heresiarches were Clergymen,
and having charge in the Church. And if reading Scripture be for none but the
learned, none ought to read it, because none can be learned before he has read
it.

For these causes it belongs to those that accuse Scripture of obscurity, to
look to themselves, Note.
least that the obscurity wherewith they charge Scripture be found in their
understanding, and this sentence of the Apostle belong to them, (2 Cor. 4.3.)
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds. So the distracted maid of Seneca's wife being
smitten with sudden blindness, complained that the air was dark. Men will cast
their defects upon God himself, and are ingenuous in finding blocks to stumble
at.

But it is no wonder that our adversaries find Scripture dark, since they
cannot find in it what they would find. For one has need to have piercing eyes
and a reaching wit, that will find in Scripture a commandment for sacrificing
the body of Christ in the Mass, or the Invocation of Saints, or the Veneration
of Images and Relics, or the Popes succession in St. Peter's primacy, or his
power over the temporal, and the very crowns of Kings, or the Roman
indulgences. There is no doubt, but that these Gentlemen desire that Scripture
were a thousand times darker, that none might find in it their condemnation.

The Fathers are so far from that language, that Origin disputing against
Celsus a Pagan, and Theodoret writing of the sicknesses of the Grecians, that
is, of the Pagans, defend Scripture against this reproach of the Pagans, that
it is written in a style too simple and too familiar. The same Fathers also
generally commend the perspicuity and evidence of the holy Scriptures.

Irenaeus in the second book, chapter 46. Irenaeus. Universae Scripturae
Propheticae et Evangelicae in aperto, ut sine ambiguitate and similiter ab
omnibus audiri possint.
All the Prophetical and Evangelical Scriptures are open and without ambiguity,
and may be heard of all alike. Tertullian calls heretics lucifugas
Scripturarum, people that fly from the light of the Scriptures. The Emperor
Constantine Theodoret l. 1. hist. c. 7. (...).
in the Council of Nice was saying, The Evangelical and the Apostolical books,
and the Oracles of the Prophets teach us openly what we must believe of the
divine things. Austin 9. chapter of the second book of Christian doctrine, says
much to the same purpose; In the things which are clearly set down in
Scripture, all things are found that concern faith and manners to live well.
Epiphanius, in the heresy 69. and 76. (...).
All things are clear in the holy Scriptures to them who with a pious reason
will draw near the word of God. And Chrysostom told us above, that Scripture
is easy to be understood even by tradesmen and ignorant men.

To the objection that it cannot be denied, but that there are some dark texts
in Scripture, these Fathers answer that Scripture expounds her self; and that
such things as are obscurely spoken in some places are plainly delivered in
other places. Thus Chrysostom, Hom. 13. upon Genesis (...).
The holy Scripture expounds it self, and suffers not the hearer to go astray.
And Basil in his Asceticks in his Answer to the 267. Interrogation, (...).
The things which seem to be said obscurely in some places of Scripture, are
expounded by other texts clearly delivered. Austin in the second book of
Christian doctrine, 9. chapter To clear the darker expressions, take the clearer
passages. And 6. chapter Almost nothing can be deduced out of these dark places,
but is found most clearly spoken in other places.

But above all is clear and evident the testimony of Chrysostom, hom. 3. upon
the second Epistle to the Thessalonians. (...).
What need is there of Sermon, seeing that all the things that are in the
divine Screptures are clear and right? all that is necessary is evident there.
But because you are hearers that look for delight, you will have also these
things; that is, Sermons. Then he personates one of the people saying, But I
know not what is contained in the divine Scriptures. Why? are they written in
Hebrew or in Latin? are they set down in another but thine own language? are
not the contents of it in Greek? But (answers he) there they be but obscurely.
Tell me, what obscurity do thou mean? are they not histories? know thou
not what things there are clear, that thou may enquire of the obscure? There
are infinite histories in the Scripture; tell me one among the rest. But thou
can not tell it; so that all that thou say are but pretenses and vain
babbling. So did that goldenmouth chide his people when they alleged the
difficulty of Scripture, to dispense themselves from the reading of it. For
then it was not lawful to any not to read it: whereas now adays to read it one
must have a permission and an especial privilege. Truly, if after the example
of Chrysostom one would question diverse persons that abstain from the reading
of Scripture, pretending that there are many obscure things in it; Tell me what
texts of Scripture you find clear, and what dark places did ye find in it? they
could not answer. They complain of the obscurity of a book where they never
read one line. Indeed hardly can Scripture be clear to him that never looked in
it. Poor souls, they make use of that scruple to feed their idleness; they
study ignorance under a pretense of docility. Christ asked a Doctor of the
Jews, Luke 10.
what is written in the Law? how read thou? presupposing that he read the
Scriptures or ought to read them. If it had been in those days the privilege
of Doctors to read Scripture, Christ to convince him of idleness and contempt,
would have told him, Thou art a Doctor, and have license to read Scripture;
thou should then make use of thy privilege.

CHAP. 59. Defense of the purity and truth of Scripture against the Cardinals
accusations and falsifications.
Page 1099.
THe boldest Chapter of the whole book of Cardinal du Perron is the 6. chapter of
the fifth book, wherein by a most perverse diligence, that I say no worse, he
gathers up all the texts of Scripture, which (says he) seem to man's sense to
be full of absurdity and contradiction; that so he may dissuade the people from
reading Scripture, and make them refer themselves to the Roman Church about the
sense of those texts, as about all other difficulties.

This might have some color, if the Church to which he sends us had made some
declaration about that, or if any ecclesiastical exposition was extant,
authorized by the judgment of the Church: but that is nowhere found. The Roman
Church which falsely styles her self Universal, has no exposition of
Scripture, but of particular Doctors, who expound Scripture diversely, and there
is little agreement among them.

Of the pretended absurdities of Scripture which he alleges, some are easily
resolved, as these. That it is said that God separated light from darkness,
that is, the day from the night. That God created the Sun on the fourth day.
Genesis 2.
That God took one of Adams ribs and therewith formed Eve. Genesis 3.
That he made to Adam and Eve clothes with beasts kins. Genesis 9.
That God put the rainbow in the cloud for a sign that there should be no more
a general flood. Deuteronomy. 34.
That after Moses there arose no Prophet like unto him. Judge. 14.
That Sampson killed a thousand men with the jaw bone of an Ass. That out of a
tooth of that jaw bone he fetched water, and many the like things, which none
can find absurd but he that seeks absurdity in them, or brings the Almighty
power of God in question, or doubts of the truth of his word.

He brings other objections where one cannot deny but there is some difficulty,
as about the calculations of times, and some proper names which seem to be put
instead of other names. By which difficulties it pleases God to call us to
sobriety. Every wise man if he cannot satisfy his reason, will choose rather
to keep himself in silence then to contend with Gods word; and for that, will
not abstain from reading Scripture, as though it were a dangerous book.

He heaps up other texts of Scripture concerning manners which seem to be
scandalous, as that which is said in Ecclesiastes, chap. 2. that there is
nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and drink, and that he should
make his soul enjoy good by his labor. And in the third chapter, that the
death of man, and that of a beast is the same; as the one dies so dies the
other, and herein man has no pre-eminence above the beast; And that a living
dog is better then a dead Lion. Sentences which say only that according to the
course of nature, and considering nothing but the present life, a man has
nothing of all his temporal good but to use it with joy, and to eat and drink
with tranquillity of mind; And that according to the course of nature the same
causes make a man and a beast to die. But the same book is full of sentences
which put a great difference between the end of good and evil men; saying that
God shall judge the righteous and the wicked. Eccles. 3.17.8.12.12.14.12.13.
That it shall be well with them that fear God. That God shall bring every work
to judgment. And he concludes the book with this sentence, Fear God and keep
his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.

He puts in the same rank some expressions of Solomon's Song, as ill beseeming:
Then the history of the incest of Lot with his daughters, and of Juda with
Thamar and the like things. But it is not without cause that God in his word
lays open the sins of holy men, to make us acknowledge humane infirmity, and
to show that God fetches good out of evil. Neither is there any thing in all
these, that ought to dissuade a man from reading Scripture. It belongs not to
us to prescribe to the Spirit of God what language he must use.

He adds some texts, which (to his thinking) might shake the faith with
scruples, as My Father is greater then I. And I go up to my God and to your
God. John 14.
And This is life eternal that they may know thee the only true God and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, and other texts employed by the Arians. John 17.
But that ought not to keep the people from reading Scripture. For in the same
Scripture they shall find wherewith to instruct themselves upon that point, and
clear texts for the Godhead of the Son of God. As when Romans 9. he is called God
above all things blessed for evermore, and Tit. 2. Looking for the blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ. And by Isaiah 9. he is called the everlasting Father. And John 1. That
word was God. And 1 John 5.24. Jesus Christ is the true God and eternal life.
And Phil. 1.6. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God.

But that which is more intolerable in that great gathering of texts, is that
this Prelate falsifieth Scripture, and makes it say what it says not, to make
it absurd. He says that it is written Genesis 2. that in the garden of Eden,
among other rivers there was both Nilus and Euphrates, Note. A notorious
falsification of the Cardinal to disgrace Scripture.
which are above a thousand leagues asunder; but in that text there is no
mention of Nilus, but of the river Gihon, even in the vulgar version. It is a
Jewish fable which is found in Josephus in the first book of his Antiquities;
wherein he shows so much ignorance, that he makes Nilus to come from the
East. And I wonder what moved the Cardinal to falsify his own Bible.

In the same place he says that Genesis 3. God walked in the cool of the wind
after noon in the garden. He finds an absurdity in these words the cool in the
afternoon; which seem to say that God was cooling of himself against the heat
of the afternoon. But these words cool and afternoon are not in the Hebrew;
there is only in the text that Adam and Eve heard God going in the garden in
the wind of the day.

In the same place he makes Scripture to say ( Judges 15.) that God made a
spring of water to come out of the hole whence a tooth of the Ass had been
plucked out, to give drink unto Sampson. But there is in the text that God brake
a great tooth of the jaw bone, and thence came out water; Of a fountain coming
out of the hole of the jaw bone it is not spoken, not so much as in the vulgar
version. Here it will not be unseasonable to say that by the Hebrew word Leki
which is translated a jaw bone, a rock is understood, out of which God fetched
water, so named in memory of Sampsons combat happened in that place. Thus the
Chaldaick Paraphrast understands it.

He adds for an apparent absurdity that (2 Chronicles. 21.) it is written that Elias
writ to Joram King of Judah, although Elias had been taken up to heaven eight
years before the reign of Joram. The absurdity which he conceives, is, that a
man that lives no more on earth should write to a man that lives on earth.
But these letters might be written by Eliah in his life time, and sent to Joram
some years after the Prophets death.

To make Solomon speak like a profane man and an Epicurean, he makes him say
Eccles. 9.5. that the dead have no more reward yonder, as if the souls were
mortal, and no salvation for them. There is according to the Hebrew, there is
no more gain unto them, (...)
that is, to the dead: for he speaks of the profit or gain which they can get
on earth. But that word yonder is an addition of M. du Perron to exclude the
hope of another life.

I do not put among the falsifications, but among the oversights that which he
says in the same place, that the Levites wife died by being too much abused by
the men of Jabesh, (Judges 19.) he put Jabesh for Gibeah.

But this is most insupportable, that he makes the Gospel to say, ( John 15.)
he that came after me was made before me. Not a word of that is found in that
chapter. (...).
True it is, that in the first chapter there is, He that comes after me is
preferred before me, or, was before me. The word made which favors the
Arians, making Christ to be a creature, is of the addition of the vulgar
version, which M. du Perron rather chose to follow, because the sense is absurd
as that version makes it, then to follow the truth of the Greek text, which is
the original. The small skill that this Prelate had in Greek, made him believe
that (...) and (...) signify always the same thing, whereof the one
signifies, was made, the other has been.

(...).
I shut up this chapter with the sentence of Epiphanius in the heresy of the
(...).
Unlike, which is the 76. All things are clear in the divine Scripture to them
that will with a godly reason approach unto the word of God, and conceiving not
a devilish efficacy, do not turn themselves down into the gulfs of death.

CHAP. 60. Of Canonical and Apocryphal books. Proofs by Gods word that Tobit,
Judith, the Maccabes, etc. are not Canonical.
IN this question, more then in any other, our Adversaries are at a loss; M. du
Perron handles this question in the first book chapter 50. p. 439, and seq. Romans
3.2.
for they have no less against them then the word of God, reason, and the
testimony of Antiquity.

As for the word of God, every one confesses that the Church of the Jews to
which the oracles of God had been committed, did not acknowledge the books of
Tobit, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Susanna, and Maccabes for Canonical.
This is known by the testimony of Josephus book 1. against Appion, where he
reckons but two and twenty books of the Old Testament, (...).
and says that the books written since the time of Artaxerxes are not so
worthy of evidence as the precedent. Indeed Josephus is posterior in time unto
Christ: His birth meets almost with the time of Christ's death. And when he
writ, the Jews were fallen already from Gods Covenant; but making an
enumeration of the sacred books, he shows what books have been received by
the Jews; not only in his time, but also in the ages that went before him.

Austin says that the Jews hold not these books for Canonical. Aug. l. 18. de
Civitate Dei cap. 36. and contra secundam Epist. Gaudent. cap. 23.
Wherefore Jesus Christ and his Apostles never allege these books. And if
sometimes they mention some history written in the Apocrypha, as the Feast of
the dedication, John 10.22. they mention also, not seldom, histories attested
by the Pagans and by the unbelieving Jews.

The book of Maccabees is is held Canonical by the Roman Church. Yet there
mention is made of Alexander the Great and of his victories, Du Perron chap.
30. l. 1. p. 440, and seq.
which many Pagans had already written before the book of Maccabees was made.
St. Paul alleges texts out of Menander, Aratus, Epimenides, etc. and that in
a point of doctrine. As that which he brings ( Acts 17.) out of Aratus, that in
God we live and move and have our being. As then the allegation of a book in
the New Testament is not a proof that the book is Canonical; so on the other
side it is an evident sign that the books in question are not Canonical, that
of so great a number of books not one is alleged in the New Testament. And if
the Apostles have used some word or expression which is found also in some
Apocrypha, it follows not that the Apostles allege that book; For the same
word shall be be found also in Pagan authors.

There is no reason then why the books of Judith and Maccabees, etc. having
never been divine nor Canonical under the Old Testament, should become holy and
Canonical under the New, as if they had altered their nature. Neither can we
receive the books of the Old Testament but from the Church of the Old
Testament; nor have the books of the Old Testament in other esteem then the
Church of the Old Testament had them.

The same is evident in that these books are not found in Hebrew. Now how
unlike is it that the book of Wisdom, if it was made in Hebrew by Solomon, be
not extant in Hebrew, and that ill versions have been preserved, seeing that
the divine works of Solomon were so precious unto the Jews? And that the Jewish
Church, which then was the true Church, has carefully preserved in their
natural language the book of Hester, and the Prophecies of Jeremiah and Daniel,
but suffered some chapters to be lost, and not been careful to preserve the
whole books in their proper tongue? Must we say that the sacred books were more
perfect among the Grecians then among the Jews, and in the versions then in the
original tongues? Which chapters added to Jeremiah and Daniel whosoever will
compare with the chapters that go before, shall easily perceive that not only
they have no connection with the precedent, but also that they contradict them,
and that the style of both is as different as day and night.

CHAP. 61. Untruths and errors in the books called the Apocrypha.
THE strongest instance for us in this matter, is, that these books are stuffed
with fables, and forged tales, and doctrines contrary to that of the Canonical
books. Could we be able to receive fables and grossly devised lies for the word
of God? In this acusation we desire not to be believed without evident proofs.
I will produce some of them.

Of the book of Tobith.
In the 5. chap. v. 14. the Angel Raphael does falsely call himself Azarias of
the race of the great Ananias and of the brethren of Tobit, who was of the
tribe of Nephtali. Wherefore also in chap. 7. v. 3. when Raguel asked the Angel
and the son of Tobit whence they were, the son of Tobit answers for both, We
are of the children of Nephtali captives in Nineve.

To say that the Angel took the name of Azarias because he was like some man of
that name, does not excuse the lie; for he that resembles Azarias, is not
Azarias. And as if that untruth were not enough, he says that he is of Tobits
brethren, endeavoring thereby to print a false persuasion in Tobits mind,
which he effected, as Tobit himself expressed it.

No more does it serve to say that Ananias signifies the grace or gift of God:
and that the Angel meant that he was the son of the grace or gift of God: for
he said himself to be of the race of the great Ananias; Now it would have been
falsely and absurdly spoken to say that he was of the race of the great gift of
God.

The book of Judith.
This book is manifestly fabulous. The history is related as happened after the
return of the Jews from the captivity of Babylon; Which is expressly said in the
fourth chapter, v. 2. (...).
They were newly returned from the captivity. And chapter 5. v. 18. They were led
captives into a land which was not theirs, and the Temple of their God was cast
to the ground, and their Cities were taken by their enemies. But now are they
returned to their God, and are come up from the places where they were
scattered; and have possessed Jerusalem where their Sanctuary is, and are
seated in the hill country which was desolate.

There is in the Greek which is the orignal, (...), which signifies word by
word, The Temple of their God was laid to the ground. Whence it appears that
this history is given as happened since the captivity of Babylon, for that
Temple was never pulled down, nor the people of the Jews transported, nor the
country made desolate before that captivity. Yet that history is related as
happened in the time of King Nebucadnezzar, dead long before the return of that
people from the captivity.

Our adversaries think they may escape by saying that in their Latin version
these words, and the temple of their God was laid to the ground are not found.
As also in the same version by a notorious falsification, these words, they
were newly returned from captivity, have been put out, and are found no more.
But (besides that we must always rather stand to the original text then to a
version, especially to the worst version of all) there is enough remaining in
that Latin version, to verify that this story is related as happened since the
return from that captivity, when the Jews were transported to Jerusalem. For in
chap. 5. v. 18. after many falsifications these words remain, Plurimi eorum
captivi abducti sunt in terram non suam; Nuper. autem reversi ad Dominum Deum
suum ex dispersione qua dispersi fuerant, adunati sunt, etc. and iterum
possident Jerusalem.
Many of them were led captives into a land that was not theirs, but of late
being returned unto the Lord their God, they were gathered again from the
dispersion wherewith they were scattered abroad, and possess Jerusalem again.
That history then is related as happened after that the people transported from
Jerusalem was returned thither, in which time Nebuchadnezzar was dead long
before.

At that time also there was no more Ninive, which had been taken and destroyed
by the Medes in the time of Cyaxares, if we believe Herodotus in his first
book; or by Nebuchadnezzar, if we believe the last chapter of Tobit, long
before the return from the captivity. Then also there was no more Kingdom of
the Medes. Media was under the Persians, and the Kingdom of Media had been
abolisht many years before. Nevertheless that history of Judith, given out as
happened since the return from the captivity, in chap. 1.5. makes Ninive to be
the seat of Nebuchadnezzars kingdom, though he never kept his Court there,
since he pulled it down This is very expressly affirmed in the end of Tobits
book.
when he had taken it. And speaks of a King Arphaxad, who never was.

It will not serve our Adversaries to say that this history happened in the
time of King Manasseh who was carried away captive into Babylon; and to seek in
the time of King Manasseh, a Nebuchadnezzar which cannot be found; for he was
not yet born when Manasseh died. They seek also in the time of Manasseh a
transportation of the people of Jerusalem, and a return of the people to
Jerusalem after the captivity, which is to be found in no story. For 2 Chronicles.
33.11. it is said only that the Captains of the host of the King of Assyria
took Manasseh among the thorns, and carried him to Babylon, but they took not
Jerusalem, and the people was not led away captive; Neither is there any trace
of that captivity, nor of the return from the same, in any history. Only
Manasseh released out of prison returned unto his Kingdom. Besides, if this
history of Judith happened in the time of Manasseh; the Temple also was ruined
in his time, which is known to be false. They must also find in the same time a
King Arphaxad of Media, who shall no more be found then King Nebuchadnezzar. In
the time of Manasseh's imprisonment Phraortes son of Dejoces reigned in Media,
of whom Herodotus speaks much in his first book. Which Phraortes was never
discomfited by Nebuchadnezzar no more then Dejoces his Father, as the first
chapter of Judith relates of Arphaxad. Both father and son were more ancient
then Nebuchadnezzar, and were both dead before Nebuchadnezzar reigned. Then
reigned in Babylon either Nabopolassar Father to Nebuchadnezzar, or rather he
to whom Nabopolassar succeeded.

To this add that if Manasseh had been then reigning in Jerusalem, he would not
have suffered Joakim the Priest to take upon him to give the orders of war, as
it is related, Judith 4.6. That would have been incroaching upon the Royal
Office, and from a Priest turning a Captain; which was never done while there
was a King; and they make Joakim contemporary to Nebuchadnezzar, although he
lived above a hundred years after that King.

Josephus in the tenth book of Antiquities chap. 4. relates exactly the things
happened in Manasseh's time, but speaks not of Judith, nor of Holofernes, nor of
Bethulia, nor of the people of Jerusalem led away captive, nor of the Temple
pulled down and built up again, which the fabulous book of Judith mentions.

To multiply lies, it is said toward the end of the history, that Judith waxed
old in her husbands house, being a hundred and five years old. And that there
was none that made the children of Israel any more afraid in the days of
Judith, nor a long time after her death. Let now our adversaries busy their
brains to find those hundred and five years, and many more after Judiths death,
in which the people of the Jews enjoyed a constant rest. Can any find, I say
not a hundred and five years, but forty only of rest in Judea, beginning at the
return of Manasseh from his captivity? That King having reigned but few years
after his release, left the Kingdom to his son Amon, who brought Idolatry again
into Judea, 2 Chronicles. 33.22. Where was Judith then, so much respected over all
the country? Where was that peaceable time without trouble in Israel? To that
King, killed after two years reign, succeeded the good King Josiah; who after
he had reigned thirty one years was killed in battle by Neco King of Egypt.
The end of his life was the beginning of the ruins and desolations of the
Jews, which never gave over, till all the Towns being taken by Nebuchadnezzar,
the country pillaged, Jerusalem and the Temple razed, the people were
transported into Babylon; Where was then Judith? For they affirm that history
to have hapened when she was in her prime. And that after this passage, she
lived with his husband: And that her husband being dead, she was still of great
beauty, and was woed by many lovers which she refused, and dwelt a hundred and
five years in her husbands house, in a time when there was neither people nor
houses in Judea, and when the country was a desert. Was there ever a fable
more grossly patcht up?

The last verse of the book, acording to the Latin version, says that the day
of Judith's victory is received of the Hebrews among the Holy days, and is
celebrated by the Jews unto this day; Which will be found false. For of that
Feast of so great solemnity, no trace is sound in all the Antiquity of the
Jews; not in Josephus, Seder Holam, hoc est, ordo seculi seu Chronicon.
not in Philo, not in the other Josephus son to Gorion, not in the Maccabees,
not in Rabbi Nahasson who has written Canons or rules of the Jewish Feasts,
not in Seder Holam, not in Munster who has written the Jews Calender.

In chap. 9. v. 2. Judith says her self to be daughter of Simeon Jacobs second
son. But in chap. 8. v. 1. her pedigree is fetched from Salasadai son of Jacobor
Israel, which is an imaginary name; for Jacob had no such son. And in the
vulgar Latin version, which the Roman Church prefers before the Greek
original, the absurdity is double; for in the same place it is said that she
was daughter of Simeon son of Reuben: whereas every body knows that Simeon
and Reuben were brothers.

Genesis 49. Jacob dying condemns the massacre of the Sichemites committed by
Simeon and Levi, so far as to say, Cursed be their anger for it was fierce, and
their wrath for it was cruel. But Judith chap. 9. ver. 2. and 4. praises and
magnifieth that action, as if God had set them on to do it, saying O Lord God,
of my Father Simeon, to whom thou gave a sword to take vengeance of the
strangers. And soon after, Thou have given all their spoil to be divided among
thy dear children, as if the ransacking of Sichem, and the robbery committed by
the sons of Jacob had been a blessing of God. In the same place speaking of
Simeon and Levi, she says, They were moved with thy zeal, and called upon thee
for aid.

Also over all that history such things are attributed to Judith as are ill
beseeming a holy and virtuous woman, as if that story had been made puposely to
defame her. She tricks up her self curiously to provoke the unchaste desires of
a Pagan Prince. In chap. 9. ver. 13. she craveth of God the grace of deceiing
with her lips. In chap. 10. ver. 12. being arrested by the Assyrians, she
pays them with lies, saying that she was fled from the Hebrews, and was come
to declare words of truth unto their Captain, and show him a way whereby he
might conquer the country without the loss of one man. And chap. 11. ver. 5.
she promises Holefernes to tell him no lie, and interposeth the name of God to
lie with more color. She praises the wisdom, the policy, and the valor of
Holofernes; Promises him that he shall extermine the Nation of the Jews,
because they had offended God; that God had sent her to work with him, to lead
him through the midst of Judea, and set his throne in the midst of Jerusalem.
Falsely adding that God had revealed her these things; which was doing the part
of a false Prophetess, and faining a false revelation.

With little honesty and no small peril of her pudicity she goes out by night,
having no body to attend her but her maid. She washes her self in a fountain
in the midst of the camp of the enemies. Being called to come to Holofernes, to
please him in his desires, she answers, Who am I that I should gainsay my
Lord! chap. 12. ver. 13. All that very far from the purity and integrity of a
holy woman.

The book called the Wisdom of Solomon.
This book is placed among the Apocrypha by Hierom, Ruffin, and a great number
of Fathers, especially by the Council of Laodicea, as I will show hereafter.

The title of the book is manifestly false; for it is none of Solomon's works,
who writ in Hebrew not in Greek: Now that book is extant in Greek only, and is
not in the Hebrew Bible. Neither is it any thing like the style of Solomon.

Austin speaks thus of it, lib. de doctrina, Christiana cap. 8. Hi duo libri,
unus qui Sapientia, and alius qui Ecclesiasticus inseribitur, de quadam
similitudine Solomonis esse dicuntur. Nam Jesu filius Sirach eo; scripsisse
constantissime perhibetur.
These two books, the one entitled the Wisdom, the other Ecclesiasticus, are
said to be of Solomon, because of some resemblance. For that opinion is
constantly received that Jesus the son of Syrach did write them. It is true
that Austin in the first book of the Retractations, does retract himself in the
fourth chapter for saying that those books have been written by the son of
Syrach. But he says not for that, that they are Solomon's. Only he says that
many call that book the Wisdom of Solomon, speaking of it doubtfully. But in
the seventeenth book of the City of God, cap. 29. he says that the learned
hold for certain that this book and Ecclesiasticus are not Solomon's.

Hierom the most learned of the Fathers in such matters, in his Preface upon
the books of Solomon, says that the inscription of this book is false: Alius
pseudepigraphus qui Sapientia Solomon is inscribitur
Another (says he) whose title is false, being entitled the Wisdom of
Solomon. And a little after, Nonnulli scriptorum veterum hanc esse Philonis
Judaei affirmant.
Some writers affirm that this book is of Philo the Jew. And in the same place
he says that the style favors the Greek eloquence.

(...).
Basil in the first book against Eunomius, toward the end, alleges the book
of Wisdom of Zorobabel; And in the same book (...).
We acknowledge but three works of Solomon, even those three that we have in
the Hebrew Bible.

And all the Fathers whom we shall hear hereafter, that put the book of Wisdom
out of the rank of the Canonical Scriptures, deny by consequent that it is
Solomon's: And there is great difference between books that treat of matters of
salvation and of Gods service, and books of plants and natural Philosophy
writby Solomon, which he did not write that they should be taught in the Church.

Now all that deny the book of Wisdom to be of Solomon, accuse the Author of
untruth; for he says himself to be King Solomon, chap. 9. ver. 7, 8. speaking
thus unto God, Thou have chosen me to be a King of thy people. -- Thou have
commanded me to build a Temple upon thy holy mount. But in chap. 15. ver. 14.
the Author forgetting that he had called himself King Solomon, speaks as
writing in a time when the Church was oppressed There in the Greek (...),
imperium exercentes.
and kept under by her enemies; which cannot be applied to Solomon's time. Had
the Jesuit Salmeron Proleg. 9. Can. 3. Librum Sapientiae ab alio quam Salomone
scribi non potuisse valde probabile est.
Salmeron considered this, he would not have said that probably this book could
not have been written by any but Solomon.

We must not find it strange that those very Fathers that deny this book to be
Canonical, will call it sometimes the Wisdom of Solomon; for they do but use
the title of the book as custom would have it, as both we and the Roman Church
call the third and fourth book of Ezra, which cannot be of Ezra, and are not
received as Canonical by the Council of Trent. This Austin says lib. 17. de
civitate Dei cap. 20. Alii duo quorum unus Sapientia, alter Ecclesiasticus
dicitur, propter eloquii nonnullam similitudinem, ut Salomonis dicantur,
obtinuit consuetudo; Non autem esse ipus non dubitant doctiores.
As for the books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, custom has carried it, that
they be said to be Solomon's; but the learned hold for certain that they are
none of his.

It is evident that the book was written by a man versed in the Grecian
Philosophy, in that he speaks of the Solstices, chap. 7. ver. 18. and of the
four moral virtues, temperance, fortitude, justice, and prudence, ver. 7.

In chap. 7. ver. 25. Wisdom is called a vapor or breath of the virtue of God;
wherein he speaks like an ignorant, whether he understand by the wisdom of God
the Person of the Eternal Son of God, or a virtue of God, which is essential to
him, and his own substance. Take it either way, is the wisdom of God a vapor?
And since it is a virtue of God, how should it be a vapor proceeding from his
virtue? With the like abuse in chap. 6. ver. 22. he speaks of the beginning of
the nativity of Wisdom as though she were born and had a beginning.

In the same book chap. 8. ver. 15. Solomon speaks of himself as being valiant
in war, of which nevertheless he never gave any proof, having never given any
battle. And ver. 20. speaking of his origin, he says, that being good he came
into a body undefiled. So then he was otherwise born and composed then David
his Father, who Psalm. 51.7. says Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me.

He cannot be excused for calling Manna the Angels food, as if Angels did eat
and had need to be fed with meat; Nor for saying ( chap. 10.7.) that the land
of the five Cities, meaning Sodom and the other Cities of that plain, was
smoking still ever since they were consumed by fire from heaven. It is false
also that five Towns were burnt in that plain; for Moses names but four,
Sodom, Gomorrha, Adama, Deuteronomy. 29.24.
and Tseboim. The fifth which was Tsoar, was spared at the request of Lot. Genesis
19.20.
So the Author of that book says untruly that the fire came down upon these
five Towns. And it is likewise false that which he says ( chap. 12. ver. 5.)
that the old inhabitants of the land of Canaan whom the Israelites expelled,
were devourers of man's flesh. Moses often describes the abominations of those
people, but never speaks that they were man-eaters. Also in chap. 6. ver. 22.
that false Solomon relates things that never happened to the children of Israel,
and coyneth histories, saying that snow and ice endured the fire and melted not.

Of the book of Ecclesiasticus.
This book is not found in the Hebrew Bible, the Bible of the Old Testament,
which was read in the Synagogues. We shall also see hereafter that the Ancient
Christian Church did not receive it as Canonical.

This book contains many good precepts, which made the reading of it
recommended by many of the Ancient, and by our own Church. But there are many
profitable books, which ought not therefore to be ranked among the divine
books, nor held for Canonical.

The Author of the book cannot be Solomon, seeing that in the forty seventh,
forty eighth and the following chapters, he speaks of the reigns of Roboam,
Jeroboam, and of the Prophets Eliah, Elisha, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and
many others who lived many ages after Solomon. Before the book there is a
Preface where the Author Jesus the son of Sirach says that he came into Egypt
in the time of King Ptolomaeus Euergetes who died about seven hundred sixty two
years after Solomon.

In the same Preface Jesus Grandfather to that Jesus who compiled these
sentences, is compared unto Solomon, and equalled in wisdom and doctrine: which
is not without impiety.

In chap. 1. ver. 4. and in chap. 24. ver. 24. there is an error which our
Adversaries approve not, namely that the Wisdom of God was created before all
things, which is mere Arrianism. For Arius taught that Christ was a created
God, made before other creatures. A sentence which none but distracted brains
will excuse with saying that Christ was created in his humane nature; for
Christ in his humane nature is not the Wisdom of the Father; and so far was he
from being created before all things, that he had not assumed humane flesh when
Jesus the Son of Sirach writ his book.

In chap. 46. ver. 20. it is said that Samuel prophesied after his death. So
this Author makes the Prophet Samuel to say that which was said by the Devil,
and puts the souls of the Saints in the power of Satan. For that the Ghost that
appeared unto Saul was not the Prophet Samuel, holy Scripture testifies it in
the same chapter, 2 Samuel 28.6.
ver. 6. where it is said that God would not answer Saul, neither by Vrim nor
by Thummim which was the ordinary oracle, nor by the Prophets. Neither is it in
a Witches power to fetch the souls of Saints out of the place of their rest.
The same appears by that Ghosts saying to Saul in the nineteenth verse, Thou
and thy sons shall be with me to morrow. For seeing that Saul is dead
desperate, killing himself with his own sword, it is not credible that his soul
after death was gathered with the Saints, nor that the soul of Saul and that of
Jonathan were carried into the same place. Wherefore it must be granted that
this Ghost was called Samuel, because it was like Samuel, and counterfeited
him, according to the custom of the Scriptures to give unto signs and
representations the name of represented things.

Austin handles this question, and says that though this image of Samuel said
unto Saul, Thou shall be with me, he said an untruth. Then he says Aug. l. 2.
questionum ad Simplicianum qu. 3. Et forte hoc quod cum illa imago Samuelis
Saulem praediceret moriturum, dixit etiam secum futurum, quod utique falsum
est. Et paulo ante. Imaginariam illusionem Diaboli machinationibus factam
propterea Scriptura nomine Samuelis appellat, quiae solent imagines rerum earum
nominibus appellari; quarum imagines sunt.
Therefore Scripture calls with the name of Samuel an imaginary illusion made
by the machinations of the Devil^, because images use to be called by the name
of things whereof they are images. And finally after he has canvassed that
question on both sides, he concludes, Let us think rather that such a thing
was done by the wicked ministry of the Pythonissa or witch, which we cannot
find or expound any more. See the Canon Nec mirum. Causa 26. q. 5. where it is
amply proved that it was not the true Samuel, but an illusion of the Devil.

Also that book does unworthily yea unjustly deal with the feminine sex, saying
that This may bear a good sense in the English version which goes thus, Better
is the churlishness of a man then a courteous woman.
the wickedness of a man is better then the good that a woman does, chap. 42.
ver. 14.

The book of Susanna.
This history has no truth at all. For what likelihood or possibility is in
this, that a handful of Jews newly led captive into Babylon should have, even
in Babylon, Judges of their Nation, condemning to death without appeal? The
Jews while they served the Romans, might have in their country some Judges of
their own, because the Victors, after they had subdued them, had left them some
kind of jurisdiction, as it is the custom of Conquerors toward the people whom
they have conquered and brought under their Empire. But it will not be found
that after the ruin of Jerusalem Jews led captive to Rome, had Judges of their
Nation at Rome that could sentence to death without appeal.

Especially it is the height of absurdity and far out of all road of likelihood
that a young stranger child, being in no Office, should make himself Judge of
the ordinary Judges, and condemn them to death, with a Sovereign judgment
without appeal: As if some stranger-child brought captive to London, should
command the Lord Chief Justice of England to appear before him, and then
sentence him to death, and send him to the Gallows.

Here observe the time: for Daniel was a child in the time of the first siege
laid to Jerusalem by Nebucadnezzar; Jehojakim being King in Jerusalem who was
carried away captive with part of the people, among which was Daniel, as one
may see in the first chapter of Daniel. That happened eleven years before the
second siege, whereby Jerusalem was razed, and the rest of the people
transported. That was the time of the extreme depression and bondage of the
Jews in Babylon; who were so far from having Offices of Judicature and
delicious gardens in Babylon (as it is said in that book of Joakim Susanna's
husband) that they were used as bondmen in hard servitude. The Author was short
in his Chronology to raise Daniel to dignity at that time, as he was afterward
when he came to age.

It is known also that in Babylon the vulgar tongue was the Chaldean, not the
Greek; Yet the history of Susanna makes Daniel to speak Greek in Babylon,
sitting in a judicial seat, examining Judges of capital causes. For this book
makes him use Greek clinches and allusions upon the words (...).
of Mastick tree, and Holme tree, which allusions will not be found at all in
the Chaldean language, or in any tongue but the Greek. And whosoever affirms the
contrary, does but set forth his own ignorance. Wherefore Porphyrius the great
enemy of the Christian name, having made this objection, Hierom in his Proem
upon Daniel answers that the book of Susanna is a fable, Can. Sanct^ Romana.
Did. 15.
and has no authority of holy Scripture. We will allege his words upon the
history of Bell. Pope Gelasius is express upon this, saying that the book of
Susanna is Apocrypha.

The History of Bell and the Dragon.
This History is of the same stuff. The very beginning is a lie, That presently
after the death of Astyages, Daniel was preferred to the table of Cyrus,
honored above all his friends. For when Cyrus dispossessed Astyages his
Grandfather from the Kingdom of Media, Cyrus was not yet Master of Babylon, and
Daniel living in Babylon, was none his subjects. Neither did Cyrus conquer
Babylon but about two and twenty years after the end of the reign of Astyages,
as one may see by the first book of Herodotus; by Berosus alleged by Josephus,
by the Chronicles of Eusebius, and by the Canon of Ptolomaeus.

Hierom in his Preface upon Daniel, calls this book a Fable; and says that it
was left out by the Greek Doctors, as having no authority of holy Scripture.
These are his words.

Cui and Eusebius and Apollinaris pari sententia responderunt, Susannae,
Belisque ac Draconis fabulas non contineri in Hebraico, etc. Unde and nos ante
plurimos annos cum verteremus Danielem, has visiones obelo praenotavimus,
significantos eas in Hebraico non haberi; and miror quosdam (...) indignari
mihi quasi ego decurtaverim librum, cum Origenes, etc. and doctores Graeciae
fateantur non haberi apud Hebraeos, nec se debere respondere P^rphyrio pro his
quae nullam Scripturae authoritatem habent.
Eusebius and Apollinaris have well answered Porphyrius, that the fables of
Susanna, Bell, and the Dragon are not contained in the Hebrew text; but that
they are part of the prophecy of one Habuc son of Jesu of the tribe of Levi,
as it is put in the title of the same fable in the Septuagint, Where it is said
That there was a Priest named Daniel son of Abda that ate at the table of the
King of Babylon; whereas Scripture testifies that Daniel and the three young
men were of the tribe of Judah. Wherefore we also translating Daniel many years
ago, gave a black mark to these visions, to signify that they were not found
in the Hebrew. And I wonder how some peevish men are angry with me as if I had
curtaled that book, seeing that Origenes, and Eusebius, and Apollinaris, and
other Ecclesiastical persons, and Greek Doctors acknowledge that these visions
are not found among the Hebrews; and that they are not bound to answer
Porphyrius for these books which have no authority of holy Scripture.

Some pedants Regourd in his Demonstr. p. 337.
give us a warning that sometimes this word fable signifies a story, and with
the same reason (likely) would suffer the Gospel to be called a fable. But they
dissemble that Hierom says, that these books have no authority of holy
Scripture.

The rest of the book of Esther.
The rest of the book of Esther, contradicts in many things the book of
Esther which is in the Hebrew Bible. The true Hebrew story chap. 6. ver. 2.
relates that Esther was brought to King Assuerus to be Queen, in the seventh
year of that King; and that she being already Queen, Mordecai discovered a
conspiracy of two Eunuchs named Big than and Teres against the life of King
Assuerus, of which he gave notice to Qeen Esther, and she to the King.

The same history is quite otherwise related in the Apocrypha book of the rest
of Esther, in the first chapter. There it is said that Mordecai had a dream in
the second year of King Artaxerxes, and discovered a conspiracy of two Eunuchs,
Gabatha and Thara. One of the books says Assuerus, the other says Artaxerxes.
The one says that it was in the seventh year of King Assuerus, the other, that
it was in the second year of Artaxerxes. And the names of the Eunuchs are
different. How unlike is it that in the same book the same history should be
twice related by the same Author, and in a different way? In the sixth chapter,
ver. 10. of that Apocrypha, it is said that Aman was a Macedonian, who in the
true story is sad to be an Agagite, that is an Hamalekite. Josephus l. 11. c.
6. says that he was an Hamalekite.
See Numb. 24.7. And such was the name of the Kings of Hamalec, 1 Samuel 15.20.
M. du Perron answers that Du Perron chap. 88. p. 628. and 629. Du Perron. p.
Ibid.
all the strangers in Asia were called Macedonians, which might be after
Alexander in the reign of the Seleucides, but the history of Esther is many
ages before. Besides Aman was no stranger in Asia, as the Cardinal esteems,
for he was an Arabian. Now Arabia is in Asia. All that swarms with ignorance.

With the like ignorance he says that Aman is called Macedonian in the letters
of Assuerus, (p) because the writer followed the Syriack version. Du Perron. p.
ibid.
But in the Syriack translation these letters are not to be found, the
Interpreter having interpreted only the Canonical book of Esther.

But how absurd is that which is said in chap. 6. ver. 14. of the same book,
that Haman would have transported the Empire of the Persians to the
Macedonians? For besides that these words suppose that Haman was a Macedonian;
whosoever is never so little versed in History, knows that the Kings of Macedon
at that time were petty Kings, unknown in Persia, and without any power; And
that these words are no less ridiculous, then saying that such a one has
undertaken to transport the Empire of the Turks to the Prince of Parma or to
the King of Algiers.

About these rests of Esther let us hear the verdict of Sixtus Senensis
Bibliothecae lib. 1.
who has few fellows in learning among our Adversaries; The other six
chapters, says he, unto the end of the book, have been added out of several
histories, by I know not what Greek author; But especially out of the eleventh
book of the Antiquities of Josephus. Then he adds that Melito of Sardis, and
Gregory Nazianzen have not reckoned that book among the sacred books, and that
Athanasius has by name rejected it as supposititious, and that it was received
very late among the Christians.

Of the books of Maccabees.
The books of Maccabees swarm with fables. In the beginning of the first book
the author says, that Alexander before his death divided his kingdom among his
servants: Which is contradicted by a multitude of Historians that have written
of Alexanders death Diodor. Sicul. lib. 17. and 18. Justin lib. 12. and 13.
Currius l. 10. Aemil. Prob. in vita Eumenis. Strabo l. 17. Pausanias Atticis,
Plutar. vit. Alex. Appian. de bello Syriaco.
By Diodorus Siculus, by Justin the Epitomizer of Trogus, by Quintus Curtius,
Aemilius Probus, Strabo, Pausanias, Plutarchus, Appianus Alexandrinus, and many
more. All relate that Alexander made no division of his Kingdom before his
death, but only gave his ring unto Perdiccas: whence arose a thousand
confusions among his successors.

In the first book of Maccabees, chap. 6. Antiochus Epiphanes striving to get
Elimais in Persia, is beaten back by the inhabitants of the Town, then flies
to return into Babylon; and hearing the ill success of the arms of Lysias the
General of his army against the Jews, falls sick with sorrow, and dies in the
one hundred forty ninth year of the reign of the Seleucides. But in the ninth
chapter of the second book, the death of that Antiochus is quite otherwise
described. That being entered into the City of Persepolis, he went about to hold
the City. That being driven from thence, he came to Ecbatana, where having
heard tidings of the defeat of Nicanor and Timotheus, and swelling with anger
at it, he resolved to extermine the Jews, and make of Jerusalem a burying
place. That in the way he fell from his chariot, and being sore bruised, worms
rose out of his body, and that he dyed a stranger in the mountains. Can any two
things be more diverse then these two relations of the same thing? The one
speaks of the City of Ecbatana, the other of the City of Persepolis. The one
says that he would enter into the Town, the other that he entered into it. The
one that he fled to return into Babylon, the other that he came to Ecbatana,
which are very different ways. The one that he heard ill news of the defeat of
Lysias; the other puts Nicanor and Timotheus instead of Lysias. The one says
that upon these ill news he fell sick for sorrow; the other that while he was
threatening the Jews he felt a sore pain in his bowels, and that by the way he
fell from his charret, whereupon his flesh rotted and bred worms. He that said
that he died in Persia near Ecbatana, knew not that Ecbatana was in Media, not
in Persia. It is now called Tauris.

In the first chapter of the second of the Maccabees, ver. 12. the Jews give
God thanks for driving away those that had fought against the holy City in
Persia. Now in Persia all the Cities were Pagan, and there was no holy City.
The holy Scripture gives that honorable name to none but Jerusalem, although
Judea had many other Cities where God was purely served.

In the same chapter the death of Antiochus Epiphanes is related the third time
in a far different manner. Namely that he was stoned in the Temple of Nannaea.
Now that this Antiochus is the same that is called Epiphanes, it is evident,
because this is related in an Epistle where the Jews of Judea announce to the
Jews of Egypt the death of that King as a great deliverance, and signify unto
them the institution of the Feast of the Purification of the Temple upon the
twenty fifth day of the month Casleu, which feast was instituted by Judas
Maccabee a little after the death of Antiochus Epiphanes. It is a great
ignorance to think that in this Macc. 2. chap. 1. The death of Antiochus
Eupator is related; For that Eupator was not killed in Persia, and never made
war there, and was killed by Demetrius son of Seleucus, who took from him both
his kingdom and his life. He was not stoned in a Temple, and outlived but two
years his Father Antiochus Epiphanes. Neither was it in consequence of the
death of Antiochus Eupator that the Fast of the purification of the Temple was
instituted.

And though we should grant that this Antiochus is Antiochus Eupator, yet the
untruth is evident, in that the letter which describes the death of this
Antiochus, and signifies to the Jews of Egypt the institution of the Feast of
the purification of the Temple, is dated on the one hundred eighty eigth year
of the reign of the Seleucides. But the death of Antiochus Epiphanes fell on
the year one hundred forty nine, as it is related, 1 Macc. 6.16. By which
account Antiochus Eupator had died thirty nine after his Fathers death,
although he outlived him but two years.

It is no less against all reason to think that this Antiochus that was stoned
to death was Antiochus Sidetes, dead in the one hundred seventy fourth year of
the reign of the Seleucides. For the institution of the Feast of the
purification of the Temple bears not that date but some thirty five years
before. And Antiochus Sidetes was not stoned to death in a Temple of Persia,
and never made war in Persia. For Justin, Appian, Orosius, and Eusebius. Chron.
Arsaces Parthus Antiochum Sidetem interfecit.
Eusebius witness that he died in battle against the Parthians, being forsaken
by his men. Appian adds that being thus forsaken, he slew himself. And it
would be a strange up-side-down History in the second of Maccabees, if the
Author had begun his relation by Antiochus Sidetes to remount to Antiochus
Epiphanes who came to the Kingdom about forty eight years before.

Observe also that Judas Maccabeus is one of them that writ the letter set down
in the first chapter of the second of Maccabees, which is dated the one hundred
eighty eighth year of the reign of the Grecians, that is some thirty six years
after his death. For that this Judas that writes these letters is Judas
Maccabeus it is evident, because it is he that instituted the purification of
the Temple, of which he gives notice in these letters unto the Jews of Egypt.

1 Maccab. 8. v. 6, 7, 8. it is said that the Romans had taken Antiochus the
great alive, and had given to Eumenes the countries of India and Media. All
that is false. See Hierom on Daniel. Zosimus, Justin, Titus Livius l. 37.
Appian in Syriacis.
The Romans defeated Antiochus the Great in three battles, but they never took
him prisoner. They never had any thing in India, and Media was none of theirs.
Their greatest Empire never went beyond Euphrates. In the time of this
Antiochus the limit of the Roman Empire was Mount Taurus, which is the limit of
Asia minor on the East. Indeed some passages of Virgil. 4. Georg. loquens de
Nilo, Usque coloratis amnis devexus ab Indis.
Latin Poets call Ethiopia India. But the absurdity should be greater yet to
say, that the Romans had given to Eumenes Ethiopia, where they never possessed
any thing, and which was about a thousand leagues distant from the habitation
of Eumenes.

For excuse they say that these things were related unto Judas, but that they
were not true. That with the like untruth, Numb. 13. the spies sent to discover
the land of Canaan made a false relation. And that the Evangelists relate many
blasphemies and lies spoken against our Savior. But all that is to no purpose;
for the relation of the spies and the slanders against our Savior are related
in the Scripture as false, and are convinced of falsehood. But the relation
about the Romans, (1 Mac. 8.) is related as true. And the Author will have
Judas Maccabeus to believe things as ridiculous, as if he had believed that
Virgil was Bishop of Islington, and had sent Embassadous to Rome about it. The
most eminent man among the Jews, who had the conduct of their affairs, could he
have been ignorant that Media and India belonged not to the Romans? And though
he had been ignorant of that, could the Author of this book be ignorant of a
thing so well known unto all if he had been enlightened by the Holy Ghost?

The like stuff he gives us in the second and third verses of the same chapter,
Macc. 1.8. That the Romans had conquered the Galathians, and had done great
feats of arms in Galatia, and had brought the gold and silver metals of Spain
under their power. If by the Galatians he means the Gauls, the Romans did
not conquer them but about an hundred years after the death of Judas Maccabeus.
If by the Galatians he understands those of Asia Minor, Judas was not so
ignorant but he knew that the Romans never gave any battle in Galatia. Those
metals of gold and silver in Spain are fables. The Romans never made war in
Spain for that end. The Poets say that the river Tago in Spain has golden
sands, which is found now to be false. But though it were true, the Romans
never got treasures that way.

But how false is that which is affirmed in the fifteenth and sixtenth verses
of the same chapter, that the Romans held every day a Council of three hundred
and twenty persons, and that they committed their Government to one man every
year? for little children know that they created two Consuls, equal in
sovereign power, every year; and that they had certain days which they called
nefastos, upon which there was a cessation of all businesses. Dionys. Halicar.
l. 2. and 3. Plut. in Gracchis. Florus Epit. Livian. l. 60.
As for the number of the Senators, Romulus established a hundred, Tarquinius
Priscus increased the number of them to three hundred, and that number was yet
in the time of the Gracchi which were posterior in time to Judas Maccabeus.

In the same place, ver. 14. it is observed, that none of the Romans was clad
in purple to be magnified thereby. This Author knew not that the Roman Senators
wore Gowns embroydered with broad flowers of purple, which they called latus
clavus. And that the Knights wore small purple flowers on their Gowns, called
augustus clavus. The robe of the Ancient Roman Kings, and that of the Augurs
called trabea, and the triumphal habit which they called toga palmata, were of
purple. And the Sovereign Priests Ov. Fast. 4. Illic purpurea canus cum vest
sacordos. Minutius Felix. Sacerdotum honores and purpuras despiciunt.
of Rome were clad in Purple. Which the Roman Emperors have imitated when they
have taken the title of Pontifices. Whence is derived the purple robe which the
Roman Popes wear now.

1 Macc. 12. An excellent observation is found in this chapter. An Epistle of
Arius King of Sparta to Onias High Priest of the Jews, whereby the
Lacedaemonians say themselves to be of the stock of Abraham; as right as if I
said that the Low Brittans in France are of the stock of Nicodemus. Doubtless
it is from thence that the Lacedaemonians were circumcised and spoke Hebrew.
They that had so much docility as to believe that simple tale, as Eusebius,
have been deceived by Josep. Antiq. l 13. c. 9. Eusebius. Ch^onol. Olymp. 141.
Josephus, who in these things is liberal of egregious lies: so far as to
Josep. Antiq. l. 1. c. 16.
make Hercules, the great knocker of monsters, son-in-law to one of the
daughters of Abraham.

In the first chapter of the second of Maccabees, ver. 19. and seq. a very
strange fable is related; that when the Jews were carried away captive into
Persia (he would say Chaldea or Babylon) The Priests hid the fire of the Altar
in a deep well: and that Nehemiah sent to Judea by the King of Persia, sent
Priests to take and to bring that fire; But they found no fire in that well,
but thick water; which being poured upon the wood of the Altar turned into
fire, and burnt the wood. This fable is put Book 1. chap. 2. page 777.
by M. du Perron among the unwritten traditions necessary to salvation. Yet it
is rejected by the universal consent of the Rabbis, who say that this fire
descended from heaven, was not in the second Temple. We have the History of
Nehemiah written by himself, wherein he punctually relates all that he has
done in Jerusalem for the good of the people of the Jews; but he makes no
mention of that fire, nor of that thick water, nor of that burning of the wood
laid upon the Altar. Before that Nehemiah was sent by King Artaxerxes, they
were sacrificing in Jerusalem, and the Altar was set up again, as it is
related, Ezra 3.2, 3. Neither was Nehemiah come to restore the sacrifices, but
to build again the walls of Jerusalem, as his history shows it. What need then
of that miraculous thick water to kindle a fire which was already kindled?

In the second chapter of the second book of Maccabees, ver. 4, 5. it is said
that Jeremiah the Prophet commanded that the Tabernacle, and the Ark, and the
Altar of incense should be brought to him, and that he hid them in the mountain
of Nebo in a pit, wherein a house was, saying to them that would mark that
place, that the place should be unknown until God had gathered again the
congregation of the people, and that when the Lord would show those things, the
glory of the Lord should appear, and the cloud also, as it was showed unto
Moses. He that coined that fable was not very learned; for who knows not that
in Jeremiah's time there was no Tabernacle, and that instead of a Tabernacle
Solomon had built a Temple, about four hundred years before Jeremiah prophesied?

The absurdity and impossibility is not less in this 2 Mac. 2.4. that Jeremiah
commanded the Tabernacle and the Ark to follow him, for so it is in the Greek.
(...).
How could a Tabernacle, which was not, follow Jeremiah? And to whom could
Jeremiah have delivered this command? To the Jews that were slain by the
Chaldeans? or to those that were reserved from the slaughter to be carried away
slaves in a hard bondage? And when Jerusalem had been taken and razed, and the
Temple burnt, and the vessels of the Temple, and the Ark by consequent were
partly carried away, partly burnt; how could Jeremiah who was a prisoner in
chains command that the Ark should be brought to him to march after him? The
poor Prophet relates, Jer. 38.28.
how being odious to the people of Jerusalem, and to King Zedekiah, he was cast
into a deep pit full of mire, and being drawn from thence, he remained in the
court of the prison, and was a prisoner when the Town was taken, and both City
and Temple burnt. But the victorious King of the Chaldeans fetched Jeremiah out
of prison, and committed him to the keeping of Gedaliah whom he had set over the
country, as it is related, Jer. 34.14. Yea after he was taken out of the
prison, he was bound with a chain, Jer, 40.1. and in that case carried to Rama,
and thence sent to Juda, where he stayed till he went into Egypt with part of
the people. In all that time, when and to whom could Jeremiah have commanded to
bring him the Ark? Where was he, to be able to save Ark from the burning of the
Temple? or to get it out of the hands of the Chaldeans to hide it in a hole,
and in an underground house fifty leagues from that place? Even in time of
peace, would the High Priest have suffered that a contemptible man, odious
among the people, as Jeremiah, should have taken the Ark from the Temple to
transport it into an unknown place! And when he was prisoner upon a charge of
treason, those Priests against whom he had prophesied would no doubt have
prosecuted him for stealing the Ark away and hiding it they knew not where.

We meet with the like or rather greater absurdities and difficulties when it
is question of finding that Ark again after the peoples return from the
captivity, to bring it again into the Temple rebuilt by Zorobabel, about
seventy years after. The Author of the second book of Maccabees says not by
whom, nor when it was found and brought to the Temple again, and of that no
trace is found in any history. And no more of that which is promised, 2 Mac.
2.8. that after the finding the Ark and the Tabernacle, the cloud would cover
them, and the glory of the Lord would manifest it self over them, as in the
days of Moses. Such a miraculous manifestation would not have been omitted by
Josephus who has most exactly written the history of the Jews of that time and
of the following ages, until the last destruction of Jerusalem. So far is
Rabbi Solomon Jark^ from confirming this, that he directly contradicts it in
his Comment on the first chapter of Haggai, saying that in the second Temple
there was no Ark. Which is confirmed by Cornelius Tacitus, who says that
Pompey having taken Jerusalem entered into the Temple, Histor. l. V.
and having the curiosity to enter into the Sanctuary, he found vacuam sedem
and inania arcana, the place empty and nothing in the most secret place. Which
should be false, if he had found there an Ark bearing two Cherubims.

Jeremiah himself contradicts the relation of the Maccabees; for ( Jer. 3.16.)
speaking of the happy and peaceable state which God would give to the Jews
after these desolations, he says, And it shall come to pass when ye be
multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, says the Lord, they
shall say no more, The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord; neither shall it come
to mind, neither shall they remember it, neither shall they visit it; Neither
shall that be done any more. Other versions say, Neither shall it be any more.
For although I willingly grant that Jeremiah in that place speaks of the
vocation of the Gentiles; yet it is the custom of the Prophets, by the things
happening to the Jews before the coming of Christ, to prefigurate future
spiritual things. Be sure that if Titus having taken the Temple of Jerusalem
had found the Ark in it, he would not have omitted to cause it to be carried
before him in triumph, with the other pieces of the ornaments of the Temple,
the enumeration whereof is made by Josephus in the seventh book of the Judaick
war; where he says that the golden table was carried among the pomps of the
triumph, and the golden candlestick, and the book of the Law; things far
inferior in magnificence to the Ark, and to the Cherubims made by Solomon.

Lib. 1. de verbo Dei cap. 15. Respondeo potuisse.
Bellarmin seeing such an evident truth, and finding no likelihood of truth in
saying that the Ark had been found again, after the return from the captivity
of Babylon, and brought again to the Temple, has found out another shift. He
says that the Ark is not found yet, but that it will be found in the last
days, the next unto the day of judgment; But the Jesuit Regourd is of
another mind. For indeed it were hard to say what good a gilded chest would do
and an Altar of incense, and a Tabernacle of skins among the general burning of
the world in the day of judgment.

P. 538. and 540.
This Jesuit then in his fourth Demonstration says that it is more likely that
the Ark was found again after the Captivity, and was in the Temple built by
Zorobabel. And he proves it by the second book of Maccabees: Wherein common
sense fails him; For our difference is whether that book be fabulous. As if
one proved that the fables of Ovid's Metamorphosis are true, because they are
in Ovid's Metamorphosis.

2 Chronicles. 5.9. It is written that the bars of the Ark remain there until this
day. An evident proof, that the Author writ the book when the Ark was yet in
being, and that the part of the last chapter which speaks of the taking and
ruin of Jerusalem, and the Temple, and of the deliverance granted by Cyrus,
was added since by another author. In the same manner as the book of
Deuteronomy, being written by Moses, the last chapter where the death of Moses
is described has been added since. The same is seen in the book of Joshuah.
For if from that text one would infer (as Regourd does) that the Ark was yet in
the Temple after the return from the captivity, he must say also that the
Temple has not been ruined by the Chaldeans, and that the Ark did not stir
from it.

In the fourteenth chapter of the second of the Maccabees, v. 41. and 42.
Razias is praised for killing himself. He being ready to be taken on every side
fell upon his sword; Choosing rather to dye manfully then to come into the
hands of the wicked, to be abused otherwise then beseemed his noble birth; Can
one more expressly commend self-murder? Is that dying virtuously? Was it
virtuously done of that man to regard more the nobility of his race then Gods
commandment? That which follows is no better, that he cast himself headlong
from a high place, and tore his bowels with his own hands.

One has need to be of an easy belief to believe that which is related, 2
Mac. 8.20. that eight thousand Jews gave battle to the Galatians in Babylon,
where they killed six score thousand Galatians. Such battles are not given in
a Town. Josephus or some other Author would have spoken of it. The whole
country of Galatia together, which is a very little country, cannot afford so
many soldiers. And much more impossible it is, that there should be so many
Galatian soulders in Babylon, which is about five hundred leagues from Galatia.
This is no less absurd then if one said that six score thousand English
Soldiers in Constantinople were killed in a battle given within the Town, by
eight thousand Spaniards. This could not be done unless the Galatians had taken
Babylon before, which they never did.

2 Macc. 15.38.
In the end of the book this Author acknowledges his weakness, as he may well;
and with just reason doubts whether he has well said. If (says he) I have
done well, and as it is fitting the story, it is that which I desired; but if
slenderly and meanly, it is that which I could attain unto. The Spirit of God
doubts not whether he has well said, excuses not his style, and alleges
not his want of power for excuse. In the vulgar version, the only approved by
the Council of Trent, the Author craveth pardon for his faults. Si minus digne,
concedendum est mihi. And the French version approved by the Jesuits of
Lovain. Si je n'ay pas dit comme je devois, il me le faur pardonner.
If (says he) I have not said as worthily as I ought, I must be pardoned. I
ask then if it be convenient to the Spirit of God, who has inspired his
Prophets to write, to doubt whether he has spoken as he ought to do, and to
crave pardon of men. And as for the lowness of the style, the Spirit of God
does not trouble himself to seek an eloquent style. His end is not to tickle
the ears, but to instruct the consciences. God knows what style is fit for
his word, and simplicity is more powerful and effectual for his end.

M. du Perron answers that St. Paul excuses himself in terms more express of
the style of his Epistles, when he says 2 Cor. 11.6. Though I be ignorant in
word, yet I am not so in knowledge: (for so the Cardinal translates it) Wherein
he commits three notable faults.

The first, that he makes St. Paul to excuse himself for his ignorance, whereas
he rather commends his learning, saying If I be rude in speech, (or, If I speak
like one of the vulgar) yet I am not rude in knowledge. He doubts not whether
he has said well; He says not, If I have not said as I ought. He craveth no
pardon.

The second fault of the Cardinal, is that he thinks that St. Paul in that text
speaks of the style of his Epistles, whereas he means his ordinary speech when
he taught by word of mouth. (...).
For as for his Epistles, they were so far from needing an excuse of their
rudeness and simplicity, that the Corinthians upbraided him, (2 Cor. 10.10.)
that his letters were weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence was weak
and his speech contemptible.

The third fault is that he falsifieth the text of Paul, translating (...)
ignorant, whereas it signifies in this place rude and simple, like one of the
common people. For although (...) signify sometimes ignorant, yet it cannot be
so taken in this place. For learning and ignorance consist not in words, but in
things, in which St. Paul in the same place, affirms himself to be learned,
saying, If I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge.

M. du Perron seeing himself besieged about with so many difficulties, and
perceiving so many absurdities and untruths in the books of Maccabees, thought
it his best course to leave all and abandon that cause, going over all those
rubs with silence. But to escape, he striveth to find the like absurdities in
the Canonical books; as that Elijah, eight years after he was transported to
heaven, writ to Joram. That Joram begot Ozias, says Matthew, who puts only
fourteen generations where there are seventeen. And that Luke dissents from
Josephus. Of which pretended absurdities, and the way to resolve these
objections I have spoken above, chap. 59.

The Reader may judge by what spirit this Cardinal was led, and what account he
made of the holy Scripture, since he makes use of the testimony of Josephus to
shake the certainty of the words of the Evangelist St. Luke. Though there were
a discord between the history of the Gospel, and that of Josephus, a Jew and no
Christian, can there be any difficulty in resolving which of the two must
rather be believed? Can that doubt fall into a Christian soul that believes
the Gopsell?

We must not omit that the Cardinal, while he labors to show himself an
Hebrician, shows his ignorance, saying that Onias in Hebrew signifies the
strength of the people, whereas it signifies God is my strength; and putting
Onias and Onian for two names signifying the same thing, whereas Onian
signifies nothing. True it is that Oniam which comes near Onian, signifies the
people is my strength, but that name is not used among the Hebrews.

CHAP. 62. That the Cardinal attributes weak objections to us, and defends that
which we do not impugn.
M. Du Perron not daring to meddle with such strong objections, puts straws in
our hands instead of swords, and ascribes to us reasons which we do not use, or
if we use them it is another way, and answers objections which we never made.

He makes us say that the book of Maccabees is not an original history, but a
summary. That the primitive Author was called Jason which is a profane name;
And that he was a Cyrenian not a Jew. But we do not reason thus. We know that a
holy man may have a name taken from the Pagans, as Apollo, Philippus, and the
like. If the Etymology of the name of Jason is Greek, it signifies Physic or
remedy, where there is nothing that is profane. But if the origin be Hebrew,
it is a name corrupted from the name Jesus, according to the custom of the
Hebrews of that time to give to their Hebrew names a Greek or Latin inflection,
turning Phinees into Phoenix, Saul into Paul, and Jesus into Jason. We know
also that Cyrene was full of Jews, and that the same man might be a Jew and a
Cyrenian. And such was that Simon that bore the cross of the Lord, Mark 15.21.

This is then our true Objection. The Author of the Maccabees says that his
book is an abridgement of the five books of Jason the Cyrenian. That book of
Jason being not a sacred book, how can the summary of a profane book be sacted
and Canonical? This is as unreasonable as if n epitome of Titus Livius or
Cornelius Tacitus were made a Canonical book.

He makes us say also that the Author of the second book of the Maccabees
excuses the rudeness of his style. But we do not say that only, but we say
that this Author doubts whether he has said well, and craves pardon, saying
that he could do no better. Which are things unbeseeming an Author speaking by
the inspiration of the Spirit of God.

CHAP. 63. That we reject not the Apocrypha because they are contrary to us;
And that they are rather favorable to us.
SOme persons little versed in our Controvesies and in the reading of the
Apocrypha, might think that we reject all these books because they are contrary
to us. The following texts will show the contrary.

In these books the Purgatory and the Limbus of the Fathers are clearly
condemed. Wisdom 3.1. the Author speaks thus, The souls of the righteous are in
the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. They are not then
tormented in a fire.

Tobit 3.6. Tobit sore afflicted, and wishing for death, prays thus to God,
Command that I may be delivered out of this distress, and go to the everlasting
place. Then he did not believe the Limbus of the Fathers; for our Adversaries
do not hold it to be an everlasting place. No more did he believe Purgatory;
for none is so senseless as to beseech God that he may be tormented in a fire.
Neither can Purgatory be called an everlasting place: for our Adversaries hold
that the souls come out of it after the purgation is ended, and that Purgatory
shall be no more after the day of judgment.

In the Apocrypha supplement of Esther, chap. 13, ver. 13, 14. to kiss a man's
feet is accounted idolatry: for Mardocheus gives this reason why he would not
kiss a man's feet. I would have been content with good will for the salvation of
Israel to kiss the soles of his feet. But I did this that I might not prefer
the glory of man above the glory of God; Neither will I worship any but thee O
God. Yet neither this, nor the example of Jesus Christ who gave not his feet to
kiss though he was God, could hinder the Pope from giving his to kiss, not only
to persons of low condition, but even to Kings and Emperors. And he causes
himself to be worshipped with a religious worship.

In the book of Baruc, chap. 6. the honors and services which the Pagans
yielded to the images of their false Gods, are amply described, which are the
same as the people of the Roman Church yield to the images of the Saints. In
ver. 11. the Author says that the Pagan Priests will deck with garments their
Gods of gold, and silver, and wood. The same is done to the images of the
Saints. That they wipe their faces because of the dust, ver. 13. The like is
done to the images of the Saints. That some of those images hold a dagger, some
an axe, ver. 15. Thus also the images of the Saints are armed. St. Paul with a
sword, St. George with a lance, St Peter with a key like Janus, and St.
Christopher with a club like Hercules. That to these images they light candles,
though they cannot see, ver. 19. The same is done to the images of the Saints.
That these idols are carried upon men's shoulders; That being fallen they cannot
rise again. That offerings are made unto them as to the dead. That their
Priests gather those offerings and make profit of them. That they sing before
those images, ver. 25, and seq. What is there in all these, that is not done to
the images of the Saints which the Roman Church worshippeth? Who sees not that
Popery imitates Paganism, and that the one is copied out upon the other?

2 Macc. 15.12. it is related that Judas Maccabeus saw in a dream Onias the
Priest, and Jeremiah the Prophet, dead long before, praying and interceding for
the people of the Jews, and watching for their defense. Of Jeremiah
particularly it is said that he was of a wonderful and excellent Majesty, and
that he gave to Judas a sword to fight for the people of the Jews. Nevertheless
for all this neither Judas nor any of the people called upon Jeremiah or Onias.
An evident proof (if that history be not fabulous) that the Jews of that time
believed that the Saints in heaven intercede for men living on earth, but yet
that they must not be invocated. For if one prays for me, it follows not that
I must pray to him or defer to him a religious service. Note also, that if the
relation be true, Jeremiah and Onias were not in an underground prison, which
they call the Limbus of the Fathers.

In the 12th chapter of the same book, v. 43, 44. Judas Maccabeus makes
offerings and sacrifices for the dead that had defiled themselves with
idolatry; and the reason is added why he prayed for the dead, that he was
mindful of the resurrection. For (says the Author) if he had not hoped that
they that were slain should have risen again, it had been superfluous and vain
to pray for the dead. Thereby it appears that Judas prayed for those dead men
that they should rise unto salvation, and besought God that though they were
dead polluted with Idolatry, and (as our Adversaries speak) dead in mortal sin,
that God would nevertheless save them in the day of resurrection. It is then
(by this Authors judgment) a vain and superfluous thing to pray, not for the
resurrection, but to deliver souls out of Purgatory, as the Roman Church does.
Which also approves not the action of Judas Maccabeus to have made prayers,
and offerings for persons dead in motral sin.

In ver. 14. of the sixteenth chapter of Ecclesiasticus, there is in the Greek,
which is the Original, (...). Every one shall find according to his works.
Which text being not favorable to the doctrine of merits, because it is one
thing to find according to his works, another thing to find according to the
merit of his works, the Bible of the Roman Church does corrupt it with an
horrible falsification; for instead of according to his works, it says,
according to the merit of his works.

So I make no doubt but that the most clear-sighted among our Adversaries with
these books abolisht; And that the Council of Trent by the same authority
whereby they cut off the third and the fourth book of Ezra from the Canon of
the Bible, could willingly have done the same to Tobit, Judith, and the other
Apocrypha's.

We do not then reject these books out of fear that our Adversaries use them
against us, but because we are obliged to maintain the authority and purity of
holy Scripture, which is lost (as far as in us lies) when it is mingled with
fables, and impious or absurd doctrines, of which these books are full. That
shakes the faith of the weak; and gives occasion of triumph and insultation to
the enemies of the Christian name; for they reproach us that we receive fables
for the word of God.

CHAP. 64. Belief of the Ancient Greek Church about the Canonical Books.
LEt us hear the Verdict of the Ancients upon this matter, beginning at the
Greek and Eastern Church, as more ancient then the Latin and Western.

The Council of Laodicea more ancient then that of Nice, (...).
Can. 58. speaks thus, We must not say in the Church particular Psalms, nor
Books not Canonical, but only the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament.
Then they add a list of the Canonical Books, where they put not Tobit, nor
Judith, nor Wisdom, nor Ecclesiasticus, nor Susanna, nor the History of Bell and
the Dragon, nor the Maccabees.

It will not serve to answer, that this was a particular Council, and that it
consisted only of two and thirty Bishops, since several Universal Councils have
approved it, especially the Council of Trull, Can. 2. in these words, (...).
We ratify the Canons of Laodicea, of Phrygia. Wherefore the Ancient Church
and all that have labored about that Code, as Balsamon, Zonaras, Harmenopulus,
have inserted it in that Council of Trull.

Regourd 4. Demonst. p. 327.
The Jesuit Regourd answers, that the decisions of the Church are not made
all at one time. For he confesses that at that time, that is, above three
hundred years after the birth of Christ, those Books were not yet received as
Canonical. And he says, that they were received soon after. How much he is
mistaken in that, we shall show hereafter. In the mean while the Reader is
desired to remember this Confession, that the Apostles, and the Church of their
times did not acknowledge those Books for Canonical. Will these men be wiser
then the Apostles?

Melito Bishop of Sardis, that lived near the time of the Apostles, as Eusebius
relates it, in the first Book of his History, chap. 26. in an Epistle to
Onesimus makes the enumeration of the Canonical Books, but makes no mention of
Tobit, nor of Judith, nor of Wisdom, nor of Ecclesiasticus, nor of Maccabees.
Being (says he) returned into the East, and having stayed in the place where
these things have been preached and done; I have diligently set in order the
Books of the Old Testament, and have sent them to thee; Of which these are the
names; Five Books of Moses, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy,
Jesus son of Nave, the Judges, Ruth, four Books of Kings, two of Paralipomenon,
the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of Solomon, Wisdom, Ecclesiastes, The Song of
Songs, Job: the Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah; A Book of twelve Prophets, Daniel,
Ezekiel, Ezra. He follows altogether the Canon of the Hebrews, but that he
inserteth in it the Book of Wisdom. Whereupon Baronius, An. 172. Sect. 5.
speaks thus Melito ex Canone Hebraeorum tantum quos recitat libros recensuit.
Melito tells only the books that are in the Canon of the Hebrews. And
Bellarmine in the 1. Book of the Word of God, chap. 20. says. Multi veterum in
Canone exponendo Testamenti Veteris, aperte secuti sunt Hebraeos.
Many Ancients, as Melito, Epiphanius, Hilarious, Hieronymus, Ruffinus,
expounding the Canon of the Old Testament, have altogether followed the Canon
of the Hebrews, that is, they have rejected the Maccabees, Tobit, Judith, etc.
It would be very strange if the Fathers had left the Canon of the Christians to
adhere unto that of the Jews. For why should they follow the Canon of the Jews,
that is, that which is found in the Hebrew Bible which is the Original, but
that they believed that there was none other? We have seen above, how Hierom,
the most learned of all the Fathers, in his Preface upon Daniel, says that the
Fables of Susanna and of Bell and the Dragon have not the authority of Holy
Scriptures, because they are not in the Hebrew; wherefore he says, that he
has given them the black mark of a spear [obelo praenotavimus] as it were to
cut their throat. And more clearly yet in his Preface upon Ezra and Nehemiah.
Quae non habentur apud illos [Hebraeos] nec de viginti quatuor senibus sunt,
procul abjicienda.
We must cast away very far, all that is not received among the Hebrews, and
which is none of the four and twenty Elders. He makes an allusion to the four
and twenty Elders mentioned, Rev. 4. according to which number some of them
reckoned the Books of the Old Testament, as he says himself in his Prologus
galeatus, and in his Preface upon the Book of Kings. Apocrypha nescit Ecclesia.
Ad Hebraeos igitur recurrendum est, unde and Dominus loquitur.
The Church acknowledges not the Apocrypha; we must then return to the Hebrew
after which also Jesus speaks. This Father holds all to be Apocrypha which is
not found in the Hebrew of the Old Testament.

Origin upon the first Psalm, according to the Testimony of Eusebius in the
sixth Book of his History, chap. 24. speaks thus, We must not be ignorant, that
there are (as the Hebrews teach) two and twenty Books of the Old Testament,
which among them is the number of their Letters. Then he makes an enumeration
of those two and twenty Books conformable unto the Hebrew Bible, which is the
Original Text; And to give a particular brand to the Maccabees, he says (...).
Without are the Maccabees.

Eusebius in his Chronicle translated by Hierom upon the 116. Olympiad.
Maccabaeorum historia Hebraea hic Graecorum supputat regnum. Verum hi^libri
inter divinas scripturas non recipiuntur.
The History of the Maccabees does from hence reckon the reign of the Grecians,
but these Books are not received among the Divine Scriptures. And in the first
Book of the same Chronicles, being come to the time of Nehemiah and Ezra, and
having related their History, he adds, In codice Graeco Scaligeri, page 44.
(...), etc (...).
As far as Ezra and Nehemiah the Hebrew Scriptures have been delivered by the
blessed Apostles, the Disciples of the Lord Jesus, to be preached. But that
which is happened and done to the Jews since, until the Incarnation of the
Lord, Josephus relates it in his Writings of the Maccabees, and Africanus after
him. He acknowledges that such Writings as are posteriour to Ezra, were not
given to the Church by the Apostles, and that the Church did not receive them
to preach them, and that they are grounded only upon the testimony of Josephus,
whom he holds to be the Author of the Maccabees.

Demonstr. 4. p. 349.
The Jesuit Regourd answers according to his custom, that if Eusebius had
known the determination of the third Council of Carthage, he would have altered
his language, that is, he wanted so much to be well instructed in that matter.
But how could Eusebius know the determination of the third Council of Carthage
which sat many years after his death? That Jesuit has little knowledge of
History.

Among the works of Athanasius, there is a Book entitled Synopsis, which M. du
Perron holds to be none of the works of Athanasius. Both Bellar. l. 1 de verbo
Dei 4 c... ex Graecis.
Bellarmine, and Baronius on the year 342.. 41. receive it as genuine and true.
In that book there is an enumeration of the Canonical books of the Old
Testament, and the Author says that they are two and twenty in number
according to the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet. Then he adds, (...), etc.
Besides these, there are others also of the Old Testament, not Canonical,
which are read only to the Catechumeni; the Wisdom of Solomon, the Wisdom of
Jesus the son of Sirach, Esther, Judith, Tobit, etc. Perhaps by Esther he means
the rest of Esther. Of the Maccabees particularly he says, Among these books
[not Canonical] are reckoned the four Ptolemaical books of the Maccabees.

Whether that book be of Athanasius, or of some other Author, we care not,
since we have an Epistle of Athanasius where that holy man's opinion is set down
in express terms. All the books of the Old Testament (says he) are two and
twenty in number. Then he adds. Athanasii Epist. (...), tom. 2. p. 920. (...)
etc. Hunc eundem locum invenies apud Balsamonem, edit. nova Parisiensi. p. 921.
and 922.
Besides these books there are others also which are not put in the Canon, but
are propounded by the Fathers to be read by the new comers, and such as will
instruct themselves in the word of piety; namely, the Wisdom of Solomon, the
Wisdom of Sirach, Esther, Judith, etc. As for the Maccabees he does not so much
as name them among the Apocrypha.

The Jesuit Regourd flies to his ordinary shift, saying in his fourth
Demonstration, p. 347. that then the Church had determined nothing about that
matter. By speaking so he confesses that the Apostles did not hold the books
of Tobit, Judith and the Maccabees for Canonical, and that they have determined
nothing about it, which is as much as saying that the Roman Church of this time
is better instructed then the Apostles. So much the Jesuit Stapleton
intimates, Stapl. de Authorit. Scripturae, l. 2. c. 4.. 14. p. 360. Cur
(inquam) Sapientiam, Ecclesiasticum, Tobiam, Judith, and alios Veteris
Testamenti libros Apostolorum temporibus non confirmatos, sed a posterioribus
Conciliis in Canonem receptos, eo nomine rejiciendos affirmas?
In the time of the Apostles (says he) Tobit, Judith, and other books of the
Old Testament were not confirmed, having been received into the Canon by the
posteriour Councils. God forbid that we should presume to be more clear-sighted
then the Apostles.

Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem in his 4. Catechesis in the chapter of holy
Scriptures, makes a list of the books of the Old Testament; and says that they
are but twenty two. All the others, (says he, speaking of the Apocrypha) are
cast out, and are of a second rank. In that Catalogue he puts neither Tobit,
nor Judith, nor Ecclesiasticus, nor Wisdom, nor Susanna, nor the Maccabees. He
wholly follows the Canon of the Hebrews, and declares why he does so.

Read (says he) these two and twenty books, and have nothing common with the
Apocrypha. Again, Meditate carefully those only, whom also we read in the
Church safely (...).
. The Apostles and the ancient Bishops, leaders of the Church, who have taught
them, were far wiser then thou. Cyrillus then has followed the Canon of the
Hebrews to obey the command of the Apostles.

Gregory Nazianzen, called by excellency the Divine, has made verses purposely
of that matter, which begin thus, (...).
As many books to the Old Covenant belong
As there are letters in the Holy tongue.


Then he makes an enumeration of those two and twenty books, without Tobit,
Judith, Bell, Susanna, Ecclesiasticus, and the Maccabees. It is too much
peremptoriness to affirm without proof, as M. du Perron does, that these verses
are none of Gregory's, seeing that they relish the vein of his other verses,
and are inserted among them. Lib. 1. de verbo Dei, cap. 4.. Ex Graecis.
Bellarmin receives them without difficulty.

Other verses we have of the same time in Iambick meeters, made by Amphilochius
Bishop of Iconium, which are found among those of Gregory, and are set down by
Balsamon. In those verses he makes a Catalogue of the divine books, among which
neither Judith, nor Tobit, nor Ecclesiasticus, nor Wisdom, nor the Maccabees
are found.

Epiphanius Bishop of Salamin in Cyprus, who is almost their contemporary,
says the same, in the book of weights and measures: where after he has
restrained the Canonical books to the number of twenty two, he adds: For the
two books written in rows of sentences, namely, that which is called the
Panaretus of Solomon, and that of Jesus son of Sirach, are indeed useful and
profitable, but (...)
are not put in the number of the Oracles. Wherefore also they were not put in
the Ark of the Covenant. The same he says in the heresy of the Epicureans,
which is the VIII; and in that of the Anomoeans or Aetians, which is the 76. It
is true that there he makes a Catalogue of the divine Scriptures, among which
he puts Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom, but he sets them after the Revelation,
removing them from the Old Testament, which he would not have done, had he not
found some difficulty in receiving them. As also in the heresy of the
Epipicureans he says that there is doubt made of those books. Howsoever he
omits all the other books that are in question, the Maccabees, Tobit, Judith,
etc. They that say that Epiphanius followed the Canon of the Jews, say true;
for he acknowledged no other. And they that speak so, ought to produce some
other place of Epiphanius where he speaks of two sorts of Canons, and
distinguishes the Canon of the Jews from that of the Christians.

To these I add Chrysostom in the fourth Homily upon Genesis, speaking of the
books of the Old Testament. Page 32. (...).
All the divine Scriptures (says he) of the Old Testament were first written
in Hebrew. How comes it to pass then that the books contended about, as Judith,
Ecclesiasticus and the Maccabees, are not found in the Hebrew, if they be
divine Scriptures?

Damascenus, An. 750.
though much posteriour in time, must not be omitted, because our Adversaries
value him much as a great Patron of the adoration of images. In the fourth book
of the orthodox faith, chap. 18. he says that there are two and twenty books
in the Old Testament according to the number of the Hebrew letters. Then he
makes a whole Catalogue of those books wherein he puts neither Tobit, nor
Judith; nor the Maccabees, nor Wisdom, nor Ecclesiasticus. Of these two last he
speaks thus; The Panaret, that is the Wisdom of Solomon, and the Wisdom of
Jesus (...).
are books full of virtue, and good; but they are not put in this number, and
were not put in the Ark. An error which he borrowed from Epiphanius, to
believe that the sacred books were enclosed in the Ark. See 1 Kings 8.9. 2 Chronicles. 5.10.

CHAP. LXV. Belief of the Fathers of the Latin or Western Church about the
Canonical books. And that the Cardinal does not truly represent it.
CArdinal du Perron being cast by the judgment of the Greek Church, has
recourse to the Western Church, saying that there was never any Latin Author
that had taken the license of overthrowing the authority of the book of
Maccabees, before St. Hierom, and Ruffinus after him. The same he says of the
other books that are in question. If he says true, and if the Greek Church in
such an important point did differ from the Roman, it shows that the Greek
Church was not subject unto the Roman.

The Reader may also observe the Cardinals subtilty, to have recourse to the
Latin Church against the Greek, in a matter of which he knows that few Latin
Fathers have written. Yet let us see what their sense was.

Hierom in his Preface upon the Proverbs of Solomon speaks thus. Sicut ergo
Judith and Tobiae and Maccabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos inter
Canonicas Scripturas non recipit; sic and haec duo volumina, Sapientiam
Solomonis and Jesu filii Sirach, legate ad ae dificationem plebis, non ad
authoritatem Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam.
As the Church reads indeed the books of Judith, of Tobit, and of the
Maccabees, but receives them not among the Canonical Scriptures: So let her
read these two volumes for the edification of the Church, not to confirm the
authority of the doctrines of the Church. Note that he sets forth the belief of
the Church of his time as well as his own. In the same place he says that the
inscription of the book of the Wisdom of Solomon is false. And in his Prologus
Galeatus, Sapientia quae vulgo Solomonis inscribitur and Jesus filii Sirach
liber, and Judith and Tobias and Pastor non sunt in Canone.
The book of Wisdom and that of Jesus son of Sirach, and Judith, and Tobit, and
the Pastor are not Canonical.

Ruffinus in the Exposition of the Symbol speaks thus, Sciendum tamen est quod
and alii libri sunt qui non Canonici sed Ecclesiastici a majoribus appellati
sunt, ut est Sapientia Solomonis, and illa Sapientia quae dicitur filii Sirach.
Ejusdem ordinis est libellus Tobiae, and Judith, and Maccabaeorum libri, etc.
It must be known that there are other books which the Ancients have not called
Canonical but Ecclesiastical, as the Wisdom of Solomon, and the other Wisdom,
which is said to be of Jesus son of Sirach. Of the same rank are the book of
Tobit, Judith, and the books of the Maccabees. And in the New Testament the
book that is called Pastoral or Hermes, the Judgment of Peter. All which they
would have to be read in the Church, but not to be alleged to confirm the
authority of the faith. He speaks as of a thing established by the Ancients,
herein contradicting our Cardinal, who will persuade us that Hierom and Ruffin
are the first that have spoken so.

In vain should one object here that Ruffinus is accused of heresy by Hierom,
who calls him a Scorpion; for there was a mortal hatred between Hierom and
Ruffinus, and they have written grievous invectives the one against the other.
Yet suppose that he was an heretic. It is enough that in this point he is with
Hierom, and that none of the enemies of Ruffinus did ever tax him for putting
Tobias, Judith, and the Maccabees out of the rank of the Canonical books. That
which grieveth most our Adversaries, is, that Ruffinus puts the Maccabees and
Judith in the same row as the book called Pastor, which is a fabulous and
ridiculous book.

Our adversaries give us eight books of Apostolical Constitutions, which they
say to be of Clement Bishop of Rome, the next successor to St. Peter: There in
In editione Latina Bovii Tomo Council. 1.
the second book, chap. 61. there is a Catalogue of Canonical books, where
neither Tobit, nor Judith, nor Ecclesiasticus, nor Wisdom, nor the Maccabees
are found.

Tertullian is a hundred and fourscore years more ancient then Hierom. He says
in the fourth book of his verses against Marcion, in the seventh chapter, that
Alarm numerus antiqua volumina signat, Esse satis circa viginti quatuor ista.
by the twenty four wings of the animals mentioned in the Revelation the twenty
four ancient volumes are designed. Others reckon but twenty two: for Hierom in
his above mentioned Prologue says that some did reckon four and twenty books
of the Old Testament, because they reckoned separately the Lamentations of
Jeremiah, and the History of Ruth; saying that they represent the twenty four
wings of the animals. It is clear that Tertullian did not acknowledge the books
of the Maccabees for Canonical Scriptures, since in the third chapter of his
book de corona militis, he puts prayers and offerings for the dead among the
unwritten Traditions. For in the twelfth chapter of the second of the Maccabees
there is an example of it.

Hilary Bishop of Poitiers writ some fifty or sixty years before Hierom. In his
Prologue of the Psalms he says, The Law of the Old Testament is reduced to two
and twenty books, that they may fit the number of the Hebrew letters. Then he
makes the Catalogue of those books where he puts none of those that are
questioned between us and our Adversaries, and says that this doctrine Ita
secundum traditiones veterum.
comes from the Tradition of the Ancients. Here Regourd does contradict
himself, choler having disjointed his memory. In the fourth demonstration, p.
354. and 355.
He says that Hilary receiving Daniel, Esther, and Jeremiah, comprehends under
Daniel the hymn of the three children, Susanna, and the history of Bell; and
under Esther the six last chapters; forgetting that he had said in the page
before that Hilary makes the Catalogue of the books of the Old Testament
according to the Canon of the Jews, who never received the book of Susanna, nor
the history of Bell, as also they never received more of the book of Esther then
is in the Hebrew.

Philastrius Bishop of Brixia in Italy writ a little before Hierom about the
year 380. In his book of heresies, in the chapter of the Apocrypha he says
that it was commanded by the Apostles that nothing should be read in the Church
but the Law and the Prophets, and the Gospels, etc. comprehending all the Old
Testament under the Law and the Prophets. Now it was never heard that Judith,
or Susanna or the Maccabees should be either the Law or the Prophets.

Austin is express to this purpose in his second book against Gaudentius, chapter
23. where he puts the Maccabees out of the rank of the Law and the Prophets,
saying, E^ hanc quidem Scripturam quae appellatur Maccabaeorum, non habent
Iudaei, sicut Legem, Prophetas and Psalmos quibus Deus testimonium perhibet.
The Jews receive not that Scripture which is called the Maccabees as the Law,
the Prophets and the Psalms to which the Lord bears testimony. Austin says
plainly that God bears no testimony to the book of Maccabees as he bears
unto the Law and the Prophets. Then the Maccabees belong neither to the Law nor
to the Prophets.

But the words of Philastrius are the most remarkable of all in the ninth
chapter, where he speaks of the heretics Hermiotites and Prodianites. Among
whose heresies he puts this, Hi Sapientiae libro utuntur Sirach illius qui
scripsit post Solomonem, id est post mulla tempora librum unum Sapientiae.
That they use the book of Wisdom of that Sirach who long after Solomon writ a
book of Wisdom.

It was then a great neglience or oversight in the Cardinal to affirm that
before Hierom none of the Latin or Occidental Church has rejected the book of
the Maccabees.

The Churches of Gauls, a little after Hieromes time, are witnesses on our
side. For in the seventh volume of the works of Austin, there is an Epistle of
Hilary Bishop of Arles to Austin; wherein Hilary says that in Gauls they did
not approve that he had used a text of Wisdom, because the book is not
Canonical. Illud etiam testimonium quod posuisti Raptus est ne malitia mutaret
intellectum ejus, tanquam non Canonicum definiunt omittendum.
They define (says he) that this text must be omitted, because it is not
canonical. Now although those Gauls dissented from Austin in the point of
predestination, saying that God has nor predestined unto salvation those
whom he foresaw that they should believe in Jesus Christ. Austin on the
contrary maintaining that God has predestined unto salvation those unto whom
he will give faith and repentance, and that the use of grace depends not from
the free will of man, but from the absolute Election of God; yet those Gauls
were accounted faithful Christians in their country, and are called by
Prosper in the precedent Epistle, servants of Christ. Chrysostom has spoken
far harder then they in that matter, and is not therefore called an heretic.
These Gauls rejecting the book of Wisdom, followed the belief of the Gallican
Church. Wherefore also Hilary does not reprove them. And Austin speaks often as
they do, as we shall see hereafter; although in the book of the predestination
of Saints, disputing against these Gauls, he indeavoureth to exalt that book
of Wisdom, being grieved that he had been reproved.

I cannot but bring here a text of Gregory the I. although he lived toward the
end of the sixth age; That Gregory, of all the Bishops of Rome the most
esteemed, in the nineteenth of his Morals, chap. 17. before he alleged a text
of the Maccabees, made a preface of excuses for using a text that was not
Canonical. Qua de re non inordinate agimus si ex libris licet non Canonicis,
sed tamen ad aedificationem Ecclesiae editis, testimonium proferamus.
Of which thing (says he) we do not treat without order and reason, if we
bring a testimony from books that are not Canonical, but have been published for
the edification of the Church. Then he adds the text of the Maccabees, where
Eleazar put himself to death, going under an Elephant, to destroy those that
rid upon him. Upon which place Ambrosius Catharinus, a man of great learning
and reputation among our Adversaries, speaks in this manner, Cathar. Opusc. de
lib. Canonicis, col. 302. B. Gregorius authoritate (ut opinor) Hieronymi motus
videtur concedere illos non esse Canonicos.
St. Gregory moved (as I think) by the authority of St. Hierom, seems to grant
that these books are not Canonical.

Cardinal du Perron bends here all his wit to avoid that blow. He says that
Gregory was yet but a Deacon when he writ that book. But if herein he spoke
amiss, why did he not correct that fault when he was made a Bishop? Why would
he suffer that to remain among his works?

He says Du Perron. p. 441.
also that the first draught of that Comment was made in the East, intimating
that he perfected it, and writ it fair when he was returned to Rome. But what
is that to the purpose? Was Gregory an hypocrite, writing among the Grecians
against the sense of the Roman Church? Baron. an. 586. 25. and An. 593.. 72.
Greg. l. 4. Ep. 46. Indict. 13.
And if he writ there but the rough draught of the book, it is like that the
Grecians did not see it.

But acknowledging that these two answers have but little color, he finds out
a third shift, which overthrows the two former. He says that Gregory's words
must be expounded, as supposing, not granting; as if he said; Suppose that the
books were not Canonical, yet they have been written for the edification of the
Church. There is in the Latin, Si ex libris licet non Canonicis, sed tamen ad
aedificationem Ecclesiae editis testimonium proferamus. One would think that
the Cardinal had more skill in the Latin tongue, then to translate licet non
Canonicis, suppose that they were not Canonical: for licet signifies although,
not suppose. Besides the Cardinal adds the word were, which is not in the
Latin. Then by that exposition he overthrows the sense of Gregory: For if
Gregory declares by these words that he holds the books of Maccabees to be
Canonical (as the Cardinal will have it) to what purpose should he make excuses
for alleging them?

Here Demonstr. 4. p. 350.
Regourd rejects the Cardinals opinion, and finds another solution which is
no better. He says that Gregory understands that the Maccabees are not
Canonical according to the Canon of the Jews, although they be Canonical
according to the Canon of the Christian Church.

But that is speaking against conscience; for why should Gregory forsake the
Canon of the Christians to comply with the Canon of the Jews? Would he have
made excuses before he alleged a text of the Maccabees, if the Christians
received that book for Canonical? Would he excuse himself to the Christians for
believing as they do? Or would he excuse himself to the Jews whom he did not
fear? Does he make any mention of the Jews or of their Canon? Nay, does he not
directly say that the Maccabees are not Canonical? Who sees not that he makes
excuses to the Christians for using a book which they approved not? As indeed
to mitigate them, he adds, that although the book be not Canonical, yet it
was written for the edification of the Church: which may be said of many books
which are not Canonical.

The book of the wonders of Scripture which is found in the third Tome of St.
Austin in the second book, chap. 33. speaks thus, De lacu vero and Abacak
translato in Belis and Draconis fabula in hoc ordine non ponitur, quod in
authoritate divinae Scripturae non habetur.
That which is related the second time of the [Lions] den, and of the
transportation of Habacuk, in the fable of Bell and the dragon, is not put in
this rank, because it is not held to have the authority of divine Scripture.

CHAP. 66. Confutation of the Cardinals shifts.
ALL that the Cardinal opposes to all that was said before, Page 441.
is so weak that it may be thrown down with blowing upon it.

He says that Cyprian calls the Maccabees divine Scriptures. That Ambrose
alleging the Maccabees cries out, Moses says as it is written in the book of
the Maccabees. That Lucifer Bishop of Sardinia calls the Maccabees the holy
Scripture. But none of these calls the Maccabees Canonical. He says also that
the Fathers often allege these books saying, It is written. But who knows not
that the same Fathers often allege books as sacred which never were held
Canonical? Irenaeus in the fourth book chap. 37. alleging the book of Pastor,
otherwise called Hermes, says, Been pronuntiavit Scriptura, Scripture has
well pronounced. Clemens Alexandrinus 1. Stromaton, toward the end of the
book, alleging the same book, brings forth a place of the same, which he says
to be divinely revealed. The like is found in Athanasius in the book of the
Incarnation of the Word. Among the Popes Decretals, the first of Pope Pius the
first speaks thus, Istis temporibus Hermes Doctor fidei and Scripturarum
effulsit.
In that time Hermes a Doctor of the faith and of the Scriptures did shine
among us. And upon that he relates the fable of an Angel appearing to Hermes in
a Shepherds habit. Yet he calls that Scripture. Pope Gelasius Did. 15. Can.
Sancta Romana.
puts that book of Hermes among the Apocrypha. Gelas. Cysicen. Concilii Niceni
l. 2. c. 18. p. 546. (...).
The Fathers of Nice in full Council alleging the book of the Assumption of
Moses, say, We shall propound that which is in Scripture. Ambrose in his book
of the good of death, chap. 10. alleges the third book of Ezra; and so does
Austin in the sixth chapter of the fourth book to Bonifacius. Yet the Roman
Church puts that book among the Apocrypha.

Then he says that Hierom has also doubted of the Epistle to the Hebrews. But
though it were so (for we could prove the contrary) what does that to invalid
that which he says that the Church did not receive Tobit, Judith, the
Maccabees, etc. among the Canonical books? Our dispute is only of the books of
the Old Testament.

Page 442.
He adds that Hierom has been induced to do this, by the Jews among whom he
dwelt, which is a conjecture without proof, and a crime of disloyalty and
prevarication against the Christian Church, charged upon St. Hierom. Yea he
goes so far as to say that Hierom had given money to the Jews to be helped by
them in the Edition of his Bible. Page 443.
Whence he will infer that Hierom endeavored to please the Jews, sworn enemies
to Christ, because he had need of their help in his labor.

Page 443.
He says also that Hierom being since more exactly instructed of the true sense
of the Church, changed his opinion, and retracted both in general and in
particular what he had said in three Prologues. And thereupon he brings some
places of Hierom, which he will have us rather to regard. But there is nothing
so authentical in all his works, as his Prefaces presixed before the holy
Scripture, where he declares that such is the sense of the Church. Yet let us
see these places.

Hierom having said in his Prefaces before Daniel, that the Susanne Belisque ac
draconis fabulas non contineri in Hebraico.
fables of Susanna, and Bell, and the Dragon, are not in the Hebrew, and that
these books have not the authority of holy Scriptures, and being reproved for
it by Ruffinus, he excuses it in his second Apology against Ruffinus, saying,
that he did not speak his sense, but what the Jews said. But he does not
retract what he had said in his Prologus Galeatus, that all that is besides the
two and twenty books of the Hebrew Bible must be accounted Apocrypha. Nor what
he had said in the Preface before the books of Solomon, that the Church
receives not the books of Tobit, Judith and the Maccabees for Canonical.

He brings a second testimony of Hieroms Preface upon Tobit, That the Hebrews
cut off the book of Tobit from the divine Scriptures. But I see not in that any
retractation. There is none of us but may say as much.

The Cardinal adds a third place maliciously clipped and corrupted. He alleges
these words out of the same Preface, The jealousy of the Hebrews does accuse
us, and imputes to us that against their Canon we transferr the book of Tobit
to Latin ears. But I judge it better to be displeasing to the judgment of the
Pharisees, and to be obedient to the commandment of Bishops. By these words so
clipped, one may understand Hieroms meaning to be that by receiving the book of
Tobit into the Canon, he would displease the Jews to obey the Bishops: But
Hierom had said a little before that the Bishops pressed him earnestly to
translate the book of Tobit into Latin. Then he adds, that the Jews were
displeased at that translation, but that it was better to displease them,
obeying the Bishops who had desired him to bestow his labor upon it. That
those Bishops should hold that book of Tobit for Canonical, he does not mention
at all.

He brings two places more of Hierom, whereby he sets Judith among the sacred
books, and says that the Council of Nice has received it among the Holy
Scriptures.

For answer I have already proved by express texts that the Fathers will often
attribute the title of sacred books to books not Canonical, and such as the
Roman Church holds for Apocrypha. And as for that he says that Hierom in his
Preface upon Judith says that the Council of Nice received the book of Judith
among the Canonical books, he makes Hierom say more then he does; for he does
not directly affirm that, but only relates it upon the faith of another;
thereby acknowledging that himself had read no such thing, nor found it in the
Council of Nice. These are his words, Apud Hebraeos liber Judith inter
hagiographa legitur, cujus authoritas ad roboranda illa quae in contentionem
veniunt minus idonea judicatur, etc. Sed quia hunc librum Synodus Nicena in
numero sanctarum Sc^ipturarum legitur computasse, acquievi postulationi vestrae.
Among the Hebrews the book of Judith is read among the Hagiographa, a book
whose authority is judged not to be very fit to confirm the things that are in
controversy. Yet being written in Chaldean, it is put among the histories. But
because it is read that the Council of Nice has counted it among the holy
Scriptures, I have condescended to your request. He had read some Author that
related that this had been said in the Council. But how little credence he
gives to that Author, it appears in that he says that this book is held to
be of small authority to decide controversies. When Hierom writ so many times
that the book of Judith was not Canonical, had he not read the Council of Nice?
I could produce a multitude of ancient witnesses that say that the Council of
Nice made but twenty Canons, whom we have entire to this day; in which there is
not one word of Judith. The Reader may ponder these words of Hierom upon the
first of Haggai. Et in Judith, si quis tamen librum vult recipere mulieris.
As it is written in Judith, yet if any will receive the book of a woman. And
in the eleventh Epistle to Furia. Legimus in Judith (si cui tamen placet
volumen recipere) viduam confectam jejuniis, etc.
We read in Judith (if any will receive that volume) that a widow, etc. Which
is more, in the said preface upon Judith he says that Libri Judith authoritas
ad roborandailla quae in contentio nem vemunt, minus idonea judicatur.
the authority of the book of Judith is judged not to be very meet for
confirming the emergent doubts, etc.

Finally the Cardinal alleges a place of Hierom in the last chapter of the
book of the Ecclesiastical writers, that says that Scripture relates how
Alexander came out of the land of Kittim; That taken out of the beginning of
the Maccabees. But Hierom says not that the Maccabees are Canonical. Pope
Nicolas the first in his Epistle to the Emperor Lewis speaks thus: In
Scripturis narratur Constantinus Imperator divisse.
In the Scriptures it is related that the Emperor Constantine has said, etc.
He takes the word of Scripture for writings and histories.

Page 345.
The Jesuit Regourd is storming about that question with much impatience; But
in the end, truth fetches that confession from him, That St. Hierom deemed not
that in his time the Church had as yet inserted those books in the rank of the
Canonical books. But it is not credible that Hierom was deceived in that point,
and that he should be ignorant what books were at that time received in the
Church for Canonical. And if he was overseen in this matter, at least he ought
to have given order that his Preface set in the front of the Bible, (where he
declares all these books to be Apocrypha) should be corrected. The same
Jesuit to make the Reader merry, says that Hierom having omitted the book of
Judith, received it since after the decision of the Council of Nice: as if
Hierom had written his first works before the Council of Nice, which sat
before Hierom was born, or at least when Hierom was in his first infancy; so
ignorant is that Jesuit in history. Besides, the Council of Nice made no
decision upon that.

From Hierom the Cardinal passes to Hilary, who in his Prologue upon the
Psalms excludes the Maccabees, Judith, etc. from the Catalogue of the
Canonical books. He upbraids Hilary that he has taken that from Origin, and
has translated it. But it is all one, since he approves the doctrine of
Origin. He says also that when Hilary said that herein he followed the
doctrine of the Ancients, by the Ancients he understands the Jews. That shift
is ridiculous, and of that there is no trace in Hilary. The Christians never
speak so, and acknowledge not the Jews in the time of the Maccabees for their
Fathers or Elders. If Hilary has taken that from Origin, is it not evident
that Origin is one of those Elders whom he has followed?

Finally the Cardinal shuts up his discourse with four warnings. The first is,
Page 441. and seq.
that the Synopsis is not of Athanasius. To which we have already answered.

The second warning is, that many Fathers of the Greek Church make Catalogues
of the Canonical books, in which Judith, Tobit, Ecclesiasticus, Page 444.
Wisdom (which he calls posthumous books) are omitted; And that nevertheless
there is not one of those books but was used by the Fathers in quality of a
sacred book. And upon that he brings many places of Greek Fathers who allege
those books, and yet call them not sacred. All that is to no purpose; for
alleging a book is not receiving it for Canonical. For then we should say that
Menander, Aratus and Epimenides alleged by St. Paul are Canonical Authors. We
have showed also that Fathers will allege the book of Pastor, and the third
and fourth of Ezra with the like respect, although they be Apocrypha. We have
showed also that this Elogie of sacred books is taken sometimes largely, and is
attributed also unto books not Canonical. And what reason or sincerity is in
this, after a Father has expressly declared that such and such books are not
Canonical (of which we have brought many testimonies) to go about to overthrow
that affirmation by some other places where those books are only alleged, but
not called Canonical?

The Cardinal has an especial fly trick about the book of the Maccabees. For
that word of Maccabees is taken three ways; Page 446.
sometimes for the Maccabees, sometimes for Judas Maccabeus and his brothers,
sometimes for the seven children martyred by Antiochus; Josephus calls them so,
and has made an express book of them, that bears that title. M. du Perron
makes use of that ambiguity to deceive. Origin in the eighth book against
Celsus says that the History of the Maccabees is attested by the testimony of
two whole Nations, where by the history of the Maccabees he understands, not
the books entitled the Maccabees, as M. du Perron takes it, but the things
happened in the time of Juda Maccabeus and his brethren. He adds that
Chrysostom upon Psalm. 43. says, that David in that Psalm has prophesied the
things that were to happen in the time of the Maccabees.

And Theodoret says the like upon Romans 8. Those places say only that God had
foretold the afflictions of the Church that were to come in the time of the
Maccabees, that is of Juda and his brethren, but speak not of the books of
Maccabees, nor of their authority.

His third warning, is that the Fathers followed according to the exigence of
their purpose, sometimes the primitive supputation of the Jews which is the
Canon of the Hebrews, sometimes the accessory supputation of the Christians.
But he confirms this with no example, but that of Origin (whom he uses to
revile as a Father of errors, and an Author of no authority) and Epiphanius;
Of the testimonies of these two Authors we have spoken before, and we need not
repeat them here. After all, what is following the Canon of the Hebrews, but
following the truth of the Hebrew Bible, and about the number of the books of
the Old Testament following the Church of the Old Testament, to which the
Oracles of God have been committed! How can it be that a book that was not
divine nor Canonical under the Old Testament, should become such under the New
Testament?

But that shift is clearly confuted by Hierom in his Preface upon Daniel, where
he says that Porphyrius, the capital enemy of Jesus Christ, to invalid the
certainty of the Prophecies of Daniel, objecteth that Daniel by the Greek
clinches upon names of trees, falsely presupposes that they spoke Greek in
Babylon. To which Hierom answers, The text of Hierom we have before set in the
Margent, chap. 65.
that the book of Susanna and the history of Bell are fables, and have not
Daniel for their Author, but a certain Habacuk a Levite, and that he had cut
off that book long before from the Canon, setting a black mark upon it, joining
himself with the Greek Doctors, who think not themselves obliged to answer
Porphyrius for those books, because they are not in the Hebrew, and have not
the authority of holy Scriptures: openly declaring that the books that are not
in the Hebrew, are none of the holy Scriptures of the Old Testament.

By the way we will observe a notorious ignorance of the Cardinal. In the
fiftieth chapter of the first book, Page 446. of the first Edition.
he says that the same Greek Authors speaking of the books of the Old
Testament, would follow according to the exigence of their purpose, sometimes
the primitive supputation of the Jews and the Rabbinical tradition of the Canon
of Ezra, and of the books enclosed in the Ark, etc. sometimes the accessory
supputation of the Christians. His calling the enumeration of the Canonical
books a supputation, is a light fault. But it is intolerable that he should
call it in contempt, a Rabbinical supputation, and would make us believe that
the books of the Canon of Ezra (so he calls in contempt the books of the Hebrew
Bible) were enclosed in the Ark of the Covenant. For not only that Ark was no
more in the time of Ezra, but even while the Ark was, and in all the time from
Moses to the destruction of the Temple, it will not be found that ever the
sacred books were put within the Ark. Scripture is express upon that 1 Kings
8.9. There was nothing within the Ark but the two Tables of stone which Moses
put there at Horeb. The same is said, 2 Chronicles. 5.10. That which the Apostle
says, Heb. 9.4. that in the Ark there was a pot of gold which had Manna, and
the rod of Aaron, does not contradict this: For the Apostle speaks of the time
of Moses. But in the time of Solomon that Manna and that rod were no more in
the Ark, nor near it, being (as is likely) corrupted by the length of time. The
Cardinal putting the books of the Canon of Ezra in the Ark was deceived by
Epiphanius, who says so much in the book of measures and weights. How could
the books of the Canon of Ezra have been put in the Ark, seeing that in Ezra's
time the Ark was no more?

The Cardinal shows how little his skill was in Hebrew, alleging a place of
Origin taken out of Eusebius in the sixth book of his history, chap. 19. where
Origin says that the Hebrews called the books of Maccabees, Sarbit Sarbaneel,
that is, the Scepter of the Prince of Gods children. He that at the least
occasions strives to set out proofs of his great learning, ought to have
redrest that wronged place, and given notice to the Reader that he must read
Sar been el, and not make of three words one, and not put bane for been.

His fourth and last observation is, Page 448.
that of those very Fathers that make a Canon or Catalogue of the books of the
Old Testament where the Maccabees are past over in silence, there is not one
that gives a perfect Canon or Catalogue, and that there is always some
defect, even by the judgment of the Ministers of Geneva. That Melito omits the
book of Hester; Cyrillus, the Revelation. The Synopsis attributed to
Athanasius, the book of Esther. Nazianzen, Esther and the Revelation. That
Amphilochius questions the same two books. That Josephus omitteth the book of
Job. All these the Cardinal brings to no purpose. For as for the Revelation, it
is a book of the New Testament: But the question is of the books of the Old. As
for the book of Esther, I suppose that Melito or Eusebius have left it out,
only out of forgetfulness; And that Athanasius putting Esther among the not
Canonical, by Esther meant the rest of Esther. As for Josephus he was a Jew,
not a Christian; Now we have to do here only with the belief of the Ancient
Christians. In that the Cardinal says that of the Fathers that follow the
Canon of the Hebrews there is not one that gives a perfect Canon, and that
there is always some defect, his memory failed him. For in the Catalogue of
the books of the Old Testament which Hierom gives us, no book is omitted, nor
in that of Ruffinus, nor in that of Hilary, nor in that of Cyrillus of
Jerusalem, who only adds to the Canon a little Epistle of Baruch. The same I
say of Epiphanius in the heresy of the Epioureans, and of Damascenus; and so
in many, little or no defect will be found.

He adds that St. John relates that our Savior was present at the Feast of the
dedication in winter, John 10.
the institution whereof is related in the only history of the Maccabees. For
(says he) the history of the winter dedication was necessary to salvation,
because without it the ordinary sacrifices could not be lawful, and by
consequent it had need of the attestation of a Canonical writing. I answer,
that St. John alleges not the Maccabees, and takes them not for witnesses.
Only he says that Christ was in the Temhle at that Feast, without either
approving or disproving the institution thereof. Besides it is somewhat a hard
sentence, to pronounce that without the knowledge of the institution of a Feast
a man could not be saved.

With the like absurdity, to prove that the books of Maccabees are Canonical,
Page 449.
he says that the Apostle to the Hebrews says, the Martyrs were tympanized
(our English version translates it, were tortured, Heb. 11.35. (...).
) and that he took that word of tympanizing from the second of the Maccabees.
And that (says he) not in matters known by natural light, or manners; but in
matter of faith. I wonder at such an impertinent reason. For that certain
Martyrs have been tympanized, is not a point of faith, but an history. If a
word which St. Luke or St. John uses, is found in some Pagan Author, it
follows not that such a Pagan book is Canonical, although both should relate
the same history. And if any had alleged in the margent of St. Luke some Pagan
author, he had not thereby declared that be holds the book for Canonical.

CHAP. 67. Of the opinion of St. Austin concerning the Canonical books. And of
the Canon of the third Council of Carthage, upon which the Cardinal grounds
himself.
SAint Austin is the only of all the Fathers that speaks of this matter with so
much diversity and contrariety, that it is impossible to draw any certainty
from his assertions.

In the second book of the Christian Doctrine, chap. 8. he makes an enumeration
of the Canonical books, where it is evident that he takes the word Canonical in
another sense then it is taken by the other Fathers, namely for the books which
the Universal Christian Church has received for divine and sacred, and for
rules of the faith. But in that place he makes many sorts of Canonical books,
some of greater, some of lesser authority, which nevertheless he calls
Canonical. These are his words. In Canonicis autem Scripturis Ecclesiarum
Catholicarum quamplurium authoritatem sequatur, etc. Tenebit igitur hunc modum
in Scripturis Canonicis ut cas quae ab omnibus accipiuntur Ecclesiis Catholicis
praeponat eis quas quaedam non accipiunt. In cis vero quae non accipiuntur ab
omnibus praeponi eas quas plures gravioresque accipiunt.
The industrious seeker of Canonical Scriptures must keep this rule in matter
of Canonical Scriptures; to prefer the Scriptures that are received by all the
Catholic Churches to them which some Churches receive not. But as for those
that are received by all the Churches, let him make more of those which more
Churches and more honorable receive, then of those that are received by
Churches inferior in number and authority. But if some Scriptures be found of
which some be received by the more honorable Churches, and some be received by
the greater number of Churches, although he cannot find that, yet I think that
they must be held in the like authority.

Now let any man judge in what uncertainties this Father intangleth men's
understandings; if so be that to know which are the Canonical Scriptures of
great or small authority, we must number and weigh the Churches. By his
account, if of fifty Churches ten receive a book for Canonical, and forty
reject it, the book shall be Canonical, but of small authority. But if twenty
receive it, and thirty reject it, the authority thereof shall grow a little.
And if a great and famous Church receives it, and ten little Churches reject
it, there he leaves men's minds ballancing. At least he ought to define what
number of Churches is requisite to make a book Canonical. No doubt but that
discourse of Austin is very much displeasing to our Adversaries. For why does
he not send them in that irresolution unto the Pope and to the Roman Church,
which in our days ascribes to her self the authority of defining the Canon of
Scriptures? But in those days they did not speak so: And the Church of Africa,
to which Austin did belong, was not subject unto the Roman. That good Bishop in
his reception did not receive from the Bishop of Rome his letters of
investiture, and did not take an oath of allegiance to him. Besides, if those
books which he says to be of less authority be received as infallible, they
are of sovereign authority: but if they hold them not for infallible, they are
not Canonical.

Austin having given such an uncertain rule to know the Canonical books, makes
a Catalogue of them, and puts among them Tobit, Judith, and the Maccabees; and
no wonder, since that a book may be Canonical, it is enough in his account,
that it be received by some few Churches, although the greatest number of
Churches reject them. And there again he plungeth men's understandings into a
greater uncertainty, for while he makes that Catalogue, he does not specify
which of them are of greater, which of lesser authority; and leaves us to
count the number, and weigh the quality of Churches.

But in other places he contradicts himself; for having said in this place that
the Wisdom of Solomon and Ecclesiastious are Canonical; in other places he
says that they are not Canonical; as in the twentieth chapter of the
seventeenth book of the City of God, where he speaks thus; It is found that
Solomon has prophesied in his books; of which there are three which are
received with Canonical authority, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of
Songs. But the other two, Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, custom has obtained that
they should be called Solomon's books, because of some likeness of style. But
the most learned hold it for certain that they are none of his. Then he adds,
that the Occidental Church has received them; Not then the Oriental. But
Hierom, Ruffin, Hilary, Philastius and the Gallican Churches contradict him, as
we have seen.

In the same chapter he alleges Ecclesiasticus, then he adds, as correcting
himself, But the things that are not written in the Canon of the Jews, are not
alleged with so much authority.

It is very considerable, that in that place he does not only put the Wisdom of
Solomon and Ecclesiasticus out of the rank of the Canonical books, against that
which he had said in the second book of the Christian doctrine, chap. 8. but
also by saying that the book of Wisdom is not of Solomon, he accuses the
Author of untruth, who says himself to be Solomon: For so he speaks to God,
chap. 9. ver. 7, 8. Thou have elected me to be King of thy people. Thou have
told me that I should build thee a Temple in thy holy mountain.

He gives the like usage to Ecclesiasticus, which he puts among the Canonical
books in the second book of the Christian doctrine, chap. 8. and yet in another
place he fights against that book, and confutes the doctrine of the same. For
whereas the said book chap. 46.21. affirms that Samuel has prophesied after
his death, and lift up his voice out of the earth, though this was done by a
witch and by the power of the Devil; Austin disputes against it in the second
book of questions to Simplician, in the third question; declaring it a very
improper thing to put the spirits of the Saints in the power of Devil, and
maintaining that it was not Samuel that spoke to Saul, but the Devil in the
form of Samuel; In hoc facto potest esse alius facilior intellectus and
expeditior exitus, ut non recte spiritum Samuelis exitatum a requie sua
credamus, sed aliquod phantasma and imaginariam illusionem Diaboli, etc.
In this business (says he) there may be a more easy intelligence, and a
readier way to come out of it, which is to believe that it was not truly the
spirit of Samuel that was drawn out of his rest, but rather that it was some
apparition and imaginary illusion made by the Devils machinations, which the
Scripture calls with the name of Samuel, because they use to call images with
the name of things whereof they are images. And a little after he concludes
thus, Let us rather think that such a thing was done by the malicious ministry
of the witch.

The same he says in the sixth question of Dulcitius where he approves and
confirms that which he had said in his questions to Simplician. About that,
See the Canon Nec mirum, in the fifth question of the twenty sixth Cause, where
the doctrine of Ecclesiasticus is confuted at large: And the book of the
Questions of the Old Testament in the twenty seventh question, where Austin
among other things says that Putans Samuelem, adoravit Diabolum.
Saul worshipped the Devil, thinking him to be Samuel.

It is this Fathers custom when his Adversaries object unto him some place out
of the Apocrypha, to answer with weakening their authority. As in the second
book against Gaudentius, chap. 23. the Donatists, Circumcellions, who would
kill and cast themselves headlong, defended themselves with the example of
Razias who killed himself, 2 Mac. 14. Austin answers them, Et hanc quidem
Scripturam quae appellatur Maccabaeorum, non habent Judaei sicut Legem, and
Prophetas, and Psalmos, quibus Dominus testimonium perhibet.
The Jews receive not that Scripture which they call Maccabees, as the Law, the
Prophets, and the Psalms, to which the Lord bears testimony. Thereby
declaring that the Maccabees are books unto which the Lord does not bear
testimony. Thus in the second book of the Retractations chapter 20. retracting that
which he had said after the book of Wisdom, That Wisd. 16.
Manna had a taste in the mouth according to every man's will, he says this,
Non mihi occurrit unde possit probari ni^i in libro Sapientiae quem Judaei non
recipient in authoritatem Canonicam.
I remember not that this can be proved but by the book of Wisdom which is not
received among the Jews in a Canonical authority. If Austin had received the
book of Wisdom among the Canonical books, he would not have retracted that
which he had alleged out of that book. And in the book of the care which must
be had of the dead, chap. 15. he alleges Ecclesiasticus, which says that
Samuel prophesied after his death: then he adds Huic libro ex Canone
H^braeorum qui in ei non est contradicitur.
This book is contradicted out of the Canon of the Hebrews, because it is not
found in it. He says not that the Hebrews contradict it, but that others
contradict it by the Canon of the Hebrews, showing that Christians contradict
it, because they adhere to the Canon of the Hebrews.

Wherefore in the fore-alledged place against Gaudentius, after he has said
that the book of the Maccabees is none of those to which the Lord bears
testimony, he adds, that yet it is not unprofitably received, so that it be
read soberly; which is a commendation bordering upon blame, to say that the
book is not altogether unprofitable, and that one has need to read it soberly,
that is, that one must not adhere too much unto it.

So much is sufficient to show that when Austin in the second book of the
Christian doctrine put Judith, Wisdom, and the Maccabees among the Canonical
books, he meant those Canonical books which he says to be of small authority.
Observe also that Austin writ the books of Christian doctrine being yet young,
and newly received to the Episcopal Office; as one may see by his books of
Retractations, where he makes a review of his books according to the order of
the time in which he writ them. In the second book of his Retractations, chap.
4. he has put his books of Christian doctrine. But in chap. 43. he speaks of
his books of the City of God as made a long time after. There he puts clearly
Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus out of the number of Canonical books, correcting what
he had said in the second book of the Christian doctrine. In the same fourth
chapter of the second book of his Retractations, he retracteth himself for
attributing the books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus unto Solomon, having since
that time got better information.

I find a place of Austin in the thirty sixth chapter of the eighteenth book of
the City of God, of which it is hard to judge. For in the same place he says
that the books of Maccabees are neither holy nor Canonical Scriptures, and yet
he says that the Church holds them for Canonical. The supputation of these
times (says he) is not found in the holy Scriptures which they call Canonical,
among which the Maccabees are not. There can be nothing more express. But the
following words contradict it; which not the Jews but the Church hold for
Canonical, a sentence which has always been unto me suspected of
falsification.

We must not dissemble that the Gallican Churches disliked that Austin should
use in his writings testimonies of books not Canonical, See the place of Hilary
above, chap. 56.
as Hilary Bishop of Arles testifies in his Epistle to Austin. When all is
said, of what weight is Austin authority against the consent of so many Fathers
more ancient then he, whom we have produced before? and against the authority
of the Church of the Old Testament? and against the word of God? and against
himself, seeing that he contradicts himself as I have showed by many proofs?

It remains now to speak of the Canon of the third Council of Carthage, which
is the twenty fourth Canon in the Code of the African Church. About that Canon
there is a dissent between the Greek and the Latin Copies. For in the Latin the
books of the Maccabees are put among the Canonical books, but in the Greek they
are omitted, and put out of the roll of the Canonical. Whereupon Chap. 50. book
1. in the beginning. page 346.
M. du Perron goes about to prove that the Latin copies are to be preferred
before the Greek, calling in contempt the Code of the African Church a Rapsody,
because it is gathered out of the Canons of several Councils of Africa. I could
demonstrate by a multitude of proofs, that hardly shall one find a book in the
whole world more swarming with falsifications and corruptions then the Latin
Tomes of Councils; the first especially, where that Canon is found. Besides
that Page 436.
M. du Perron overthrows with his own hand all that he alleges for the Latin
Copies, acknowledging that there are vices in the Latin, which he imputes to
the Copists or transscribers, preferring the Greek Copies before the Latin, as
for certain Epistles (of which we shall speak in the right place) because he
holds the Greek Copies of those Epistles to be more favorable to him. But that
dispute is useless, since we have those two things granted, the one that the
contrariety of the Copies makes this Canon doubtful; The other, that though we
would receive that Canon such as it is found in the Latin Copies, yet the
authority of a Council of Carthage held within the fifth age is not sufficient
to overthrow a Council of Laodicea more ancient by two hundred years, and
approved by the Universal Councils, or to outweigh the general consent of so
many Fathers both Greek and Latin, which we have produced; Much less to be
opposed to the word of God, and to make fables to become true histories.

CHAP. 68. Of the Canon of the holy Scriptures defined by Pope Innocent the I.
And of the Decretal Epistle of that Innocent to Exuperius.
THE Roman Church is like a sick body laboring with complicated Symptoms,
whereof one cannot be eased without irritating another. In the first Tome of
the Councils there is a Decretal Epistle attributed to Innocent the I. directed
to Exuperius Bishop of Tolosa, in which that Pope makes a list or enumeration
of the Canonical books, conformable unto that which is established by the
Council of Trent. Our Adversaries producing that Epistle in this Cause, see not
what a blow they give to the authority of the Bishop of Rome; for thereby it
appears that the Greek and Oriental Church was not subject unto the Roman,
since that Church had another sense then the Roman. If such was the belief of
the Roman Church, how comes it to pass that the Council of Laodicea, Origin,
Melito, Eusebius, Athanasius, Cyrillus of Jerusalem, Gregory Nazianzen,
Amphilochius, Epiphanius, and generally all the Greek Fathers, have held those
books for Apocrypha, which the Roman Church held for Canonical? Why did even
the Occidental Church differ from the Sea of Rome in that important point;
which we have showed by testimonies, of Ruffinus, Hilarious, Philastrius and the
Gallican Churches? Or if the belief of the Bishops of Rome that went before,
that Innocent was conformable unto that of Innocent, how comes it to pass that
Hierom who was Secretary to Damasus a Roman Bishop, and outlived that
Innocent, was so bold as to depart from his Masters opinion? Could that man, so
eminent in learning, be ignorant of the belief of the Roman Church? Here is
more. For Gregory the first Bishop of Rome who writ well nigh two hundred years
after that Innocent, is of contrary opinion, and holds that the Maccabees are
not Canonical. And Pope Can. Sancti Romans Did. 15.
Gelasius holds Susanna for Apocrypha. These Gentlemen by producing that
Epistle of Innocent, show that the decisions of the Bishops of Rome were in
those days of very small account among strangers, and that those that belonged
to the Popes family, and his very successors, did little regard them.

But to come to that Epistle, who so shall but look upon it near hand, will
acknowledge that it is an absurd and ridiculous piece, which abuses Scripture
with a profane licentiousness. It is that Decretal which proves that married
persons must not be admitted to Ecclesiastical charges, because it is written,
Be ye holy, for I am holy: and because the Apostle said, To the clean all
things are clean, but to the defiled and the unbelievers nothing is clean. As
though marriage were a pollution and infidelity. Also because the same Apostle
said, They that are in the flesh, cannot please God. Now you are not in the
flesh, but in the Spirit. As if the Apostle by them that are in the flesh meant
married persons, and by them that are in the Spirit, the unmarried. Are these
Apostolical Oracles? Nay, is it not a manifest impiety and profanation of the
Word of God?

In the same Epistle it is said that the Law of God prohibiteth the admitting
of married persons into Ecclesiastical honors; Of which nevertheless the word
of God speaks not, neither is there one word of that to be found in the whole
Scripture. Wherefore also Lib. de Clericis, c. 18.: Ac Thomas. Nunc breviter
probandum est non jure divino sed humano duntaxat probibitum esse conjugium.
Thomas 2.2. qu. 38. Art. 11.
Bellarmin, after Thomas, acknowledges that the Celibat of Clerks is but of
humane right.

The same Epistle says that of all antiquity, and from the beginning, Priests
were commanded to abide in the Temple during the year of their service
(supposing that there was no women in the houses of the Temple) and that the
Priests were forbidden to come near their wives all the year of their
ministering. For (says the Author of the Decretal) those ought not to be
admitted to the sacrifices that use a carnal conjunction with their wives;
because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. How many untruths and
ignorances in few words? It is false that the Priests did serve by years. For
as for the High Priest there was never a year but he did officiate in his
Priesthood. But under him he had four and twenty courses or divisions of chief
Priests that served by turns, each one a fortnight every year. It is a great
error to think that each of these chief Priests was three and twenty years
without officiating. It is false also that those courses or divisions of
Priests serving by turn were so from the beginning, as that Decretal says.
David instituted that order about four hundred and fifty years after the first
institution of the legal Priesthood, as it may be seen, 1 Chronicles. 24. It is
false also that the Priest was separated from his wife during the time of his
ministration, and that there was no woman dwelling in the Temple. We have an
example of the contrary, 2 Kings 11. where it is said that Jehosheba daughter
to King Joram kept Joash hid for the space of six years, with his Nurse in the
Temple in the bedchamber. And of Anna, Luke says in the first chapter, that
she departed not from the Temple. 1 Samuel 2. the Priests sons of Eli lay with
the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle. And the High Priest and
his children having their ordinary dwelling in the lodgdings of the Court,
which made part of the Temple, we must not doubt but that their wives dwelt in
the same house.

By all these it appears what authority that Decretal can have which is
attributed unto Innocent. For I can hardly believe that it is his, both because
of the absurdity of the Epistle, and because the first Tome of the Councils is
full of false Epistles of Popes, as it is acknowledged by the most learned of
our Adversaries, of which we shall hereafter give evident proofs.

Yet if it be of Innocent, we are no more obliged to believe him then Hierom,
and Ruffinus, and Gregory the first, successor to that Innocent, or then the
Churches both Oriental and Occidental of Innocents time, who held Judith,
Wisdom, Maccabees, etc. for Apocrypha, as we have proved.

It is no wonder if that Innocent was a man of little learning, for the Roman
Sea was always barren in learned men. In the three first ages that Sea had
good Bishops and faithful Martyrs, whose power did not reach much beyond the
walls of Rome. Since that time, some ages past in which we find in that Sea
prudent Bishops, industrious in their temporal businesses, laboring to raise
their authority which was but small. But we find not one among them of
exquisite learning. And always that Sea was inferior in that point to the
Churches of Greece, Asia and Africa, which have had Bishops of far higher
learning.

CHAP. 69. That the Popes have put their Canons and Decrees not only in the
same rank as Canonical Scriptures, but above.
BEcause nothing hinders so much the progress of the Kingdom of Satan as the
word of God contained in the holy Scriptures, the enemy of our salvation has
bent all his strength to put it out, and used all his craft to corrupt it, and
bring down its authority. He made use sometimes of the impiety of the Kings of
Juda, and of the profane negligence of the High Priests to abolish the books
of the Law; so that in the beginning of the reign of Josiah it was an unknown
book, which would have been lost, had not the High Priest, looking not for it,
found a copy of it hid in a corner of the Temple. Since that time he raised
Antiochus Epiphanes, who spared no endeavors to abolish all the copies of the
same. We read in a hundred places of Austin, that before Constantines time the
persecutors constrained the Christians to deliver to them the holy Scriptures
to suppress them. Whence arose the schism of the Donatists, who denied that
Cecilian was the lawful Bishop of Carthage, because he had been ordained (as
they say) by Bishops that had delivered the sacred books to the Persecutors.

If the Popes had undertaken to abolish the holy Scriptures, they could never
have compast it, because the Jews have carefully kept for us the Old Testament
in Hebrew, and the Greek Churches have faithfully preserved the New Testament
in Greek: And over them the Pope has no power.

All that the Popes could do, was to forbid the reading of them unto the
Nations subject unto them, and to hinder the translation of that holy book into
the vulgar tongues. In Italy and Spain and all the Countries where the
Inquisition reigns, it is a crime punishable with the fire, to have an
Italian or a Spanish Bible. To which the Popes and his instruments have added
all the possible means and arts to weaken the authority of the holy Scripture,
teaching that it contains not all things necessary to salvation; that it is
obscure, and that the reading of it is dangerous: Also that there is another
word not written; and that the tradition of the Roman Church is more ancient,
more perfect, and of greater authority then the holy Scripture; And that the
Church is not subject to Scripture, but Scripture to the Church, that is, to
the Pope. That Scripture is not the Sovereign Judge of the points of faith, but
that unto the Roman Catholic Church that judgment belongs. That from the
authority of that Church the authority of Scripture depends, which is a dumb
rule, and to be received only because the Church commands it.

But one of the subtilest wiles of Satan to weaken the authority of Holy
Scripture, was to foist into Scripture fabulous and erroneous books, that the
evident untruth and absurdity of those books might bring in question the truth
of the other books divinely inspired, and that by mingling of false coin the
good gold might be suspected, and the whole Scripture lose credence in men's
minds.

The malice and rash profaneness of those whom Satan has employed in that
work, is come so far as to go about to put the Decretal Epistles of the Popes
among the Canonical books, which if they could have compassed, we should have
the Scriptures increased by one half and above, and the sacred books indicted by
the Spirit of God, should have been matched with ridiculous pieces, which many
times want common sense.

In the Roman Decree in the ninteenth Distinction, the Canon In Canonicis,
bears this inscription, Inter Canonicas Scripturas Decretales Epistolae
connumerantur, that is, The Decretal Epistles of the Popes are reckoned among
the Canonical Scriptures. And that proved by a testimony of Ex August. l. 2. de
Doctrina Christ. c. 8. Ubi pro quae Apostolicas seeds habere and Epistolas
accipere meruerunt, Gratianus legit, quas Apostolicae seeds habere and ab eo
accipere meruerunt.
Austin wickedly falsified.

About the year of our Lord 865. Hinckmarus Archbishop of Rhemes made
difficulty to obey Pope Nicolas the I. and spoke of the Decretals of the Popes
with contempt, saying that they are not inserted in the Code of the Canons of
the Church, as not being of the like authority. Against that Hinckmarus, Pope
Nicolas in the time of King Charles the Bald disputes with a proud language, in
an Epistle to the Bishops of the Gallican Church; where he says that Can. Si
Romanorum Did. 19. Capitulum sancti Innocentii Papae cujus authoritate
doceatur a nobis utrumque Testamentum esse recipiendum, quanquam in ipsis
paternis Canonibus nullum eorum ex toto contineatur insertum, etc. Si Vetus
Novumque Testamentum sunt recipienda, non quod codici Canonum ex toto videantur
annexa, sed quod de his recipiendi sancti, Papae Innocentii prolata videatur
esse sententia, etc.
there is a Chapter of Pope Innocent, by whose authority it is taught that the
Old and the New Testament ought to be received, although they be not inserted
within the Canons of the Fathers. Whence he infers, that if the Old and the
New Testament must be received, not because they are annexed to the Code of the
Canons, but because the holy Pope Innocent has pronounced his sentence that
they must be received, by the same reason the Popes Decretals ought to be
received, though they be not inserted in the Code of the Canons, because among
them there is a Chapter of the holy Pope Leon, who commands us so to keep in
force the Decretals of the Apostolical Sea, that if any sin against them, he
may know that he shall not be pardoned. What is all that but a company of
blasphemies heaped up with a bestial stupidity, and destitute of common sense?
For what can be more absurd then that Decree of Innocent, which commands that
the Old and the New Testament be received, as if it had been a doubtful thing
whether they must be received, unless he had pronounced his sentence in their
favor? Or can there be a greater impiety, then to conclude that the Old and
the New Testament must be received, because such is the Popes sentence? And
that must be, although the books of the Old and the New Testament be not annexed
unto the Canons of these Roman Church, which presupposes that the conjunction
of Scripture with those Canons was able to add unto Scripture some authority. A
thing so far from truth, that rather, if any thing could take authority from
Scripture, it should be that association of the Canons of the Roman Church with
the sacred books. Was there no stronger reason then the Popes authority to
oblige us to receive Scripture? But what, They could speak no better for their
end, which is to equal the Popes Decretals unto the word of God: for so they
ground both upon the same authority. Finally, to fill up the measure of
impiety, that Pope says that if any disobey the Popes Canons, it shall not be
forgiven him. For the offenses against God Laws are pardoned, but the offenses
against the Popes Laws are not pardoned, as being far more grievous sins, and
committed against a greater Master; the reason whereof is given by Pope
Damasus, Causa 15. Qu. 1. Can. Violatores: The inscription of that Canon is, In
Spiritum Sanctum blasphemant qui sacros Canones violant. They that transgress
the holy Canons, blaspheme against the Holy Ghost. Wherefore that sin is
unpardonable.

To this language is conformable that of Gregory the first in his Epistle to
Antoninus Subdeacon, wherein he complains of a certain Honoratus, Lib. 2.
Epist. 16. non solum mandata Dei negligens, sed and scripta nostra contemnens.
who (says he) not only has neglected Gods commandments, but has despised
our writings. Here is the language of the servant of servants. Here is the
Apostolical humility.

Bellarmin in the second book of the Councils, chap. 12. maintains that the
Popes Canons are Canonical Scriptures.. Dico Duo Canones Pontificum suo modo
sunt and dici possunt Scripta sacra and Canonica.
The Popes Canons (says he) in their way, are and may be called holy and
Canonical Scriptures. And truly if it be so that the Decrees of Popes give
authority to Scripture, and that the Pope is Judge of Controversies, not the
Scripture; we must grant that the Popes decrees have more authority then the
Canonical Scriptures, and must be inserted in the Bible rather then the
Epistles of the Apostle St. Paul. For (if these men must be believed) the Pope
is the only head of the Universal Church, which St. Paul was not.

Hinckmarus Archbishop of Rhemes in his book of fifty five chapters, alleges
very often this sentence of Pope Hilary, who says, that Cap. 18. and 36. Non
minus in sanctarum traditionum sanctiones quam in ipsius Domini injuriam
delinquitur.
the sin committed against the Ordinances of the holy Traditions, is not a
lesser sin then rashly presuming to outrage the Lord himself. Again, Cap. 27.
It is not lawful to any to violate the divine constitutions, and the Decrees
of the Apostolic Sea.

BOOK II. Wherein is TREATED OF St. Peter's Primacy, And of his Abode at ROME.
CHAP. 1. That the Government of the Universal Church cannot, and must not be
Monarchical.
State of the Question.
ALthough in civil matters several Nations follow not the same form of
Government, there being in the world, some Monarchical, some Aristocratical,
some popular States, and some mingled of all three; yet the whole mankind taken
together is but a Monarchy, of which God is the Monarch and the Sovereign head.

Thus in the question about Church Government, although several Churches have
several forms of Ecclesiastical policy: Yet taking the whole Orthodox Church
together, it is a Monarchy, whereof Jesus Christ is the Head. About that we do
not dissent with our Adversaries. But the question between us is, whether under
Jesus Christ there must be a visible Head over the whole Universal visible
Church? Also whether that power belong to the Pope of Rome?

In this question we must carefully distinguish the Universal Church from the
Churches of one Town, or one Country. For as in civil things, if one has
proved that the Monarchical State is the best of all, he has not therefore
proved that there must be one Monarch over the whole world. Likewise if it be
expedient that each particular Church be governed by one head, not by many, it
follows not that there must be one head over the Church of the whole world.
Thus God has given that instinct unto Bees, that every hive, or every swarm
has its King, but there is no King over the whole kind. Wherefore out of that
Policy of the Church of Israel, that they had one High Priest, one cannot
infer that the like must be in the Christian Universal Church; because that
Policy was enclosed within one Nation, but this extends to all Nations, of whom
none is excluded from the Covenant of God in Jesus Christ, and that Covenant is
presented unto all by the Gospel. One Head might be sufficient to govern the
Church of Israel: But to govern the Church of the whole world, no head is
strong enough, and no shoulders are able to bear such a heavy burden. A man
raised to that height should soon become giddy; pride would puff him up, and
the distance of places would keep him from having his eye everywhere, and
giving order to all. Besides, the form of the Church Government of Israel was a
figure of the Christian Church, and of Jesus Christ and his graces, and by
consequent, there was need in that government of one High Priest that should be
a figure of Christ our High Priest.

For this cause our Adversaries who will needs have it granted that St. Peter
was head and Monarch of the Christian Universal Church, yet acknowledge that
the other Apostles were also Heads of the Universal Church, as we shall see
hereafter, tacitly acknowledging that such a power could not be proper for one
man alone.

Wherefore also the Apostle Ephesians. 4. making an enumeration of the charges which
Jesus Christ going up to heaven left unto his Church, says, that he gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Doctors. Of
Pope or Monarch of the Universal Church, he speaks neither there nor in any
other place. In that text it is especially to be noted that Paul speaks of the
union of the Universal Church in one body, and of the compact communion of the
Saints and faithful; Which necessarily required that he should speak of the
Head which joins and keeps that body in union, if God had appointed such a head
in his Church.

The book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, attributed to Dionysius Areopagita,
makes an enumeration of Ecclesiastical Offices, and an exact description of the
order and constitutions of the Christian Church; but he speaks of no higher
degree then Bishops of every particular Church. To compose a book of Hierarchy
without speaking of the chief Hierarch, it is as if one spoke of Monarchy
without speaking of a Monarch, and of Kingship without mentioning a King.

If the Church of the Apostles time had acknowledged an Universal Head under
Christ, No doubt but that upon the decease of St. Peter (who is now held to be
the first Pope) the Apostles that outlived him would have met to choose a
successor; and would have chosen one of the Apostles, and would not have left
the Creation of a head for the Universal Church, to the discretion of the
people and Clergy of Rome; for the Christian people of the City of Rome had no
right to give a Head to the Churches of Persia, Syria, Armenia, and Egypt,
without their concurrence.

And if after St. Peter's death there had been need of one that should succeed
him in that Primacy; without question the Apostle St. John, the Disciple whom
Jesus loved, and his near Kinsman, should have succeeded him in that power,
before Linus, of whom we have no record of any action worthy of memory, or
Causa 12. qu. 1. Can. dilectissimis.
Clement, to whom certain Epistles are ascribed that give Constitutions about
mice-dung, and would have possessions and women to be common; To whom also the
Apostolical Constitut. l. 3. c. 2.
Constitutions are ascribed, which say to marry above three times is plain
fornication.

The principal power is, that if that Sovereign power over the Church of all
the world must be received, it must have been established by Christ, and the
succession in that Office must be grounded upon his ordinance. Suppose then
that Christ has given unto St. Peter alone the Primacy over the Church of the
whole world: Yet that Office cannot be perpetual in the Church, and continued
by a thread of succession, unless Christ has constituted that succession. Thus
Moses had been constituted by God a Prince, and Lawgiver, and Priest in Israel,
but he had no successor in all these Offices, because God had not commanded it.
Thus John the Baptist had no successor. And the Apostles, John, James, Philip,
Paul, etc. had no successors in their Apostleship. This indeed is the point
which we insist upon, and upon which our Adversaries are gravelled. We desire
them to bring forth some declaration of Christ upon that subject, or some text
of the word of God whereby a succession is assigned unto St. Peter's
Apostleship, or to his primacy over the Church, or whereby it is declared that
the Office of Head of the Universal Church must be perpetual, or a constitution
of St. Peter, that the Bishop of Rome ought to succeed him in that dignity. He
has writ to the Church two Epistles full of doctrine, the last of them written
2 Pet. 1.13. and 14.
a little before his death. Reason required that he should have charged the
Church to obey the Bishop of Rome after his decease, as to his successor in his
Apostleship, and he to whom he resigned before his death, the conduct of the
Universal Church. But not a word of that. So that this point which is the chief
of all the controversies, and the main hinge upon which the whole Roman
Religion is turning, and that which is made in our days the main ground of the
Christian faith; that point, I say, is found to have no ground in the word of
God, and is but an unwritten Tradition.

Bellarmin Lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans c. 12. Observandum est tertio, licet forte
non sit de jure divino Romanum Pontificem ut Romanum Pontificem Petro
succedere, tamen id ad fidem Catholilicam pertinere. Non enim est idem aliquid
esse de fide and esse de jure divino. Nec enim de jure divino fuit ut Paulus
haberet penulam, est tamen hoc ipsum de fide Paulum habuisse penulam. Etsi
autem Romanum Pontificem succedere Petro non habeatur express in Scripturis,
etc.
acknowledges that the Scripture speaks not of the succession of the Pope in
the Primacy of St. Peter, and that it is not a point of divine right, no more
(says he) that it is not a point of divine right to believe that St. Paul had
a cloak. But there is inequality in that comparison; For we find in Scripture
that St. Paul had a cloak, but we find not in Scripture that God has
established the Bishop of Rome successor of St. Peter's Primacy. Observe then
that the whole Romish Religion is founded upon a tradition which is not of
divine right, about which we have not any Ordinance of God, and of which, by
the confession of our very Adversaries, the word of God speaks not.

We acknowledge that St. Peter, as also the other Apostles planting the Gospel
and setting up Churches in those places, where they passed, established in
those Churches Pastors, which therefore had a good right to call themselves
successors of such an Apostle: Not successors in the Apostleship, but in the
charge of Bishop over that particular Church. In that sense many Fathers called
the Bishop of Rome successor of St. Peter, not in the Apostleship, but in the
Bishopric of the Roman Church, which in the first age did not extend much
beyond the walls of the City of Rome; In the same manner as Simon was the
successor of St. James in the Bishopric of Jerusalem, and Titus successor of
St. Paul in the I Will of Candia, and Timothy in the Church of Ephesus.

Although this be the main difficulty about which our Adversaries are plunged,
having nothing firm for proving that succession of the Pope in St. Peter's
primacy, without which evidence of succession in vain do they labor to prove
St. Peter's primacy: Yet because the Cardinal following the steps of his Majesty
of great Britain, falls upon that discourse in the fifty sixth chapter of the
first book, we will give also some chapters to the examination of the reasons
and testimonies which he brings for it.

CHAP. II. That St. Peter had no jurisdiction over the other Apostles, and was
not Monarch of the Universal Church.
Answer to the Lord Cardinal.
WE deny not that St. Peter was Head and Pastor of the Universal Church; for
the same power belonged also to every one of the Apostles, as St. Paul says of
himself, that he had the care of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11.28.

Wherefore also Christ being near his death, resigneth the care of his Church
to all his Apostles alike; I dispose unto you the Kingdom, as my Father
disposed it unto me. For their Apostleship was not affected to one particular
Church.

Cypr. l. de unitate Ecclesiae, c. 3. Christus Apostolis omnibus post
resurrectionem parem potestatem tribuit. Et paulo post. Hoc etiam utique
caeteri Apostoli quod Petrus, pari consortio honoris and potestatis.
Cyprian does acknowledge it. Christ (says he) after his resurrection gave an
equal power unto his Apostles. And in the same place, The Apostles were the
same thing as Peter, having an equal fellowship in honor and power. And
Hieron. lib. 2. in Jovinianum. In alio loco super omnes Apostolos fundantur
Ecclesia, and cuncti claves regni coelorum accipiunt, and ex aequo super eos
Ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur.
Hierom after him says the same.

Neither would we deny that St. Peter was the first and the most honorable
among the Apostles, having the precedence among his brethren; and that as among
the Kings of Christendom there is some order of sitting, and the Ambassadors
of the one march before the Ambassadors of the other; so St. Peter was the
first in the order of sitting among the Apostles, who deferred that honor to
his excellent virtues, to his zeal, to his miracles, or to his age (although
Epiphanius affirms that his brother Andrew was the eldest) or to some other
consideration. Wherefore also the Ancients call often Peter the Prince of the
Apostles, and in the list of the twelve Apostles he is always placed the first
by the Evangelists.

But to think that Peter had a power of jurisdiction over the other Apostles,
the word of God allows it not, seeing that himself has written two Epistles,
wherein the highest titles which he assumeth, are the titles of Apostle, and
Presbyter, or Elder. Now Monarchs will never write to their subjects
(especially when it is question of prescribing them their duty) but they will
take the titles of Sovereign authority, which give weight to their words.

In the celebration of the holy Communion, the Apostle St. John was sitting in
the most honorable place, being the nearest unto Christ, and resting his head
in the Lords bosom.

In the ninth chapter of Luke, Christ sends his Apostles to preach the Gospel,
without money, without provision, without horse; St. Peter was sent like the
rest and in equal condition.

Acts 15. the Apostles meet to decide a question raised among the Disciples.
Now in such Assemblies he that presideth or moderateth, must speak the first,
to make the overture of the Action, and the last also, to pronounce the
conclusision. But St. Peter does neither, in that place: For before he spoke,
the question Act. 15.7. (...).
had been long agitated; And St. James speaks the last, and pronounces the
final decision; adding several things to that which St. Peter had propounded,
as the abstinence from blood, and from things strangled. Wherefore also
Chrysostom in his Homily upon that place, says (...).
that the principality was deferred unto James.

Luke 22. the day before our Saviors passion the Apostles dispute among them
about the pre-eminence: Which they would not have done, if they had believed
that Christ had given the primacy to Peter. Then or never Christ would have
told them, Why will ye overthrow the order which I have established? Since I
have given the primacy to Peter, why do you resist my will? But he tells them no
such thing: Nay, he tells them, The Kings of the Nations exercise dominion over
them, but it shall not be so among you. And Mat. 20.25. Ye know that the
Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great,
exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you, but whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your servant. Cardinal du Perron seeks to elude this
text, saying that Christ forbids them, not primacy, but only the desire and
affectation of primacy; and to aspire to a superiority over their fellows. But
it is clear that Christ forbids both to his Apostles. For he tells not them
only, Whosoever will be great among you, but also, Whosoever shall be great.
Again, the Kings of Nations exercise dominion over them. But it shall not be so
among you. It is clear that he forbids the Apostles that any of them exercise
dominion over his fellows. For the primacy of a Pastor in a particular Church
is not subject to the same inconveniences as the domination of one over the
Universal Church. It is also an error to think that Christ forbids his Apostles
only, to use a tyrannical domination over there fellows. For it is not credible
that any of them had such a perverse inclination. Besides, Christ forbids them
to use authority, which is far less then domination. The same thing he forbids
them, Matthew. 23.8. Be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ,
and all ye are brethren. That word Rabbi did not import any domination or
tyranny, but such an authority and respect as was deferred unto the Scribes and
Pharisees, out of the opinion that the people had of their holiness.

Acts 8. the Apostles send Peter and John to preach in Samaria. Would the Pope
now accept of such a Commission, to be sent to preach into Suitzerland or into
Denmark? In vain the Cardinal affirms that St. Peter was sent by entreaties;
for Peter and John are here set together in the same mission, and are not sent
in several manners. In our days the Pope would take such an entreaty as an
injury or a scorn. Neither does the text speak of entreaties. To affirm that
without proof, is a rash part.

If Peter had had the power of jurisdiction over the other Apostles, he should
be always named the first. And St. Paul, Gal. 2. would not say, that James,
Cephas, and John were held to be the pillars; for so it is set down in all the
copies, and even in the vulgar version, the only approved by the Council of
Trent. The only edition of Compluto set out by Cardinal Ximenes has corrupted
that Text.

Among the Corinthians, some said I am of Cephas, others said I am of Paul,
preferring Paul before Peter. But they would never have preferred Paul before
Peter, had Paul taught them that Peter was the Master and Superior of Paul,
and the only visible Head of the Universal Church.

2 Cor. 11.5. St. Paul says, I suppose I was not a whit behind the very
chiefest Apostles; By saying not a whit, or, in nothing, he does not except any
thing. Wherefore Hierom in his Comment upon Gal. 2. brings in Paul comparing
himself unto St. Peter in these words, I am in nothing inferior to him, for we
are established in the Ministry by the same God. And in the Council of Ephesus
there is an Epistle inserted of the Council of Alexandria, which says that
Petrus and Johannes equalis sunt ad alterutrum dignitatis, propter quod
Apostoli and sancti discipuli esse monstrantur. lib. de unitate Ecclesiae.
Peter and John are of the same dignity one toward another; wherefore also
they are Apostles and holy Disciples. And Cyprian speaks thus Hoc erant utique
caeteri Apostoli quod Petrus, pari consortio and honoris and potestatis. lib.
2. contra Iovinian.
The other Apostles were the same thing as St. Peter, associate in the same
society of honor and power. And Hierom Cuncti claves regni coelorum accipiunt,
and ex aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur.
They all receive the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and the stability of the
Church is equally founded upon them all.

Wherefore also Paul, Gal. 2.9. says that James, Peter and John gave him the
hand of association, receiving him for their fellow-worker. It is more then the
Pope does to any man.

CHAP. 3. Testimonies of Fathers upon this subject. An excellent place of St.
Ambrose falsified by the Cardinal: And a text of the Apostle falsified likewise.
Origin in the third Homily upon the third of Numbers, says Paulus mihi viam
novi hominis and ardui itineris ostendat. Ipse ergo Apostolorum maximus, etc.
Let Paul go before me, and show me the path of that new man, and that
difficult way: He the greatest among the Apostles, who knew that there were
many Churches not only in earth but in heaven also.

Eusebius in the second book of his history, cap. 1. alleges Clement in the
sixth of his hypotyposes, saying, Peter, James and John having been preferred
by the Lord, had no contention about the honor, but chose James the just
Bishop of Jerusalem. If St. Peter had been the Head of the Universal Church, it
had been a small thing to him to be Bishop of Jerusalem; and there had been for
him no occasion of dispute about the degree. A certain proof that the Bishop of
Jerusalem was honorable above all others, and was not inferior in dignity to
any. And the same Clement in the seventh of the Hypotyposes, alleged by
Eusebius in the same place, The Lord after the resurrection gave to James, John
and Peter, etc. giving to James the first place.

Cyprian was of opinion that before the resurrection of the Lord, Peter had the
primacy over the other Apostles, but that after the resurrection he made them
equal in power and authority: Having begun by one, to show that the Church is
one. In the book of the unity of the Church he speaks thus, Although the Lord
after his resurrection give to all his Apostles an equal power, and say, As the
Father has sent me, so I send you, Receive the holy Ghost. Whose sins ye
remit, they shall be remitted. Yet to show the unity, he has established a
chair, and has disposed by his authority the origin of that same unity,
beginning by one. All the Apostles were in effect that very thing which St.
Peter was, having the same society of honor and power. But that place shall be
examined hereafter.

We have alleged before a notable expression of the Council of Alexandria,
that Epist. Conc. Alexandrini. Aequalis sunt ad alterutrum dignitatis, etc.
Peter and John are of equal authority one toward another.

Chrysostom (...).
Hom. 18. upon the Epistle to the Romans, God has committed unto Paul the
whole preaching, and all the affairs of the habitable world, and all the
mysteries, and the whole administration. And Hom. 3. upon the first of Matthew,
(...), etc.
Paul says, I am not worthy to be called an Apostle; Therefore was he made the
first of all. And Hom. 66. (...).
It is manifest to all, that none shall be set before Paul. And upon Gal. 1.18.
(...), etc.
Paul after such great and good actions, having no need of Peter, nor of his
word, but equal in honor to him (for I will say nothing more) yet goes up to
him, as to a greater and elder. And upon Gal. 1. (...).
Paul shows that for the rest he was equal unto them, and compares himself
not to the others, but to the first of the Apostles, showing that each of them
enjoys the same dignity.

Epiphanius, who in other places calls Peter the first and the Prince of the
Apostles, nevertheless in the Heresy of the Nazarites, which is the twenty
ninth, asks how the Prophecy was fulfilled, which foretells that the Christ
shall sit for ever upon the throne of David; and answers, that it was
fulfilled in the Bishops. For (says he) James succeeded Christ in the
Pontificat and principality over the Church, because James was of the race of
David. And in the heresy against the Antidicomarianites which is the fifty
eighth, he says that (...).
James was the first that received the Episcopal chair; and that to him first
Christ did commit the throne which he had on earth. Indeed to say that James
was the sole successor of Christ's throne over the Church, is acknowledging him
the first and the chief of the Apostles.

The same in the heresy of the Marcosians, which is the 34. puts Paul before
Peter. No man (says he) can be equalled unto them in greatness of knowledge
(...).
neither Paul nor Peter, no^ any other Apostle.

Gregory Nazianzen does the same in the twenty sixth Oration, Paul, or Cephas,
or Apollo, or such a planter, or such a waterer. And a little after; The
Paul's, the Cephas'es, the Apollo's.

Ambrose in the sixty sixth Sermon of the nativity of Peter, and that of Paul,
Ergo beatus Petrus and Paulus eminent inter universos Apostolos, and peculiari
quadam praerogativa praecellunt; verum inter ipsos quis cui praeponatur,
incertum est.
Then (says he) Peter and Paul are eminent among all, and excellent by a
particular prerogative. But it is uncertain which of the two must be preferred
before the other. I think they are equal in merit, since they are equal in
passion or sufferings. And upon Psalm 38. Quod Petro dicitur, Apostolis
dicitur. That which is said to Peter, is said to the Apostles; speaking of
these words of Christ to Peter, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven.

The same in the book of the incarnation, chap. 4. Petrus loci non immeror sui,
primatum egit. Primatum utique confessionis non honoris, primatum fidei non
ordinis.
Peter not forgetful of his place, made use of his primacy; I mean of his
primacy in confession, not in honor; of the primacy of faith, not of order.
Which text the Cardinal dippeth and falsifieth in his 526. page, putting these
words only, Peter not forgetting his place, made use of his primacy. The rest
he has suppressed.

The same Ambrose upon Gal. 2. Petrum solum nominat, and sibi comparat, quia
primatum ipse accepit ad fundandam Ecclesiam; Se quoque pari modo electum ut
primatum habeat in fundandis Ecclesiis gentium.
Paul names Peter alone, and compares him with himself, because he had
received the primacy to lay the foundation of the Church. He says that he was
chosen in the same manner to lay the foundation of the Churches of the Gentiles.

And in the same place Quis eorum auderet Petro primo Apostolo, cui claves
regni coelorum Dominus dedit, resistere, nisi alius talis qui fiducia
electionis suae, sciens se non imparem, constanter improbaret quod ille sine
consilio fecerat?
Which of them durst resist Peter the first Apostle, to whom the Lord has
given the keys of the kingdom of heaven, unless it was some other like him,
who grounding himself upon his election, and knowing that he was not inferior
unto him, constantly reproved that which he had done without counsel?

The same in the second book of the Holy Ghost, chap. 12. Nec Paulus inferior
Petro, quamvis ille Ecclesiae fundamentum.
Paul was not inferior to Peter. And a little after Nec Paulus unquam indignus
Apostolorum Collegio, cum primo quoque facile conferendus, and nulli secundus.
Paul was not unworthy of the College of the Apostles, and may be compared
with the first whosoever he be, and must not be put in the second rank after
any.

Hierom upon the second chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians personateth
Paul speaking thus Hieron. secundo and breviori commentario in Galatas, In
nullo sum illo inferior, quia ab uno Deo sumus in Ministerio ordinati.
: I am in nothing inferior to Peter, for we have been established in the
Ministry by the same God. And in the first book against Jovinian, Although the
Church be founded upon all the Apostles, and all receive the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and that the stability of the Church be equally founded upon
them all; yet one is chosen among twelve, that by the establishing of one head,
the occasion of Schism be taken away. Himself upon Isaiah 54. calls Peter and
Paul, duos Apostolorum Principes, the two Princes of the Apostles.

Leo the first in the Sermon of the Nativity of the Apostles, comparing Peter
with Paul, Of whose virtues and merits (says he) we must have no diverse or
separate conceit; for the choice has made them even, and the labor alike, and
the end equals.

Victor of Carthage Baro. com. 8. an. 646.. 22.
The most blessed Apostles, endowed with the like honor and fellowship of
power, have converted the Nations unto the Church.

That I may not be tedious in heaping up a multitude of allegations, the
strength of truth is so great, that the Cardinals Bellarmin Bellar. lib. 1. c.
9. de Pontif. Romano. Respondeo. Summa potestas Ecclesiastica non solum data
est Petro sed etiam aliis Apostolis.
and Du Perron acknowledge that all the Apostles were heads of the Universal
Church. Bellarmin makes them equals. The Sovereign Ecclesiastical power (says
he) was not only given to Peter, but also to the other Apostles. And a little
after, It was necessary that to the first preachers and founders of Churches a
sovereign power and liberty should be granted. And in another place cap 12.
quidem libri.
We confess that the Apostles were equal in Apostolical power, and had
altogether the same authority over the Christian people. Yet he puts this
difference, that the sovereign power was given to Peter as to an ordinary
Pastor that should leave behind him a perpetual succession, but to the others
as to subdelegate persons that were not to leave any successor. But this he
says without proof, and without any word of God; and it is absurd and
impossible. For the power of a subdelegate is never equal to that of the
Soverain who has delegated him, and to whom he is to give account of his
charge, and who can take it from him at any time.

M. Du. Perron cap. 56. page 526.
acknowledges that to the other Apostles the authority of governing the Church
was conferred in common, and jointly with St. Peter. Yet he adds that they had
not the power of exercising that authority, but in as much as they were
associated and aggregared with Peter, and as it were grafted and inserted upon
him. This he says (as Bellarmin) without proof, and without Scripture, and
contrary to the Apostles saying, Gal. 1.1. of himself, that he is an Apostle,
not of men, nor by man. And Gal. 2.6. that they who seemed to be somewhat added
nothing to him. (...)
A text which the Cardinal has falsified to break the strength of it,
alleging it thus, They that seem to be some what have taught me nothing. Book
1 chapter 526. Falsification of the Cardinal.
Having put this word [taught] of his own, to make the world believe that St.
Paul compares himself to the chief Apostles only for learning and doctrine,
not for the charge and authority of Apostle. But how does he prove that? For
God does not set Peter as the source and the origin of the Apostleship. And
Peter was as much obliged to adhere to the other Apostles, as the other
Apostles to Peter. Wherefore when Peter returned from the house of Cornelius he
gives account of his actions, Act. 11. that none should believe that he was
departed from the union with his brethren. And St. Paul Gal. 1.1. says himself
to be an Apostle, not by man but by Jesus Christ only. As indeed he was many
years in his Apostleship before he spoke to Peter, or had any communication
with him.

CHAP. 4. Examination of the text of Matthew. 16.18. Thou art Peter and upon this
rock, etc.
Shifts of the Cardinal.
TO all that we have said before, our Adversaries oppose the words of Christ,
Matthew. 16.18. that after Peter had made that confession whereby he
acknowledges Jesus to be the Christ the Son of the living God, Jesus said to
him, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, etc. By which
words they pretend that Christ sets Peter to be the foundation and the Head of
the Universal Chuch.

But since that by this text Christ puts not Peter in actual possession of any
power over the Church, but only does promise it to him, saying to him in the
future, I will give thee the Keys, etc. we cannot understand wherein consists
that power, but by the text whereby Christ fulfilleth the promise made in this
place. That text is found, Joh. 20. v. 21. and 23. where Christ does actually
confer that power to all his apostles: As my Father has me, even so send I
you. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whosesoever sins ye
retain, they are retained. There all the Apostles receive equal power. So that
the power promised Matthew. 16. unto Peter, after the resurrection, is equally
conferred upon all. As also the same promise is made equally to all Matthew.
18.18. Whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven etc. Had the
Apostles understood that by that text Thou art Peter, etc. Christ had conferred
the primacy upon Peter; after that they would never have disputed about the
superiority. And the Greek text, as also the Latin version puts a clear
difference between the person of Peter, and the stone upon which the Church is
founded, (...) etc. Tu es Petrus, et super hanc petram. Upon that Stone and
ground which thou have now laid, namely that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
the Living God, the Church is founded. For the Church is not founded upon a
mortal man, but upon the Son of the eternal God. The Church was before Peter,
and at the coming of Peter has not got a new ground; If it had, we should also
say that Peter being dead, the ground of the Church should have been changed
again, and another put in his room. And the faith of Peter should have been
grounded upon his own self.

That which is the ground of the Church, is also the ground of our faith. Now
our faith is not grounded upon the person of Peter, but upon his doctrine,
which is the same as that of the other Apostles, who also are equally called
foundations by the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.20. being built upon the foundation of the
Prophets and the Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.
Observe that the Church is grounded upon the Prophets as well as upon the
Apostles: Now it is not grounded upon the persons of the Prophets, who were
dead long before St. Paul writ this; No more then upon the persons of the
Apostles, but upon their doctrine, and upon Jesus Christ whom they have laid
for the foundation of faith. And Rev. 21. The wall of the City (which is the
Church) had twelve foundations and in them the names of the twelve Apostles.
This is a peremptory truth, 1 Cor. 3.1. Other foundation can no man lay then
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Wherefore also the Apostle, Jude v. 20.
will have us to build up our selves on our most holy faith, that is, upon Jesus
Christ apprehended by faith: For our faith is not grounded upon men. A truth
not contradicted by those texts that call the Apostles foundations; for by the
Apostles their doctrine is understood, which lays Christ for the foundation
of the Church.

Wherefore we conclude that the stone upon which Christ said that he would
build his Church, is Christ himself confessed by Peter, or the faith and
confession which Peter had newly made. Or if by that stone we understand the
person of St. Peter, it is a Metonymical expression; wherein by St. Peter we
understand his doctrine and preaching: In the same manner as we say Tully and
Virgil for the works of Tully and Virgil; And as the Apostle says Ephesians. 2.20.
that we are built upon the Prophets, and Apostles, that is, upon their doctrine.

The Fathers very often by that rock upon which Christ would build his Church,
understand the faith and confession that Peter had expressed. Cyrillus lib. 4. de
Trinitate; I think (says he) that by that rock he understands nothing else but
the unshaken and most firm faith of the Disciple. Hilary in his second book of
the Trinity; Unum igitur hoc est immobile fundamentum, una haec est fidei Petra
Petri ore confessa.
It is the blessed only rock of faith confessed by the mouth of Peter. And in
the sixth book Super hanc confessionis Petram Ecclesiae aedificatio est.
Upon that stone of confession the Church is built. And in the same place, That
faith is the foundation of the Church.

Hierom in his first book upon Mat. 7. The Lord Hier. in Matthew. Super hanc
Petram Dominus fundavit Ecclesiam. Ab hac Petra Apostolus Petrus sortitus est
nomen.
has founded his Church upon that rock. From that rock the Apostle Peter has
got his name. Chrysostom Hom. 55. upon Matthew, (...).
Upon that stone I will build my Church, that is, upon the faith of the
confession.

Ambrose upon Ephesians. 2. Vnde dicit Dominus ad Petrum, Super istam Petram
aedificabo Eccleam meam, hoc est in hac Catholicae fidei confessione statuo
fideles ad vitam.
Upon that rock I shall build the Church, that is, upon the confession of the
Catholic faith, I establish the faithful unto life. And in the book of the
Sacrament of the Incarnation, chap. 5. Fides est Ecclesiae fundamentum; Non
enim de carne Petri sed de fide dictum est, quia portae mortis ei non
praevalebunt, sed confessio vicit infernum.
The faith then is the foundation of the Church; for it is not of the flesh but
of the faith of Peter that it is said that the gates of death shall not prevail
against it. It was the confession that overcame hell.

Basilius of Seleucia in the Homily upon this place, (...).
Christ having called that confession [Petram] the rock gives that name to
Peter, who had first made that confession.

The Council of Chalcedon, Council. Chalcedon, in rescripto Synodicarum
literarum Juvenalis Hierosolymitani ad Palaestinos.
The Church is fastened upon that confession, and upon the faith which the
Apostles have given us.

Austin upon the tenth Treatise upon the first Epistle of John, Quid est Super
hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam? Super hanc fidem, super hoc quod dictum
est, Tu es Christus.
What mean these words, I will build my Church upon that rock? Upon that faith,
upon that which is said, Thou art the Christ, etc.

And in the 142. Treatise upon John, Super hanc ego Petram quam confessus es,
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. I etra enim erat Christus.
Upon that rock which thou have confessed, I will build my Church, for Christ
was the stone.

And in the 13 Sermon of the words of the Lord in St. Matthew, Thou art Peter,
and upon that rock which thou have confessed, upon that stone which thou have
known, saying, Thou art the Christ the Son of the living God, I will build my
Church; Super meipsum filium Dei vivi aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Super me
aedificabo te, non me super te.
I will build my Church upon my self who am the Son of the living God. I will
build thee upon me, not me upon thee. The same he says in the fiftieth
Treatise upon John. And whereas it had happened to him sometimes to call Peter
the rock of the Church, he corrects himself for it in the book of
Retractations, chap. 21. I have said in some place (says he) that upon Peter,
as upon the rock, the Church is founded: But I know also that since I have so
expounded it, that it may be understood that by that stone, I meant the stone
which Peter confessed. For it was not said to him, Tu es petra, sed tu es
Petrus; Thou art the stone, but thou art Peter: Now the stone was Christ.

Upon this, two Cardinals, Bellar. l. 2. de Summo Pontific. cap. 10.
Bellarmine and Du Perron, accuse Austin of ignorance; and that he understood
not the languge in which the Lord spoke; It is (says Cardinal du Perron, page
545.) a Grammatical error, arising in part for want of knowledge of the Hebrew
and Syriack tongues, etc. And page 546. he says that Austin is fallen into an
oversight.

Nicolas de Lyra is excellent upon this text. The Lord said unto Peter, Et ego
dico tibi pro te and pro sociis tuis quod tu es Petrus, id est confessor Petrae
verae quae Christus est factus, and super hanc Petram quam confessus es; id est
super Christum aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.
I tell thee, that is, for thee and for thy fellows, that thou art the stone,
that is, the confessor of the true stone which was made the Christ, And upon
that stone which thou have confessed, that is, upon the Christ, I will build my
Church.

The ordinary Gloss says the same?

Anselmus whom the Pope has made a Saint, upon Matthew. 16. says, Super hanc
petram id est super me aedificabo Ecclesiam mean. I will build my Church upon
this stone, that is upon my self.

Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes, who writ about the year of our Lord 865. in
the work of 55 Chapters, Chap. 45. Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram id est
super hanc firmam and solidam fidei consessionem quam tu es confessus,
aedificabo Ecclesium meam.
Thou art Peter and upon that stone, that is, upon the firm and solid
confession of faith which thou have confessed, I will build my Church.

To the places of Fathers, which say that this stone is not the person of
Peter, but Jesus Christ confessed by Peter, the Cardinal says Page 323. and
324.
that the Fathers before Constantines time, in whose reign the Arians rised,
have understood by this stone the person of St. Peter; But since Arius began to
deny the Godhead of Christ, the Fathers have licensed themselves to call that
confession the foundation of the Church, and to change the litterall sense into
a moral and tropical, that they might thence take occasion to declaim against
the Arians, who by denying the Godhead of Christ, destroyed the foundation of
the Church. This is worth observing; For thereby he accuses the Fathers of
wresting the Scripture to their advantage, and to give diverse expositions to
Scripture according to the times and persons they had to do with. Thereby also
he says, that the Fathers used this text against the Arrians to prove the
Godhead of Christ, because the Church cannot be founded upon a man. If their
reason be good it is impossible that by the stone upon which the Church is
founded, the person of Peter should be understood. Note that the Fathers in the
texts which we have alleged, say not only that by the stone we must understand
Christ, or the faith and confession of Christ, but also formally deny that the
person of Peter can be understood. Whence it appears that not only they bring
a different exposition, but also that they impugn and overthrow the other.

He says also that these two expositions agree very well, Page 522. Of this
text and the manifest impiety, see the Preface of this Book.
and that the Church is formally founded upon the person of St. Peter, but
causally upon his confession: That is, that the Church is really founded upon
the person of Peter, but that the confession which he made, is the cause that
the Church is founded upon his person. So that he will have these words, The
Church is grounded upon the person of Peter, to be proper; but these, The
Church is grounded upon the person of Christ confessed by Peter, to be
figurate. He says that this expression, that the Church is founded upon the
faith or confession which Peter made, is like unto this, that the faith of
Peter marched upon the waters, which is a very improper locution, and literally
false.

Herein the Cardinal speaks clean contrary to truth, and there is blasphemy in
his doctrine; whereby he teaches that he that says that the Church is founded
upon Jesus Christ, or upon the faith in him, speaks improperly; but he that
says that it is founded upon the person of Peter speaks properly, and without
figure. For Christ and his doctrine is the foundation of the Church truly,
properly, and really: But the person of Peter is figuratively and Metonymically
the foundation of the Church, taking Peter for his doctrine; as we say Homer
for the book of Homer, and the Prophets for the writings of the Prophets. It is
false that the faith of Peter is the cause that his person was made a
foundation of the Church; as if the excellency of his faith and confession had
deserved to receive that honor from Christ. For Peter had not that faith by
his virtue, but by Gods inspiration: Now there is no merit in receiving the
graces of God, to whom alone the praise for them is due. Besides, many before
Peter have made the like confession; as Nathaneel, John 1. Thou art the Son of
God, thou art the King of Israel; and the Samaritans, John 4. We know that this
is the Christ the Savior of the world. And the fall of Peter denying his
Master, which hapened since, showed what the merit of his faith could then be,
and how steadfast it was.

No more truth is there in the Cardinals affirmation, Chap. 56. p. 411. of the
second Edition.
that when Peter said to Christ, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God, he had already been made Head of the other Apostles. That is confuted by
Christ's words in the same place, where he says to Peter, I will give thee the
keys of the Kingdom of heaven. By speaking in the future, and promising to
give him the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, that is the government of the
Church, he shows that he had not given them to him before.

It is false also that Peter answered, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God, Page 513.
the other Apostles holding their peace, and not knowing what to answer, as the
Cardinal will have it. Is it credible that the Apostles knew not that Jesus was
the son of God? having heard the Father bearing that testimony unto him from
heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased? Having already
preached the Gospel, the summary whereof is that sentence. John 4.42.
Were they worse instructed then the Samaritans who long before had made that
confession? or then Nathanael, who the very next day after Peter was called to
the Apostleship had made that notable confession, John 1.49. That then Peter
set himself forth to answer the first, came out of his zeal and his wonted
forwardness, not out of the ignorance of his fellows.

With the like error the Cardinal says in the same place, Page 523.
that of those two expositions the one is immediate, the other mediate; the one
direct, the other collateral; the one literal, the other moral; the one
original, the other accessory; the one perpetual, the other temporal; the one
from the beginning the other by occasion. An impious Philosophy! For can one
say without impiety that this proposition that the Church is founded upon Jesus
confessed by Peter, is an indirect and not perpetual proposition, and is not
from the beginning? Certainly this was and is, and shall be for ever true. That
exposition is true, not occasionally but by a perpetual necessity. One would
think that this Cardinal has undertaken to make war against the Son of God.

After these so impious and so extravagant conceits he brings more of the like
subtilty. Page 525.
He says that the diverse uses of this word, foundation of the Church, must be
distinguished. That it is one thing to be a foundation of the faith of the
Church, another thing to be a foundation of the Ministry of the Church. And of
that foundation of the Ministry of the Church he makes three kinds; the first
an objective foundation, the second a suggestive foundation, the third an
instrumental and organical foundation. So he stretches his wit about vain and
senseless conceits. For there is no objective foundation, there being no
relation or proportion between being the foundation of a building, and being
the object of a faculty or action. And these words, a suggestive foundation
signify nothing at all; never did any man speak so. This Cardinal pleases
himself with his own conceits; and as Apes hold their young ones to be of
excellent beauty, so does this Prelate admire his own misshapen fancies, which
he hides in obscurity as it were with a cloud of dust, that they may be
suffered to pass.

It is false also that Peter or the Apostles be ministerial foundations, unless
by the Apostles their doctrine be understood. The authority of the Ministry is
founded upon him who is the author of the same, the Lord Jesus. Otherwise the
authority of Peter's Ministry should be founded upon Peter himself. Which is
both absurd and impossible.

CHAP. 5. Six reasons of the Cardinal to prove that by this Stone the Person of
Peter is understood.
Page 541. and 542.
TO persuade that by these words Thou art Peter, etc. Christ foundeth his Church
upon the person of St. Peter, the Cardinal brings six reasons, but all to no
purpose. For we easily suffer that exposition, so that by the person of Peter
his doctrine be understood, as they say the Prophets, to signify the writings
or the doctrine of the Prophets. Yet let us examine his reasons.

The first is that our Lord having foretold to Peter that he would change his
name, puts him now in possession of that promise. And that this text cannot
expound the sense of the word Peter, unless in the second part of the text the
word Peter be taken in the same sense, and for the same subject, as it is taken
in the first. And by consequent that sentence, Upon this stone I will build my
Church, cannot be interpreted of the person of Christ, but of the only person
of Peter.

I answer that the sense is both natural and fluent, by expounding it thus,
Thou shall be called Peter by reason of the stone which thou have confessed,
upon which the Church is founded. Besides, before that Christ had spoken so to
Peter, he was already named Peter. So St. Matthew calls him in chapter 10. That
name is given him by Christ in the first chapter of John v. 41. Thou art Simon
the son of Jona, thou shall be called Cephas or Peter. Which is not a
prediction nor a promise, but an actual imposing of the name. As when the Angel
said to Jacob, Genesis 32. Thou shall no more be called Jacob but Israel, although
he speak in the future, yet Jacob did at that time receive the name of Israel.
Thus Luke 1.60. Elizabeth naming her son said, His name shall be John.

The second reason is, that our Savior intends in this place to return to
Peter that which Peter had done for him in his discourse. Now Peter had done
two things, the one to declare the appellative name of our Lord, which is
Christ, the other to expound the sense and the energy of the same word Christ,
saying thou art the Christ the son of the living God. Wherefore the law of the
antithesis required that not only the Lord should declare a name unto him,
saying, Thou art Peter, but also should expound unto him the energy of that
name, saying, I shall build my Church, which could not take place, unless by
the word Peter in this second sentence the person of Peter be understood, etc.

But here the Cardinal is out, to think that these words, Thou art the Son of
the living God, be the exposition of the word Christ. For Christ is a name of
office; but to be the son of the living God, belongs to his nature, and is an
exposition of the same.

The third reason is, that it had been altogether out of purpose to make
mention of the name of Peter, considering the nature of the discourse that
Christ was to use with him, if by these words, and upon this stone, he had not
meant the person of Peter. For this word Peter had no relation to the keys,
but to building.

But that reason is without reason. The word stone or rock has relation to the
next sentence, I will build my Church: And that relation stands alike whether
by the word stone the person of Peter be understood, or the stone confessed by
Peter.

The fourth reason is that it would have been an all Grammatical coherence to
say, I declare unto thee that thou art Peter, and that upon that stone which is
my self, I will build my Church, and I will give thee the keys of the kingdom
of heaven.

But the coherence is very good, taking thus the words of our Savior, I tell
thee that thy name is Peter, and that upon the stone which thou have taken for
thy foundation, namely that I am Christ the son of God, I will build my Church.

The fifth reason is, that the Pronoun this is relative, which must be referred
to the Antecedent already expressed.

I answer that the text of Matthew shows that the pronoun this, is not the
relative of Peter: For the relative must agree in gender with the antecedent.
But there is in Matthew (...), Tu es Petrus, and then in the feminine (...)
super hanc petram.

Finally, he says that our Savior would make such an allusion to the name of
Peter, as would seem to confirm and approve the imposed surname. Which I grant,
For it is as if Christ had told him, Thou art with good reason called Peter,
because by calling me the Christ the son of the living God, thou layest the
fundamental stone upon which I shall build my Church.

CHAP. 6. Other proofs brought by the Cardinal out of Scripture.
HE heapeth up more proofs for St. Peter's primacy. Page 529.
He alleges that to him it was said, I will give thee the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven. By the keys of the kingdom of heaven nothing else is
understood but the government of the Church, which often in Scripture is called
the Kingdom of heaven, and the Kingdom of God. It is the style of Scripture to
understand by the keys, the government of the house. Thus Isa. 22.21. God
promises to Eliakim the charge of High Steward in the Kings house, The key of
the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so he shall open and none
shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open. And Rev. 3. it is written
that Christ has the key of David, that is, the government of the Church. That
key was given not only to Peter, but also to all the Apostles. For Christ
having asked all his Apostles, Whom say ye that I am, and Peter having answered
for all, has received also the keys of the Kingdom of heaven for all, as Aug.
Tract. 50. in Joh. Si hoc Petro tantum dictum est non facit hoc Ecclesia. Et
paulo post, Petrus quando claves accepit, Ecclesiam sanctam significavit. Idem
Tract. 118. Petro dicitur, Tihi dabo claves, etc. tanquam ligandi and solvendi
solus acciperet potestatem; cum and illud pro omnibus dixerit, and hoc cum
omnibus tanquam personam gerens ipsius unitatis acceperit.
Austin says in the fiftieth and one hundred and eighteenth Treatise upon St.
John, and Hierom in the first book against Jovinian. They all receive the keys
of the Kingdom of heaven, and upon them the stedfastness of the Church is
equally founded. Thus Gregory Nazianzen in the Oration upon Basil says, that
the keys of heaven have been committed to Basil. And in the Council L. 3 c. 9.
of Paris under the Emperors Lewis and Lothary, all the French Bishops say
themselves to be porters, to whom the keys of the kingdom of heaven are given.
Ambrose Tibi dabo claves regni coelorum, and ut solvas and liges. Quod Petro
dicitur, Apostolis dicitur, non potestatem usurpamus, sed servimus imperio.
upon Psalm. 38. I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. That
which is said to Peter, is said to the other Apostles. Hilary in book 6. of the
Trinity speaks thus to the Apostles Vos o sancti and beati viri ob fidei
vestrae meritum claves regni coelorum sortiti, and ligandi and solvendi in
coelo and terra jus adepti.
You holy and blessed men who by the merit of your faith have obtained the keys
of the Kingdom of heaven. Theophylactus upon that text of Matthew; Although it
be said to Peter alone I will thee the keys, yet they are given to all the
Apostles. When? It was then when he said to them, Whose sins soever ye remit,
they shall be remitted. And Anselmus upon that place, We must observe that this
power was not given to Peter alone, but as Peter answered him alone for all, so
in the person of Peter the Lord gave that power unto all.

Our Adversaries themselves hold that the power of the keys is included in the
power of binding and loosing. Now the power of binding and loosing is given to
all the Apostles, Mat. 18.18.

The Cardinal alleges also the words of Christ to Peter, Luke 22. I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren. By which words Christ promises to Peter, that in the
temptation at hand his faith should not sink and fail altogether: And he
warns him that after he is risen from his fall, he should admonish others to
grow wise by his example. But this text has no relation to the primacy,
neither far nor near.

The Cardinal uses also these words thrice repeated of our Savior to Peter,
Feed my sheep. But Christ said not to him, Feed alone my sheep, and with
sovereign power. There is no Pastor of the Church but must feed Christ sheep,
Ephesians. 4.11. Acts 20.28.

Austin in chap. 30. of the book of the Christian combat says, that Cum Petro
dicitur Amas Me? Pasce oves meas; omnibus dicitur.
when it is said unto St. Peter, Love thou me? Feed my sheep; it is said unto
all.

Basil in his Ascetical constitutions, chap. 22. Having constituted Peter
Pastor of his Church after him: For he told him, Love thou me more then
these? feed my my sheep; (...).
Giving to all Pastors and Doctors that should come after, the like power.
Whereof we have a proof in that all bind and loose as well as he.

Ambrose in the book of the Priestly dignity Quas oves and quem gregem non
solum tunc beatus suscepit Petrus, sed and nobiscum eas suscepit, and cum illo
nos eas suscepimus omnes.
. Which sheep Peter did not then receive alone, but he with us, and we all with
him have received them. That interrogation, Peter, love thou me? was made to
St. Peter thrice, that by three confessions he might repair the three denials,
whereby a little before he had denied the Lord, as Hierom says in the Epitaph
to Fabiola, Petrus trinam negationem trina confessione delevit, Peter blotted
away his triple denial by his triple confession. And Austin in the twenty third
Treatise upon St. John, Redditur trinae negationi trina confessio. Three
confessions are given to repair the three denyals. Ambrose says the same in
the Apology of Daniel, chap. 6. And Epiphanius in the heresy of the Cathari,
which is the 59.. 1. And Cyrillus upon John 12. cap. 64. Where also he renders
a reason why after these three confessions the Lord said to him, Feed my sheep;
namely that thereby the Lord restored him into the dignity of the Apostleship,
least that by the triple denial he might not seem to have been shaken. Very
unfitly then words of comfort are employed to establish a Monarchy.

The Cardinal is not ashamed to use for Peter's primacy, that which is said in
Matthews Gospel, Page 539.
that Jesus Christ commanded Peter to pay tribute for him and for himself,
which is a proof unworthy to be confuted.

CAHP. VII. Of Cyprians opinion about Peter's primacy, and that the Cardinal
has not understood it. And how all the Apostles have been heads of the
Universal Church.
CCyprian in the book of the unity of the Church, held, that before the
resurrection of Christ Peter alone had the primacy, but that after the
resurrection all the Apostles were made equal, so that by his reckoning, his
Primacy continued but two or three years at the most. He says that Christ
would have that primacy to be at the first, in one man only, before it was
communicated to many, that the dignity should begin by one, to show the unity
of the Church, and that all Bishops, though in several Countries, make but one
chair, and one succession. His words are these, Quamvis Apostolus omnibus post
resurrectionem suam parem potestatem tribuat, and dicat, Sicut misit me Pater,
and ego mitto vos, Accipite Spiritum Sanctum. Si cui remiseritis peccata;
remittentur illi; Si cui tenueritis, tenebuntur: Tamen ut unitatem
manifestaret, unam cathedram constituit and unitatis ejusdem originem ab uno
incipientem sua authoritate disposuit. Hoc erant utique caeteri Apostoli quod
Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis. Sed exordium ab
unitate proficiscitur ut Ecclesia una monstretur. Pamelius has corrupted that
place, and has added this, Supra Petrum unum Christus aedificat Ecclesiam
suam. Also Primatus Petro datur. Which words are not found in the other copies.
Although the Lord after his resurrection give to his Apostles an equal power,
and say, As my Father has sent me, so do I send you, Receive the Holy Ghost:
Whose sins soever ye remit, they shall be remitted. Yet to show the unity, he
has established one chair, and has by his authority disposed the origin of
the unity, beginning by one. The other Apostles indeed were the same thing as
Peter was, endowed with the like honor and power; but the beginning proceeds
from unity, to show that the Church is one.

The Cardinal is not far from that opinion. Page 529.
Only he adds one thing of his own, which Cyprian says not, That Christ gave
to other Apostles part in the authority which he had given to St. Peter. And
that this privilege to be the foundation of the Church was originally in
Peter, but in the others by association and aggregation. Wherein he differs
from Cyprians doctrine, who says that Peter was the head of the Church before
the other Apostles only in time, not in degree; and says not that the dignity
of the other Apostles was grounded upon that of Peter, and makes it not depend
from his primacy. He says indeed that he that abandoneth Peter's chair, cannot
be in the Church. But by Peter's chair he understands not that of the Roman
Bishop only, but Cyprian l. de unitate Ecclesiae,. Episcopatus unus est cujus a
singulis in solidum pars tenetur.
the whole body of Bishops, whom he holds to be all sitting in that chair, and
to have a solid and joint part in that succession. Herein also the Cardinal
contradicts St. Paul, who in the beginning of the Epistle to the Galatians,
says himself to be an Apostle not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ. And
chap. 2. ver. 6. he says that they that seemed to be somewhat (he speaks of
the most excellent Apostles) added nothing to him: Which should be false if his
Apostleship had been grounded upon Peter, and had taken origin from him. And
really he had exercised his Apostleship many years before he spoke with Peter,
and before he had any communication with him.

To the words of Cyprian, which say that Christ gave to his Apostles an equal
power after his resurrection, and that they were all endowed with the like
honor and authority, the Cardinal brings a distinction; saying that Cyprian
speaks of the inward and essential power of the Apostleship, not of that
which is external and accidental to the Apostleship. And that they were equal
as for the power, not as for the order of the exercise of the power. He casts
those dark words, as a black smoke before the eyes of the Reader, for fear of
being perceived. He means that they were equal in that which is essential to
the Apostleship, but not in the primacy, which is accidental and not essential
to the Apostleship. But Cyprian clearly confutes that distinction, making them
equal in honor: Now the chief honor which our Adversaries attribute unto
Peter, is the honor of the primacy. Besides, Cyprian says that the Lord, Mat.
16. established Peter to be the head of the Church, but that after his
resurrection he made them equal; which is saying clearly enough, that after the
resurrection he made them all heads, and that Peter had no more that primacy.
Our Adversaries say that ( Mat. 16.) Peter was established head of the
Universal Church, which is a thing accidental to the Apostleship. Now it is in
that very thing that Cyprian says that Christ made the other Apostles equal
unto Peter; that is, in the prerogative which he had before his resurrection;
making them all after the resurrection of Christ equal both in honor and
power. How equal in power, if Peter had power over them? And how equal in
honor, if Peter had alone the primacy over the Universal Church?

Because the Fathers say very often that all Bishops are successors of the
Apostles, and of St. Peter: the Cardinal says that the Bishop of Rome alone is
successor of St. Peter by a direct succession, but that the others Bishop are
sitting in St. Peter's chair, and are in some sort his successors by an oblique
and indirect succession. But the most esteemed among the Popes, Gregory the I.
surnamed the Great, did not know that distinction. For in the 37. Epistle of
the first book, he extolleth the dignity of the three Sees of St. Peter, which
are Rome, Antioch and Alexandria. Then he adds, Cum ergo unius atque una sit
seeds cui ex authoritate divina tres nunc Episcopi praesident.
Whereas then the Sea is one, and of one man, over which See three Bishops
preside now by divine authority, all the good which I hear of you, I attribute
unto my self; and if you hear any good of me, impute it to your merit. And in
the fifth book, Epist. 60. he writes thus to the Bishop of Alexandria Hujus nos
Magistri and Discipuli authoritate constringimur ut and ego sedi Discipuli
praefidere videar propter Magistrum and vos sedi Magistri propter Discipulam.
. We are tied together by the union between the Master and the Disciple [St.
Peter and St. Mark] so that it seems that I preside over the Sea of the
Disciple, because of the Master; and that you preside over the Masters See,
because of the Disciple. There not only he makes the Bishops of Alexandria
equally successors of St. Peter with him, but also he says that they preside
over the Roman See in some sort. And he equalleth the Bishops of Antioch and
Alexandria to that of Rome, as sitting in the same chair, and having the same
succession. And truly if Peter has been Bishop of Antioch, and the Bishops of
Antioch are descended from him in a direct line; I see not why the Cardinal
makes them his successors in a collateral and indirect line. That he affirms
with his own mere authority, and brings no other authority for it.

CHAP. VIII. Of St. Peter's being at Rome. Examination of the Cardinals reasons.
Whether St. Peter has been at Rome or not, and whether he suffered
Martyrdom there, is a question of no use for the establishing the primacy of
the Bishop of Rome. For it is not necessary that he has given preheminences to
all the places where he made some stay. If he was put to death at Rome, it is
rather a disgrace to the City of Rome then an honor, to have murdered such an
excellent Apostle. Thus our Savior marketh Jerusalem with a note of infamy for
killing the Prophets. Luke 13.
Or if the abode and martyrdom of Peter at Rome is considerable for conferring
the primacy upon the Bishop of Rome, much rather ought the Bishop of Jerusalem
have the Primacy, since Christ was crucified at Jerusalem; and that it was for
a good while the dwelling place of all the Apostles. Had St. Peter died at
Milan, or at Capua, or in Capernaum, none would for that defer to the Bishops
of those places the government of the Universal Church. Nevertheless M. du
Perron, after others, thinking thereby to confirm powerfully the Popes primacy,
treats that question at large, and gives to that matter the 31. chapter of his
first book.

I do acknowledge freely, in the very beginning of this controversy, that this
opinion has been received among the Fathers, that St. Peter was at Rome and
there died; yet the most ancient of them that speak of it are Irenaeus lib. 3
cap 3.
Irenaeus and Tertull. de praescriptionibus. cap. 36.
Tertullian who writ about a hundred and thirty years after St. Peter's death,
which is a sufficient time to give course to a false opinion.

I purpose not to oppose the testimony of the Ancients, nor to deny absolutely
that St. Peter was at Rome. Only I say that this matter is so involved with
fables, that the untruths added to it, are sufficient to bring all the truths
in question. It is easy to show that the Traditions about that, received by
our Adversaries, that St. Peter after he had been seven years Bishop of
Antioch, transported his See to Rome, where he was Bishop and first Pope five
and twenty years together, are things inconsistent, and whereof the untruth is
evident.

The Cardinal in the forealledged chap. 31. begins by our objections, which he
sets forth neither in the manner nor in the order that we propound them, and
brings weak reasons for us, such as we would not insist upon. Here then I will
insist only upon that which I think to be solid, and set down our reasons, such
as they are indeed, not such as he makes them.

I. We say then that if St. Peter had been Pope at Rome so long, some traces
should be extant in the Acts of the Apostles, or in some Ancient Author of good
credit, of a thing so notable; some description, or some mention of his
journey, and of the places where he past going from Syria to Rome. The first
that described St. Peter's journey was Simeon Metaphrastes, about eight hundred
and fifty years after Christ's birth; an Author notoriously fabulous, whom Ann.
44. Sect. 17.
Baronius very often accuses of untruth. In vain the Cardinal answers that
St. Luke in the Acts follows especially the actions of St. Paul his Master. For
besides that Luke speaks often of St. Peter; even since the conversion of Paul,
that action of transporting the seat of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy from the
East to the West, is such an important and public thing, that it should not
have been buried in silence, but made known to all the Churches of the world.
That man should be strangely negligent, who writing the Roman History of
Constantines time, should say nothing of the removing of the Roman Empire to
Constantinople.

II. But who will believe that such an excellent Apostle has been so long in
the first City of the world, upon such a high stage, among so many combats, and
left behind him no Sermon, and no record of his miracles and of his combats
against the enemies of the Gospel? Doubtless not only the Christian Authors,
but even the Pagan Historians, of which that age was so fertile, had not been
silent of him; seeing that the miracles of Apollonius Thyanaeus, who lived near
about the same time have been recorded, and the Apophthegmes of one Demetrius a
Cynick who lived then at Rome, and of Florus a begging Philosopher, have been
recorded.

It is true that some Ancients say that St. Peter fought at Rome in the sight
of all the people against Simon Magus, who being carried up in the air in a
fiery Chariot fell down at the prayers of St. Peter, and brake his neck. But
such a public and wonderful accident had not been forgotten by the Pagan
Authors of that age, as Suetonius, Tacitus, Seneca, Pliny and others. Austine
in his Epistle to Casulanus, which is the 86. says that many Romans hold that
narration to be false: Where Austin speaks not only of the fast whereby Peter
prepared himself for that combat (as M. du Perron will have it) but of the
whole story. There being no likelihood of ground for thinking it false, that
Peter prepared himself by fasting for so great a combat. St. Austin was too
prudent to make that fast to be suspected as fabulous.

The same appears also in that Justin. Mar. Apol 2. (...).
Justin Martyr in his second Apology, and Tertullian in the Apologetick, say
that the Romans had honored Simon Magus with a Statue inscribed To Simon the
Holy God. For if the Romans had seen him thus cast headlong at St. Peter's
prayer, they had rather erected a Statue to Peter, instead of crucifying him.
Baronius on the year 44.. 55. says, that under Gregory XIII. in the Isle of
Tiber was found a stone with this inscription, Semoni Sango Deo. It is that God
whom the ancient Romans called Sanctas and Diespiter, which Varro mentions in
his fourth book of the Latin tongue. And Ovid. Fastor. 4. Quaerebam Nonas
Sancto Fidione referrem,
An tibi Semo pater, etc.
It is credible that the ancient Christians little skilled in the Roman
antiquity, seeing that inscription in the basis of a statue, thought it was the
statue of Simon Magus.

III. It is very considerable also that St. Paul, in the last chapter of the
Epistle which he writ to the Church of Rome, saluteth a great number of
persons; among others, some whom he calls his helpers in Christ, and his
work-fellows; but he makes no mention of Peter, Page 183.
who (if he had been at Rome) should have been saluted the first. M. du Perren
answers, that the Epistle to the Romans was written while the Jews were out
of Rome, and that St. Peter was relegated into the East. A thing evidently
false and convinced of untruth, by the names of the persons that then were at
Rome whom St. Paul saluteth. For he saluteth Priscilla and Aquila which were
Jews, as it appears, Acts 18.2. who being banished out of Rome by the Emperor
Claudius, like the other Jews retired to Corinth, but since returned to Rome,
and there continued; for when Paul came to Rome, he conferred with the Jews
that lived there, Acts 28.17.

As for Peter, if he was banished out of Rome with the other Jews, I see no
reason why he was rather relegated into the East (as M. du Perron says) then
his Contrymen that went to Corinth and other places. Besides, St. Peter was
a Jew, and therefore of the East. Now none is relegated into his own Country.
A Jew cannot be banished into Judea.

The Cardinal adds that if this argument take place, we must conclude also that
Timothy was not Bishop of Ephesus, because St. Paul writing to the Ephesians
salutes not Timothy; And that St. James was not Bishop of Jerusalem, because
St. Paul writing to the Hebrews, does not salute St. James, and makes not any
mention of him. But this Cardinal is short here, and apprehends not that the
strength of our argument lies not, in that Paul writing to the Romans salutes
not Peter, but in that he saluting many persons of the Church of Rome, and
naming them, and saluting especially his helpers in Christ, and work-fellows in
the Gospel, he names not Peter, and salutes him not. If St. Paul writing to
the Ephesians while he was there had saluted many persons making no mention of
Timothy, there had been reason to find it strange. Note by the way the
Cardinals ignorance, who thinks that the Epistle to the Hebrews was written
particularly to the Church of Jerusalem, seeing that it is written to the Jews
scattered over all the world. If it had been addressed in particular to the
Church of Jerusalem, the Apostle would rather have written to them in the
Jewish language, and would not have alleged Scripture unto them according to
the version of the Septuagint, but as it was read in the Synagogues of
Jerusalem.

IV. Moreover, it is not likely that St. Paul would have written such a long
Epistle unto the Church of Rome to instruct them in the Christian religion, if
they had then enjoyed the daily instruction of Peter the Apostle. At least he
would have given some reason in that Epistle why he would instruct the Church
of Rome, which having such an excellent Pastor as St. Peter, did not want
instruction. And he would have exhorted the Romans to value very highly that
singular grace of God, to have provided for them such an holy and excellent
Apostle.

V. Observe also that St. Paul writ to the Romans, being at Corinth, two years
and above before his journey to Rome, which he took in the second year of Nero,
when Festus was sent to succeed Felix Governor of Judea. Now the five first
years of Nero past with all lenity, neither did Nero then oppress or persecute
any; so that no persecution could constrain Peter to absent himself from Rome,
if he had been Bishop of Rome at that time. And Paul's coming to Rome at that
time shows sufficiently that Peter was not then at Rome; for St. Luke, Acts
28.15. and seq. relates how some of the brethren came to meet him, and how
being come to the City, he visited the chief of the Jews; Of visiting Peter, or
any communication with him, no mention is made, and yet he should have begun
his visits there.

VI. While Paul sojourned at Rome he writ many Epistles; to the Galatians, to
the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, to Philemon, and the
second to Timothy, as it appears by the subscription of the Epistles, which
(though not Canonical) are not to be contemned. Gal. 2.6, 7, 8.
In the Epistle to the Galatians he defends the honor of his Apostleship,
against those that would abase it, making him much inferior unto other
Apostles. To that end he says that the most eminent (meaning James, Peter and
John) having perceived the grace that was given unto him, gave him the right
hand of fellowship, receiving him in the society of the Apostles. Had the
Apostle Paul lost memory or common sense, that he should omit his present
condition, which would have served more then any other thing to raise the
dignity of his Apostleship? For he could have said that Peter had received him
for his associate in the conduct of the first Church of the world, where was
the seat of the Primacy over the Universal Church. To say that the Epistle to
the Galatians was written before that to the Romans, (as the Cardinal deemeth)
is contradicting the subscription of the Epistle to the Galatians, which says
expressly, that it was written from Rome, and by consequent after the Epistle to
the Romans, which was written from Corinth, long before Paul came to Rome.

VII. In the Epistle to the Colossians, written also from Rome, chap. 4. v. 10,
11. He says that Aristarchus and Marcus, and Jesus which is called Justus,
were his only fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God, which had been a comfort
unto him. Where was St. Peter then? Is it credible that he was not joined with
St. Paul to help him in the work of the Gospel, and to be a comfort unto him?
Or shall we say that Paul envied him that praise? Note also that he speaks not
of those that served him at home, but of those that were his coadjutours in the
Kingdom of God, that is, in the work of the Gospel.

VIII. It is not to be omitted that Gal. 2.7. Paul says that the Gospel of the
circumcision was committed unto Peter, that is, the charge of announcing the
Gospel unto the Jews; for which it was more convenient for him to live in
Judea, or Syria, or Idumea, or Egypt, or Cyrene, which swarmed with Jews, then
at Rome, where there was but few Jews at that time, and those subject to
banishment, and exposed to much oppression and scorn: Martial. Epigr. l. 1. Hoc
quod transtiberinus ambulator qui pallentia sulfurata fractis permutat vitreis.
Juvenalis. Occultam Judaea susurrat in aurem. Qualiacunque voles Judaei somnia
vendunt.
They sold matches beyond the Tyber, were fortune tellers, lay in the Forest of
Aricinum, and were in great contempt.

IX. The same Apostle, Romans 15.23. says to the Romans, that he had a great
desire to come to them, for he intended to advance the work of God at Rome. Now
he had told them, ver. 20. that his custom was not to build upon another man's
foundation, that is, to announce the Gospel in such places where some other
Apostle had already founded the Church. He presupposes then that Peter had not
founded the Roman Church.

X. But that which makes the abode of Peter at Rome, and his being Bishop there
more uncertain, is the dissent which is found among the Ancients about that
matter.

Eusebius in his Chronicle, according to Hieroms version, says that St. Peter
having been the first founder of the Church of Antioch, was sent to Rome to
preach the Gospel, where he was Bishop of the said City five and twenty years
together. But that place is falsified and corrupted; for in the Greek text of
Eusebius these words where he was five and twenty years a Bishop, are not
found. Yet that which Eusebius says, that Peter was sent, shows that he was
subject to the college of the Apostles, since he received his mission from
them.

The Pontifical of Damasus in the life of Linus, says that Linus was Bishop of
Rome from the Consulate of Saturninus and Scipio, which was in the second year
of Nero, unto the Consulate of Capito and Rufus, which fell in the thirteenth
year of the same Emperor. By which reckoning Linus was eleven years Bishop of
Rome. But in those eleven years our Adversaries say that Peter was Bishop of
Rome. Which if it be true, there was two Bishops or Popes at Rome at the same
time.

As for St. Peter's death, Petrus a Nerone affixus cruci, martyrio coronatus
est, capito^^d terram verso, and in sublime pedibus elevatis, asserens se
indignum ut sic crucifigeretur ut Dominus suus.
Hierom in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers says, that in the last year
of Nero, which was the fourteenth, Peter was crucified at Rome with his head
downwards, because he held not himself worthy to be crucified in the same form
as Christ his Lord was; as if the form of the punishment were at the choice of
him that is punished. Also that he was buried in the Vatican near the triumphal
street. Now he could not be buried there presently after his death. For it is
not credible that the Roman Magistrate would have suffered that the body of a
fellon, executed with the most infamous punishment of all, should be buried in
an honorable place, where none was buried before. Eusebius in the last chapter
but one of the second book of his history, says, (...), that Peter was nailed
to a piece of wood, but of that turning of his head downwards he speaks never a
word.

The first Decretal of Clement the V. gives notice to James of the death of
Peter. If we believe that Epistle, Peter dyed before James. Now James dyed in
the seventh year of Nero; So the furthest time that can be assigned to Peter's
death by that account, must be the sixth year of Nero, in which time Nero had
not begun yet to persecute the Christians; not the fourteenth year, as Hierom
says. Our Adversaries cannot accuse that Epistle of untruth, since Pope Leo
IX. in his fourth Epistle, and Gregory the VII. in the thirty sixth Epistle,
and the Council of Vatson allege it. And the Jesuit Turrianus made a book
purposely for the defense of these Decretals.

In the first Tome of the Councils there is an Epistle of Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, where he says that he has buried the body of St. Peter In Templo
Apollinis, in monte aureo, in Vaticano palatii Neroniani.
in the Temple of Apollo, in the golden Mount, in the Vatican of the Palace of
Nero, where also he says that the bodies of many Bishops lie; All fables and
forged tales; for Cornelius would not have laid St. Peter's body in a Temple of
Idols: and if he had offered to do it, the Pagans would not have suffered it;
Especially in a time when the Church of Rome was hidden and cruelly persecuted.
And Nero's Palace was not a place where any was buried; and that golden Mount
is an imaginary place. And the Pagans did not bury in their Temples.

If any must be believed in a matter, the relation whereof is so various, it
seems to be Athanasius, to whose authority, that of other Fathers ought not to
be compared. He then in his first Apology for his flight speaks thus (...).
. Peter who hid himself for fear of the Jews, and Paul who was let down in a
basket and fled, having heard this voice, You must suffer Martyrdom at Rome,
did not shrink back from that journey, but rather went rejoicing. And Peter
rejoiced when they cut his throat, as returning to his own kindred. Three
things he says of Peter. The one, that the Jews sought to put him to death.
The other that Peter and Paul were not taken at Rome, but that both took their
journey to Rome, there to suffer Martyrdom. (He means, it seems, that the
Jews having delivered them to the Romans, these Apostles were at several times
brought to Rome) The third thing which he says, is, that Peter had his throat
cut, not then that he was crucified. Wherefore I wonder how Eusebius, contrary
to the testimony of Athanasius, would say that Peter was nailed to a piece of
wood.

Other fables are said of Paul's Baron. an 69.. 12.
death, that when he was beheaded, out of his neck issued not blood, but milk.

The like dissent is between Writers about the successors of Peter, and that
dissent breeds a very thick darkness. Tertullian in the thirty second chapter
of Prescriptions, and Hierom upon Isa. 52. and in the first book against
Jovinian, put Clement immediately after St. Peter. Optatus in the first book
against Parmenian, puts Linus, and then Clement, and next to him Euaristus.
Hierome in the first book of Ecclesiastical writers, speaking of Clement, puts
him the fourth after Peter. Anastatius the Library Keeper, and Luitprandus say
the same. But Eusebius in his Chronicle, and Irenaeus confound Cletus with
Anacletus, as being but one. for which Epiph. contra Carpocrat. haer. 27.
Epiphanius in the twenty seventh heresy brings diverse reasons, saying that
the truth is not evident to him. It is no wonder then, if the succession of
some particular Bishop be doubtful, and if the Authors vary upon the names of
the successors. But it is not credible that if the Bishop of Rome had been the
Head of the Universal, Church, the name and number of the first that held that
Monarchy; could have been uncertain; and that in a flourishing age, where there
was no want of Writers. As if there were a dispute about the next successor of
Augustus or Charlemagen.

But when our Adversaries are put to find the seven years, in which they say
that St. Peter held his See at Antioch, and the five and twenty in which they
say that he held it at Rome, they find themselves in a maze, and involved with
insoluble difficulties: for there being but thirty six or thirty seven years
from the death of Christ to that of Peter, if from them you take off the seven
years of his sojourning at Antioch, and the twenty five of his ruling the Sea
of Rome, there will remain to him but four or five years to do all the things
that are said of him in the Acts of the Apostles, and in the Epistle to the
Galatians; which yet could not have been done in less then eighteen or twenty
years.

Suppose that the conversion of Paul happened a year after the death of Christ,
as Cardinal Baronius will have it, and after him Cardinal du Perron, which
passage yet we will show hereafter to have happened above six years later.

Gal. 1.18. St. Paul says that three years after his conversion he went up to
Jerusalem to visit Peter.

Twelve years after Christ's death, St. Peter is committed in the prisons of
Jerusalem by Herod Agrippa, Acts 12. For that happened in the last year of that
Herod, the second or third year of the Emperor Claudius. So twelve years are
past already, and Peter is still in Judea, and has not yet fixed his See at
Antioch. Which is confirmed by Eusebius in the fifth book of his History, chap.
17. where he says that a certain Apollonius knew by a Tradition come from the
Apostles, that Christ before he ascended into heaven, had commanded his
Apostles to abide at Jerusalem twelve whole years. Not but that it was lawful
for them to go out of the Town to visit the neighboring Churches, Act. 9.10,
11.
but their ordinary residence was as Jerusalem. Thus Peter dwelling at
Jerusalem, yet went to Lydda, Samaria, and Cesarea. Which agrees very well
with that relation, Acts 8.1. that after Stevens death, the Church of Jerusalem
was dissipated, and scattered in diverse places; the Apostles only excepted,
who stayed at Jerusalem. They would not think of flying out of Jerusalem,
notwithstanding the peril to obey Christ's prohibition.

We learn Acts 11.20. that the Church of Antioch was founded a little before
Peter's imprisonment; not by Peter, but by the preaching of some Cyprians and
Cyrenians, who first announced the Gospel in Antioch unto the Gentiles, and
that for the advancing of that holy work, Barnabas was sent from Jerusalem, who
joined Paul with himself. And a famine being shortly after in Judea, the
Disciples of Antioch sent some relief by the hands of Barnabas and Saul unto
the Churches of Judea that were pincht with famine and poverty, Act. 11.29. In
all that work Peter had no part, whence it is evident that he was not yet
Bishop of Antioch.

Barnabas and Saul being come to Jerusalem found Peter prisoner; for in the
first verse of the chapter following, we read that (...).
at or about the same time Herod stretched forth his hands to vex certain of
the Church, and apprehended Peter.

Onuphrius an Augustinian Monk, the most learned in history of all our
Adversaries, says that Peter being come out of prison, went immediately into
Antioch twelve years after Christ's death. But that is contradicted by the
history of the Acts; for in the beginning of the thirteenth chapter an
enumeration is made of the holy men that served the Church of Antioch, among
which Peter is not named. So that already thirteen years at the least are past
since Christ's death, and Peter is not yet Bishop of Antioch.

Let us follow the thread of the history. We have said that Paul three years
after his conversion came to Jerusalem, and there saw Peter, with whom he was
fifteen days. The same Apostle says in the following chapter, that fourteen
years after he went up again to Jerusalem, Gal. 2.1.
where he saw James, Cephas and John, who gave to him and Barnabas the right
hand of fellowship. Whether you reckon those fourteen years from his
conversion, or rather (as it is more likely) from his first journey to
Jerusalem, they will be above fifteenth years since Christ's death, and St.
Peter is still in Judea, and has not yet seated himself in Antioch.

In the fifteenth of the Acts a Council is kept at Jerusalem, where Paul being
sent from Antioch, was present, and Peter also. Our Cardinal will have that
Council to be upon the eighteenth year after the death of Christ. All which
time from the death of Christ, Peter is still found in Judea, never in Antioch.

Suppose that presently after that Council, Peter set his See in Antioch, and
there lived seven years, which yet does not appear; yet twenty five years are
already past since our Saviors death before Peter was at Rome. And yet you
must find some years for him to visit the Churches of Asia, Pontus, and
Galatia, to which he directs his first Epistle; which Churches he visited
after his residence at Antioch, according to Hieromes testimony in his
Catalogue.

By that calculation some twelve years should remain for Peter to reside in
Rome. But if Paul's conversion did not happen but seven or eight years after our
Saviors death, hardly will four or five years remain, and the twenty five
years of Peter's holding his Bishops See at Rome shall be reduced to the sixth
part.

The Cardinal to rid himself of these difficulties, does two things. First, he
makes St. Peter to take many journeys from Rome to Judea, and transports him in
an instant from Rome to Jerusalem. Of which journeys not the least mention is
made in all Antiquity. It had been a shorter course to put him in many places
at the same time, as well as the body of Christ in many millions of places in
the same moment. Secondly, he hastens the conversion of St. Paul, and will have
him converted the very first year after the Lords death. A thing very unlikely.
For the persecution and the martyrdom of Steven preceded the conversion of
Paul, there being an intervall between, in which Paul did persecute many. Now
that persecution about Steven happened many years after Christ's death. In the
end of the Greek Chronicle of Eusebius, set out by Josephus Scaliger, there is
a little book entitled the Epitome of times, which says that the martyrdom
of Steven happen seven years after Christ's Passion. Nicephorus in the second
book, chap. 3. alleges Enodius the next successor to Peter in the Bishopric
of Antioch, who says that Steven died seven years after our Saviors death,
and that Paul was converted six months after. To which Euodius, as more
ancient, and contemporary to the Apostles, we must give more credence then to
the Chronicle of Eusebius. Beside it is not credible that this persecution was
raised against the Christians by the Jews in the first year after the Lords
death, because Tiberius was then living, who would not have permitted that
persecution. For Tertullian in the first chapter of the Apologetick, and
Eusebius in his Chronicle, testify that Tiberius favored the Christians, and
prohibited upon heavy penalties that they should be accused. It is more
credible that this persecution happened in the beginning of the Empire of
Caligula, which meets with the seventh year after the Lords death.

Moreover, if St. Paul was converted the first year after the Lords death, it
will follow that the eight first chapters of the book of the Acts of the
Apostles, and half the ninth, contain no more but the history of one year, and
that the two following chapters contain the history of ten or eleven years. For
that which is related in the eleventh and twelf chapters happened twelve years
after Christ's death.

Such are our reasons, not those which M. du Perron frames for us, to the
number of twelve: Which having set forth such as he would, he takes after a
great deal of pains to confute them.

As for reasons and proofs out of the word of God, to show that Peter was
Bishop of Rome, he brings none, but the last verse but one of the first Epistle
of Peter, where he says, The Church that is at Babylon, salutes you, and
Marcus my son. For (says he) Babylon is Rome, and the word Marcus is a Roman
name. And Papias by the relation of Clemens Alexandrinus, says, that Marcus
being desired at Rome by the brethren, writ a short Gospel, which Peter having
read, approved of it.

For answer, I say that it is doubtful whether by Babylon Peter understands
the Babylon of Chaldea, or the City of Rome, or the whole body of the Paganism,
under which the Christian Church suffered persecution. As Rev. 18. by these
words, Come out of Babylon my people, God commands not his people to come out
of the City of Rome, but out of Popery, and out of the subjection under the
Roman Hierarchy. Yet let us suppose that by Babylon Peter understands Rome;
what can be inferred thence, but that Peter was at Rome? But that proves not
that he was Bishop of Rome, or that he has set there the seat of the primacy
over the Church, or that he has continued there long.

In one thing the Cardinals judgment was short, Page 189.
when he reproved Erasmus for saying that the Babylon which St. Peter speaks
of, is the Babylon of The Cardinal should have said Chaldea.
Assyria, admiring the ignorance of Erasmus, for not knowing that when St.
Peter writ this Epistle, there was no more Jews in Babylon, as Josephus
testifies. To what purpose that? and what does it against Erasmus? Is it not
enough that Babylon had some Christians, though they were no Jews? for those
Christians were the Church of Babylon.

And how absurd is his argument! Marcus my son salutes you; Now Marcus is a
Roman name; Ergo Peter was at Rome, when he writ this Epistle. This is want of
natural Logic. Thus Paul is a Roman name; may one thence infer that St. Paul
was at Rome when he writ his Epistles? A man that never was at Rome, may have a
Roman name. And suppose that Mark writ his Gospel at Rome, does it follow that
St. Peter approved it being at Rome? For his credit he should have abstained
from alleging Papias, who is a teller of fables. It is the testimony that
Eusebius gives of him, in the third book of his history, in the last Chaper.

Another ignorance of the Cardinal must not be forgiven him, Page 180, and 181.
when he admires the ignorance of Calvin for saying that the journey to
Jerusalem (which St. Paul speaks of Gal. 2.1. when he says, Then fourteen
years after I went up again to Jerusalem) was not the journey for the Council,
but the journey for the Alms.

For although Paul's journey mentioned Gal. 2.1. was another then that for the
Alms, Acts 11.29, 30. yet the Cardinal is out, thinking that the journey that
St. Paul speaks of, Gal. 2.1. Then fourteen years after I went up again to
Jerusalem, is the same journey as that for the Council. For it is said Acts
15.2. that Paul was sent by deputation from the Church of Antioch when he went
to that Council. But the voyage for the Alms, Gal. 2.1, 2. was undertaken by
(...).
revelation. I went up, says he, by revelation. The first journey was to get
the advice of the Apostles about a controversy moved at Antioch. But the
journey mentioned, Gal. 2.1, 2. was undertaken to commune with the Apostles
about the preaching of the Gospel, lest by any means (says he) I should run or
had run in vain.

To shut up this discourse, although in the word of God no trace is extant of
the voyage of St. Peter to Rome, and of his suffering there, but rather many
things that give suspicion of the contrary; yet I am prone to believe that he
was at Rome, and there suffered Martyrdom, seeing the consent of the Fathers
upon that matter, although they writ long after St. Peter's death. As for the
time that he was there, it seems that the fore-alledged Pontificale Damasi in
Lino.
Pontifical of Damasus makes it plain, and discovers the truth, so that he
points to us the spring and the origin of the error, and of the
contradictions upon that subject. He says that Linus was Bishop of Rome under
the Emperor Nero, from the Consulate of Saturninus and Scipio, which was on
the second year of Nero, unto the Consulate of Capito and Rufus, in the
thirteenth year of the same Emperor. I think then that Peter being come to
Rome in the second year of Nero, placed Linus there to conduct that Church, and
after a short stay at Rome he returned into Judea. And that eleven or twelve
years after his departing from Rome, being apprehended by the Jews, and
delivered up to the Romans, he was carried up to Rome, 36 or 37. years after
the death of Christ; where after some months of imprisonment he was put to
death, the last year of the Empire of Nero. But Eusebius has mistaken one
Emperor for another, putting the date of Peter's comeing to Rome on the second
year of Claudius, instead of the second year of Nero. An easy mistake, since
those two Emperors had the same name, the one being called Claudius Nero, the
other Nero Claudius. He has then taken one Claudius for another, and one Nero
for another, and the second year of the one for the second year of the other.
Making Peter to come to Rome the twelfth or thirteenth year after Christ's
death, instead of the twenty fourth or twenty fifth, which is the same time
that Paul also was carried up to Rome; where Paul continued longer, as having
guards, though he had leave to walk in the City. But Peter returned into Judea,
leaving Linus Pastor of the Church of Rome.

As for the form of his execution, I think not that Athanasius spoke lightly
and without good information, that he was sought by the Jews to be apprehended.
That he went up to Rome, there to suffer death, and that he performed that
journey cheerfully. That he (...).
had his throat cut, or was strangled. His burial was no doubt, as of other
executed persons, not in an honorable place. But long after his death, the
Christians might have transported his bones, and buried them with honor.

In our days, an imaginary sepulcher, and supposititious relics serve for the
traffic. For the Archiepscopal cloaks or palls which the Pope sells very dear,
are laid upon St. Peter's tomb, and sent to the new Archbishops that pay for
them. Every year, one with another, the Pope gets by those palls above an
hundred thousand Ducats.

CHAP. 9. Falsifications of the Cardinal about this matter in his fifty sixth
Chapter.
I Owe some notes to the falsifications, wherewith the fifty sixth chapter of
the Cardinals first book is stuffed, to prove the Primacy deferred by Christ
unto Peter.

In page 527. he alleges the words of Cyrillus of Jerusalem in the eleventh
Catechesis; All the other Apostles holding their peace (for that doctrine was
above their strength) Peter the Prince of the Apostles, etc. told him, Thou art
the Christ, the son of the living God. These words, above their strength, are
not in the Greek, but are added by the Cardinal to depress the other Apostles
in comparison of Peter, as wanting that strength and virtue which Peter had to
make that answer. There is in the Creek of Cyrillus (...), etc.
All being silent (for that doctrine was above man) Peter, etc.

With the like licentiousness he corrupts a place of Athanasius in the fourth
Oration against the Arrians. He makes Athanasius say, There is no doubt but
that the same who inquired, as having first revealed unto Peter the things
which he had known, now asks the same things of him in an humane manner. He
alleges that text, to persuade that Christ had revealed unto Peter, that he
is the Christ the son of God, before he had revealed it to the other Apostles.
But Athanasius says no such thing, but only that Christ had revealed that unto
Peter, before he questioned him about it. His words are (...).
There is no doubt but that the same Lord who did inquire after that he had
revealed unto Peter that which he had from his Father, did afterward put a
question to him about it in an humane manner.

These two falsifications were added to fill up the measure; for in the page
before, there are two notorious ones, which I already touched before. The one
whereby he makes Paul to say, Gal. 2.7. that (...).
they that seemed to be somewhat, had taught him nothing, whereas there is in
the text, that they had added nothing to him. Lest that it should be known that
Paul in that text does equal the dignity of his Apostleship, with that of the
most excellent Apostles, the Cardinal has put, they have taught me nothing,
instead of they have added to me nothing, to make the world believe that Paul
compares himself in learning unto the other Apostles, not in the authority and
dignity of the Apostleship. And yet the same Apostle saying in the same place,
that James, Cephas and John had given him the right hand of fellowship, speaks
manifestly of the society in the Apostleship, not of the equality in science.

The other falsification is an allegation of Ambrose in the fourth chapter of
the book of the incarnation. Petrus statim loci non immemor sui, primatum egit;
primatum confessionis utique, non honoris; primatum fidei, non ordinis.
Peter not forgetful of his place, made the primacy; clipping the following
words, the primacy indeed in the confession, not in honor; the primacy in the
faith, not in order.

In page 531. and 532. he turns the words of Chrysostom upside down with a
notorious depravation. We object to our Adversaries these words of Gal. 2.9.
James, Cephas and John, who seemed to be the pillars, gave unto me, and to
Barnabas the right hand of fellowship. So all the copies have, saving only that
of Cardinal Ximenes the Edition of Compluto. And the vulgar version, the only
approved by the Council of Trent, renders it thus, Jacobus, and Cephas, and
Johannes qui videbantur columnae esse. Whence we infer, that if Paul had
believed Peter to be the only Head of the Universal Church above all the other
Apostles, he would not have set James before Peter. To weaken that Text and
make it suspected, the Cardinal says that Chrysostom in his Comment upon the
Epistle to the Galatians, reads Cephas, James and John. Who so will take the
pains to look to the place of Chrysostom, shall find the contrary, and shall
see that Chrysostom both alleges and expounds the text thus, (...). James,
Cephas and John. In the very same manner the Cardinal falsifieth Hierom in the
following lines.

This is no better. In the same fifty sixth chapter in page 533. he brings
Austin alleging a text of Cyprian in the second book of Baptism, chap. 1. For
Austin alleges thus Cyprian, with whose authority the Donatists fenced
themselves against the Orthodox. Cyprians authority does not fright me, because
his humility does recreate me. We know that the merit of Cyprian, a Bishop and
a Martyr was great; but is it greater then that of Peter an Apostle and a
Martyr? Of whom the same Cyprian in his Epistle to Quintus speaks thus, Nam nec
Petrus inquit, quem primum Dominus elegit, and super quem aedificavit Ecclesiam
suam, cum secum Paulus de circumcisione disceptaret, postmodum vendicavit sibi
aliquid insolenter, aut arroganter assumpsit, ut diceret se primatum tenere,
and obtemperari a novellis, and posteris sibi potius diberi.
For (says he) neither Peter whom the Lord has first elected, and upon whom
he has founded his Church, when Paul disputed with him of the circumcision,
attributed any thing to himself insolently, nor assumed any thing with
arrogance, to say that he had the primacy, and that the new [Apostles] and late
comers ought rather to obey him. By these words, Cyprian says plainly, that if
Peter had assumed the primacy, or pretended that Paul was to obey him, he had
spoken arrogantly and insolently. For we have seen that Cyprian believed that
Peter had the primacy over the Apostles, before the resurrection of the Lord,
but that the Lord made them all equal after his resurrection. And that he made
Peter the first among the Apostles, only for the priority of time, not for the
Apostolical dignity. Whence it appears also that Cyprian believed that the
Church was founded upon Peter, yet not upon the person of Peter, but upon his
doctrine. Then to cast dust into the Readers eyes, the Cardinal corrupts the
whole place with a most shameful falsification; thus alleging Cyprians words;
You see what Cyprian says, that the holy Apostle Peter in whom such a great
grace of the primacy was shining, being reproved by Paul, answered not that he
had the primacy, and ought not to be reproved by new men and posteriour unto
him. He cuts off Cyprians words, that it would have been arrogance and
insolence in St. Peter, if he had attributed the primacy to himself, or if he
had thought that St. Paul did owe him some obedience. Also he interprets the
word posteris, posteriours, whereas he signifies those that are come since.
And whosoever has any relish of the Latin tongue, knows that posteri
signifies not men posteriour in order or dignity, but the posterity, and such
as are posteriour in time.

The following is one of the least, and yet must not be omitted. In page 534.
he alleges Cyprian in the book of the unity of the Church, saying that the
other Apostles were that which St. Peter was, Pari consortio praediti and
honoris and potestatis.
endowed with an equal part of authority and power. Cyprian does not speak so,
but says, The other Apostles were that which St. Peter was, endowed with the
like society of honor and power. That word part weakeneth this place of
Cyprian, as if every Apostle had not the entire power. Then the Cardinal has
put the word authority instead of honor, that the Reader may think that
Cyprian speaks of the inward authority of the Apostleship (as the Cardinal
speaks) not of the honor due to the primacy.

A few lines before he does fraudulently allege Chrysostom upon the Epistle
to the Galatians, where that Father speaks thus: Hence comes that Paul
reproves, and Peter bears it; to the end that while the Master holds his
peace, the Disciples may change their opinion. The end of the Cardinal is to
persuade that Chrysostom calls Peter Master in respect of Paul. But the truth
is, that in that place he is called Master with a relation to his Disciples,
who are mentioned in the same line, in whose presence Paul made that
reprehension to Peter.

In the following page, which is the five hundred thirty fifth, he alledgdeth a
place out of Cyprians book of the unity of the Church, which is not found in
any Copy of Cyprian; but he says that Ivo and Gratian allege it so; making
Cyprian to say, He that forsakes Peter's chair upon which the Church is
founded, does he trust that he is in the Church? If the works of Cyprian were
lost, it were excusable to allege fragments related by other Authors; But
since we have Cyprians works in their integrity, is it not an abuse and a kind
of falsification to stand upon allegations made by new Authors, who are justly
suspected, rather then upon the works extant of Cyprian? Besides, that one may
not see whether he has faithfully alleged Ivo or Gratian, he abstaineth from
quoting the Canon, and the Distinction where they speak so.

I cannot call it a falsification, but a flight mingled with contempt of Gods
word, that in the same chapter, page 540. after he has proved St. Peter's
primacy, because Christ commanded Peter to pay the tribute for him and for
himself, and because sick men were carried into the way where Peter passed,
that at least his shadow might pass over them, and because he punished Ananias
and Sapphira with death (which are ingenuous and recreative proofs) he
declares that he will examine a text of Scripture alleged by his Majesty of
Great Britain, not by the Scripture, but by the Fathers. As if there were any
better interpreter of Scripture then Scripture it self. Or as if the Exposition
made by men ought to be preferred before God himself speaking in his word.
Devils do not fly so fast from holy water, as this Prelat from the word of God;
or if sometimes he makes use of it, it is to wrest it and falsify it.

I will bring one more of his falsifications, which is in the last line of his
fifty fifth chapter, where he alleges Leo speaking thus in the Epistle to
Martianus, which is the fifty second. None of the Patriarchal Sees but that of
Rome shall remain stable and unmoved. This place is altogether false. Here it
is truly, Nec praeter illam Petram quam Dominus in fundamentum posuit, stabilis
erit ulla constructio. That is, No building shall stand firm besides that stone
which the Lord has laid for a foundation. Of Rome or the Patriarchat of the
same he makes no mention. And though he did, are Popes receivable witnesses
when the dispute is of their authority? Must we receive Popes for Judges in
their own cause?

These are some of his many falsifications, that by this pattern the reader may
judge of the whole piece. For if one would examine all the authorities brought
by this Prelat, he should weary the Reader with a long list of falsifications;
the reading whereof would be odious to our Adversaries, and of small
edification to them that fear God. Yet hereafter according to occasions we will
show more of that kind, in the Cardinals work.

Advertisement to the Reader.
THE four following books contain the history of the Roman Bishops from the
Apostles to the fourth Universal Council in the year 451. which is the term
that Cardinal du Perron has set to himself in his dispute against his Majesty
of Great Britain. I show that in all that time, and lower, the Bishop of Rome
was not acknowledged Head of the Universal Church; and I discover the untruth
and inutility of the proofs brought by the Cardinal. In which deduction I have
followed, not the order of the Chapters of the Cardinal, but the order of the
times, to give more light to the Reader, and to unravell the thread of the
history which the Cardinal has ravelled purposely to decieve with more
facility: Also that I may not be constrained, by following all his steps, to go
fifty times over the same things as he does. I did not meddle with such things
as are nothing to our controversies. For Cardinal du Perron to make a show of
his learning, has inserted in his book long disputes against Cardinal
Baronius, which concern us not at all. But as for the things that belong to our
Controversies, I hope I have given such satisfaction upon all that the Cardinal
brings forth, that the Reader who is not prepossest with hatred, and has
reserved to himself some liberty of judgment, will acknowledge that this
Prelates book is a heap of impostures and useless proofs: And that going about
to cover himself with the authority of Fathers against the word of God, he is
cast by those very Judges whom he has chosen.

BOOK III. Which is the FIRST PART OF THE HISTORY of PAPACY: WHEREIN So much of
the History of the Ancient Christian Church is deduced from the beginning, unto
the year 300. of Christ, as will prove that then the Bishop of Rome was not
acknowledged Head of the Universal Church.
CHAP. I. That in the first Age the Bishop of Rome was not acknowledged Head of
the Universal Church.
ALthough the Word of God decide this question sufficiently by not assigning
unto St. Peter any successor in the Apostleship, or in the primacy over the
Universal Church, and speak neither far nor near of a Hierarchical Sovereign,
or of the Bishop of Rome: Yet because Cardinal du Perron being destitute of the
word of God, casts himself altogether upon the Fathers, and grounds himself
upon humane testimonies; it will be expedient to search the first and the
purest antiquity of the Church, and to show how much he is mistaken, and that
in vain he heaps up testimonies to no purpose; taking the pre-eminence which
the Bishop of Rome pretended in the time of the first four Councils, over the
Bishops of the Roman Empire, for a primacy and sovereign power over the Church
of all the world, the precedence for a power of jurisdiction, and the
prerogatives founded upon the dignity of the City, or upon the Ecclesiastical
Canons, for divine rules: Limiting himself purposely to the time of the first
four Councils, the first whereof was held in the year of Christ three hundred
twenty five, because the three precedent ages are contrary to him. Wherefore
the three parts of four of the testimonies which he alleges, are from the
history of about fourscore, or a hundred years.

Because in points of history and antiquity it is necessary to begin by the
things that are most ancient, I am forced rather to follow the order of the
times then that of the Cardinals Chapters, which overthrow the order of times,
and have neither order nor coherence, and the most part whereof dispute about
things of no use.

To begin then at the first Age: Among the Fathers of the first Age, I put in
the first rank the Apostles and the Evangelists. In whose writings there is no
trace of that imaginary Monarchy, and not one action of Peter that has any
relish of primacy or Sovereign power in the Church; Not one word of that holy
Apostle, where he speaks like a Monarch, although we have the history of his
life, and two long Epistles which he has written to the Christian Church.

To that Apostle, Vide Pontificale Damasi.
Linus a disciple of St. Paul has succeeded, according to the relation of many
Ancients; And he succeeded him, not in the Apostleship, but in the conduct of
the Church of the City of Rome: For of him we have no action recorded that
extends beyond the limits of his particular Church. Had Peter needed a
successor in the primacy over the Universal Church, there were some Apostles
that outlived Peter; among others that excellent Apostle St. John, to whom
that dignity rather belonged then to a Disciple of Paul. At least the Apostles
that outlived Peter should have been called and asked their advice. A Head
could not be given to the Universal Church without their consent.

After Linus, they put Clement, of whom diverse Epistles are extant in the Tomes
of the Councils. Whether they be true or false, it matters not for our present
purpose, since our Adversaries give them to us as true. Among them there are
two written to S. James Bishop of Jerusalem, to whom he gives these qualities;
Clemens Jacobo fratri Domini, Episcopo Episcoporum, regenti sanctam Hebraeorum
Ecclesiam Jerosolymis, sed and omnes Ecclesias quae ubique Dei providentiae
fundatae sunt.
Clement to James brother of the Lord, Bishop of Bishops, governing the holy
Church of the Hebrews which is at Jerusalem, as also all the Churches that are
founded every where by the providence of God. Thereby he acknoledgeth St. James
his superior, governing the Roman Church as well as the other Churches.

In the same Age lived Dionysius, the Areopagite converted by St. Paul. Which
Dionysius, our Adversaries make the Author of the books of celestial Hierarchy,
and of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. In that book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
which he frames at the imitation of the celestial (where one sovereign Monarch,
which is God, has under him diverse Angelical orders) this Author describes the
Ecclesiastical charges and degrees: And from the least mounting to the
greatest, he rises no higher then to the charge of Bishop of each particular
Church, and makes Episcopacy the highest degree. It would have been very
convenient to his end, to have spoken of the charge of Sovereign Pastor, head
of the universal Church, so to make the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy conformable
unto the celestial. But of such a Head he speaks not, because he knew none such.

In the same Age the custom began to create the Bishop of Rome by the suffrages
of the people and the Clergy: Which was also the custom of other Churches. A
certain proof that the Bishop of Rome was not the Head of the Universal Church.
For was it reasonable or likely that the people of the City of Rome should have
the power to give a Head to the Churches of Bersia or East Indies? Who knows
not that in elective Kingdoms, the King is elected by the States, and general
Assemblies, to which Deputies are sent from all parts of the Kingdom, because
all parts are alike interessed in that election.

In all that Age no trace is to be seen of the power of the Bishop of Rome
without the limits of his particular Church. No Law given by him to the
Universal Church. No appeal from any Church, not so much as from the next
Churches, much less from the remote. All the Churches that were founded
immediately from the Apostles, as that of Jerusalem, of Rome, of Thessalonica,
of Antioch, were honored above all others, and were called the first and
Apostolical. And those that were propagated and planted by those, first took
the same title, and were likewise much honored. Of them Tertullian speaks
thus; Sic omnes primae and omnes Apostolicae, dum unam omnium probant unitatem;
communicatio pacis, and appellatio fraternitatis, and contesseratio
hospitalitatis.
They are all first and Apostolical, while the communion of peace, and the name
of brethen, and the common earnests of hospitality show the union that is among
them all.

This Age brought forth many heresies, the Simonians, the Cerinthians, the
Ebionites, the Nicolaites, etc. If the Bishop of Rome had been Head of the
Universal Church, it was his part to cite those heretics, and make them appear
before him, and to take cognizance of their crimes and errors. But of that no
trace is found. Neither do we see in Irenaeus, or Epiphanius, or Austin, or
Theodoret, or Philastrius who have by express Treatises described and
represented the heresies of the Ancient, that any of those Heretics be
condemned for disobeying the Pope, and not yielding to his Judgment.

There is a book of the same age called the Canons of the Apostles, which
doubtless are very ancient, although there be but small likelihood that they
were made by the Apostles. There some Canons are found much contrary to that
which is practiced in our days by the Popes, and by the Roman Church.

The eighty fourth Canon is such, (...).
Let the Bishop, the Priest, or the Deacon that will meddle with war, or will
have these two things, the Roman Empire, and the Sacerdotal government, be
deposed. For the things of Caesar must be given unto Caesar, and the things of
God unto God. And in the sixth Canon the Bishop is forbidden to meddle with
civil affairs.

The fifth Canon is this, (...)
Let not the Bishop, or the Priest, or the Deacon reject his own wife upon
pretense of piety. If he put her away, let him be deprived from the Communion.
If he continue, let him be deposed.

The sixty fourth Canon is this, (...).
If any Clark be found fasting upon the Lords day, or on the Sabbath day,
excepting one only, let him be deposed; if he be a Layman, let him be
excommunicated.

Toward the end of this Age lived Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, who in the
Epistle to the Philippians says, that whosoever fasteth upon the Lords day or
Saturday, is a murderer of Christ.

From those rules the Roman Church has dispensed her self; Especially from the
eighty fourth Canon. For many Popes have led Armies, and given battles. And the
Pope has drawn to himself the rights and the power of the Roman Emperor.

CHAP. II. That the Bishop of Rome in the second Age was not acknowledged Head
of the Universal Church. Vindication of Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea against the
false accusations of Cardinal du Perron.
IN the year of the Lord 103. according to the computation of Baronius,
Anacletus was made Bishop of Rome, and held the Bishopric nine years and three
months. That his charge was small, and the limits of his Bishopric but short,
it appears by that the Pontifical of Damasus says of him, that in those nine
years he created five Priests, three Deacons, and six Bishops. If he had
governed, I say not the Universal Church, but only a Diocese of ten leagues
about Rome, he had created many more.

In the beginning of the same age Ignatius was Bishhp of Antioch, who passing
through Smyrna writ a letter to the Romans, where he makes no mention of the
Bishop of Rome, nor of the primacy of the Roman Church.

In the year of Christ 142. Telesphorus was made Bishop of Rome, who, as
Damasus relates, made an order that there should be a fast of seven weeks
before Easter. But he says that this order was only for the Roman Church; and
that the other Churches held not themselves subject unto it, it appears in
that many other Churches followed another order. Irenaeus shows it in the
Epistle which he writ to Victor Bishop of Rome, which Epistle is related by
Eusebius in the fifth book of his history, chap. 23. Eusebius. in Graeco codice,
ib. 5. c. 22. (...), etc.
Some (says he) think that they must fast but one day, some two, some more.
Some limit their day [of fast] to forty hours both of day and night. And that
diversity of observations has not begun in our age, but has been long before
our Ancestors. And yet they have kept peace among themselves. He speaks of the
Fasts before Easter.

In the year of the Lord 159. according to the relation of ^aron. an. 159. S. 1.
Baronius, Pius Bishop of Rome made a Law that Easter should be celebrated upon
the Lords day; and Baronius says that this Law had been revealed unto him by
Angels. So they said to show that this Law was given by Pius as necessary and
come from God. And yet the Churches of Asia did not practice it, because they
held not themselves subject unto the Bishop of Rome, who also made that Law,
not for the Universal Church, but only for the Church of the City of Rome. This
will clearly appear out of that which happened since. For about the year 167.
Anicetus being Bishop of Rome, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna came to Rome to
confer with him: And this was their communication according to the testimony of
Irenaeus, related by Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 26. in Graeco codice.
Eusebius. Polycarpus and Anicetus having conferred a little about certain
things wherein they differed in opinion, made their peace presently; and for
the observation of that Feast, they brake not the band of charity, etc. Yet
Anicetus could not persuade Polycarpus to leave his custom. Neither could
Polycarpus persuade Anicetus that he should practice the custom of Asia. Here
two things are to be observed. 1. That Polycarpus thought not himself bound to
follow the opinion of Anicetus the Roman Bishop. 2. That notwithstanding the
diversity of opinions, they lived in peace, Anicetus being not offended that
the brethren of Asia would not hearken to him.

That controversy about Easter grew hot afterward: for the Church of the
West, and part of that of the East did celebrate the Feast of Easter upon the
Lords day. But part of the Church of the East did celebrate it upon the
fourteenth day of the Moon of March, not looking for the Lords day, grounding
themselves upon St. John's authority, and that of his Disciples, Ignatius and
Polycarpus, and of Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, then living, a person of great
authority. Toward the end of that age, Victor Bishop of Rome took that
business in hand with eagerness; and for that subject separated the Oriental
Churches from his communion. Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus resisted him,
speaking thus; Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23. Hier. Catal. in Polycrate.
I then brethren, who have lived sixty five years in the Lord, who have
conferred about the faith with many brethren scattered over all the earth, who
have perused all the holy Scriptures, am not troubled with that which is
objected unto us to fright us; for our Ancestors have said that we must rather
obey God then men. The Apostle Peter, Acts 4.19. spoke thus to the Priests and
Sadduces, who forbad the Apostles to speak any more in the name of Christ,
saying that it was just before God rather to obey God then men. Yet the
Apostles were not at all subject unto those Priests, whose Office was now void,
and expired by the death of Christ. Which I say to show that the Cardinal is
out, Page 341.
thinking that he that speaks so, acknowledges himself subject and obliged to
obey those to whom he speaks in that manner.

Victor incensed with that resistance, excommunicateth all the Eastern
Churches. An action condemned by the Roman Church, which expressly Cap. Romana
de sententia excommunicationis in 6. In universitatem vel in collegium proferri
excommunicationis sententiam prohibemus.
forbids to excommunicate an University or College. How much more to
excommunicate whole Countries and Provinces? By that excommunication Victor did
rather excommunicate himself by his separation from their communion, as
Eusebius says, Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 25. in Graeco. (...).
That did not please all the Bishops, wherefore also they made him a contrary
command that he should keep peace, union and charity with his neighbors. Among
other examples he brings forth the Epistle of Ireneus to Victor, whereby he
accuses him to have violated charity, and to have departed from the example of
his ancestors. Ruffinus relates the same. The word (...) is notable, that other
Bishops, made him a contrary command. For that word imports that those Oriental
men believed that they had as much power to command Victor as he them.

Cardinal Du Perron cap. 44. p. 330.
answers that Eusebius was an Arian, and Ruffinus an enemy of the Roman
Church. So does this Cardinal use the Fathers, when they speak things that
displease him. And indeed it is most unjustly that he accuses Eusebius of
Arianism, seeing that in so many places he speaks so excellently of the
Godhead of the son of God; especially in the fourth book of the Evangelical
demonstration, chapter 3. and in the 5. book, chapter 2. Eusebius has subscribed to
the Symbol of Nice, and to the condemnation of the Arians. And he praises and
exalts Hosius the capital enemy of the Arians. See the first book of
Theodoret, chapter 11, 12, and 13. where Eusebius is altogether purged from that
suspicion, and the word (...) consubstantial, is defended by the authority of
Eusebius of Cesarea.

Socrates in the 1 book, chapter 3. does expressly distinguish between Non
Caesariensis ille sed alter.
Eusebius of Nicomedia, a head and a favourer of the Arian party, and this
Eusebius of Cesarea whom he purges from that imputation. The same 17 chapter in
Latino, where he calls him Eusebius Pamphili, because of the great friendship
between Eusebius and Pamphilus.
Socrates in his 2 book, chapter 21. shows how vigorously this Eusebius of
Cesarea resisted the Arians, and brings many very express testimonies out of
his books wherein he condemns those that call the Son of God a Creature.

Some places indeed are found, l. 7. and 11. of his evangelical preparation,
where he calls Christ (...), and (...), a second essence, and a second God. But
these books were written by Eusebius in the time of the persecutions, long
before the Council of Nice, after which it shall not be found that ever he
spoke so.

Hierome meant this in his Apology against Ruffinus, saying that Eusebius
Arianae signifer quondam factionis.
Eusebius had been sometimes the standard bearer of the Arian faction, namely
in the time when he writ his books for the defense of Origin. But since that
time he changed language, as we have proved. And Nicephorus concurs with this
in the 21 chapter of the 8 book. Eusebius (says he) was at the first a Sectary of
the Arian heresy; but after that he had subscribed to the Council of Nice, he
writ to his friends, and proved that some ancient and excellent Bishops had
used the word (...) consubstantial, to express the Godhead of the Father, and
of the Son. Some delay that he took in the Council of Nice before he subscribed
to the Symbol made in that Council, and some emulation between Athanasius and
him, which appeared at the Council of Tyr, have increased that suspicion, (...).
of which he purges himself by an Epistle related by Theodoret.

So many ancient witnesses, and Eusebius himself, ought rather to be credited
then the second Council of Nice, held above four hundred years after; A Council
stuffed with impiety and the setter up of the adoration of images by a law.
That Council sets upon Eusebius the black mark of an Arian, to be revenged of
him for saying in the seventh book of his History, chapter 18. speaking of the
Statue of Christ at Paneas which is Cesarea Philippi, erected by the woman whom
the Lord had healed of a bloody fllx; and of the images of Paul and Peter which
he affirms to have seen, he adds, That it is no wonder if the Pagans to
whom Christ had done some good, did such a thing; and a little after he says
that Et paulo post. (...).
this was done by the Ancients by a Pagan custom to honor indifferently in
that manner all those whom they held for their Saviors.

But the true cause why the Cardinal and many of the Roman Church do so
calumniate Eusebius, is, that being the only ancient Historian who has written
the History of the three first ages until the year of Christ three hundred and
thirty eight, he speaks always of the Bishop of Rome as of another Bishop,
without giving him any superiority, and without relating any actions of his,
which reach beyond the limits of his Bishopric, excepting only the action of
Victor, which he condemns openly. Especially because in the establishment of
the Christian Religion made under Constantine, Eusebius says nothing of the
Bishop of Rome, as of a person left behind, who was not at all employed in that
great business. Yet what high esteem Hierome had of this History of Eusebius,
he showed it by taking the pains to translate it out of Greek into Latin.

As for Ruffinus, M. du Perron does injustly tax him to have been an enemy to
the Church of Rome, because he had quarrels with Hierom.

Pope Gelasius Did. 15. Can. Sancta Ruffinus vir religiosus plurimos
Ecclesiastici operis edidit libros.
speaks thus of him, Ruffinus a religious man has published many books of
Ecclesiastical work. And Gennadius a Massilian Priest puts him among the
Orthodox Authors. Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes in the book of the fifty five
Chapters, chapter 21. Decimus histori^e Ecclesiasticae liber Ruffini. qui in
Catalogo Apostolicae S^des inter recipiendos libros describitur.
The tenth book of the Ecclesiastical History of Ruffinus, who in the Catalogue
of the Apostolic See is put among the books which must be received. And though
Ruffinus had been a Pagan, yet the Histories written by Pagans are read and
believed. It is false also that Ruffinus was excommunicated by Pope Anastasius,
as the Cardinal says. Anastasius indeed says in an Epistle of his, Ruffinus a
nostris partibus est alienus, Ruffinus is averse from our party; but he says
not that he has excommunicated him.

But there is no need to quarrel about Eusebius or Ruffinus, since we have the
Epistle of Irenaeus condemning the rashness of Victor, as a thing without
example, never heard of before. Indeed the Cardinal alleges a place of
Irenaeus, twice in the forty fourth Chapter, and twenty times in other places;
but he falsifies it. The words of Irenaeus are Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter
potentiorem principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam.
. To that Church of Rome because of the more powerful principality every Church
must resort. For convenire ad Ecclesiam Romae is not to consent with the Church
of Rome, as the Cardinal interprets it. Irenaeus says that because of the
Sovereign power (namely the power of the Roman Empire) which had its seat at
Rome, all the Churches resorted thither and had communication with the Church
of Rome. For all the Subjects of the Empire had businesses in the capital City,
as it is said in the (...).
nineth Canon of the Council of Antioch.

But what? although Victor be blamed by the Fathers for this so unjust
excommunication, nevertheless M. du Perron thence infers that he had power
to do so much. For he presupposes that excommunication cannot be done but by a
Superior: Wherein he is very much mistaken; for Antiquity is full of examples
to the contrary. Cyprian in the forty one Epistle unto Cornelius says
Illicitae and contra Ecclesiam Catholicam factae o^dinationis pravitate
commoti, a communicatione eos nostra statim cohibendas esse censuimus.
that he has excommunicated Novatianus a Roman Priest, who by tampering and
factions had caused himself to be elected Bishop of Rome.

John Patriark of Antioch in the first Council of Ephesus excommunicated
Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria, who was not subject to him. Hilary Bishop of
Poitiers pronounced anathema against Liberius Bishop of Rome, as it is to be
seen in his fragments. Menas Patriarch of Constantinople excommunicated
Vigilius Bishop of Rome, as Nicepherus reports it in his seventeenth Book; chapter
26. Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople blotted out of the Diptycha or
Ecclesiastical tables, the name of Felix Bishop of Rome, commanding that his
memory should be execrable. Baron. an. 484. sect. 34.
In the year of Christ five hundred and thirteen, Severus Bishop of Antioch, an
Eutychian, was excommunicated, and sentence of deposition was pronounced
against him by Cosmas Bishop of Epiphania, and by Severianus Bishop of
Arethusa, although they were his inferiors, as Evagrius l. 3. c. 34.
Evagrius relates it. And Victor of Tunis in his Chronicle Anno 549. relates
that the Bishops of Africa excommunicated Vigilius Bishop of Rome. Such
excommunications were but simple declarations that they would have no communion
with such a one, and that they would separate themselves from the communion of
such a man and such a Church. Which was well apprehended by Sigebert who says
in his Chronicle an. 409 Innocentius Papa and Orientales Episcopi pro Johannis
praejudicio ab Orientalium se communione suspendunt.
Innocent Pope, and the Bishops of the West suspend themselves from the
communion with those of the East because of John Chrysostom. They suspended
and separated themselves from the communion with the Eastern men, but did not
cut them off from the Communion of the Universal Church. The Nomocanon of the
African Church has many Canons which show that evidently. Especially the Can
77. (...).
seventy seventh, and eighty one Canons, which speak of persons which being
excommunicated in the Church of another, ought to content themselves with the
communion of their own Church. I cannot make such a sinister judgment of
Victor, as to believe that he intended to cast away into damnation, and to
exclude from the Universal Church all the Churches of Asia, for a dispute about
the observation of a day.

I pass by the long discourse of the Cardinal whereby he goes about to show
that the relation of Nicephorus and Anastasius concerning the indignities
offered to Vigilius Bishop of Rome, at Constantinople, is not true; Page 343.
and seq.
for that is nothing to the purpose of the present question. It is enough that
Nicephorus believes that an equal can be excommunicated by an equal. Likewise
I pass by his long discourse in the same chapter, to show that Victors meaning
was to excommunicate the Churches of Asia, and to deprive them from the
communion of the Church: for it is sufficient that this excommunication
pronounced by Victor, found no place, and took no effect. Whence it appears
that he was not acknowledged Head of the Universal Church. Wherefore Eusebius
in the forealledged place, says not that Victor cut off, but that (...).
he endeavored to cut off the Churches that dissented from him from the common
union, for he could not bring it to effect. In our days if the Pope
pronounces an excommunication, it is published with bells ringing, candles
burning, and then put out. But at that time the Pope had no executors of his
Decrees in the East. He spoke, but no body stirred for his speaking. And
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus who was involved in that excommunication, did
notwithstanding his resistance to the Bishop of Rome, end his days in the
communion of the Church, and was very much respected. His words full of liberty
against the condemnation pronounced by Victor, are related out of Eusebius by
Hierome in the Catalogue of Writers.

Yea in the West the Christians of the Beda in historia Anglosaxonum. Galfridus
Monumetensis l. 8. de gestis Regum Brita^norum. Polydorus Virgilius. Baronius
an. 298. sect. 6.
I Will of Britain did not care for the judgments given by Victor: for they
celebrated the feast of Easter on the fourteenth day of the Moon of March.

That diversity of customs lasted till the first Council of Nice, in which the
Quartodecimani were condemned, and the Churches were reduced to one general
observation. Which was done without speaking of Victor, and without any regard
to his authority.

So much of the second age: In which no trace appears of the primacy of the
Bishop of Rome. No appeal to Rome from other Churches. No Laws from Rome given
to the Universal Church. No communication of the Bishop of Rome with the
Churches without the Roman Empire. No heretics condemned for dissenting from
the Bishop of Rome. In those days the Bishops of Rome were eminent only in
sufferings, full of zeal, in a deep poverty, affecting no pre-eminence, and
having no other dignity, but that which their good life, and the greatness and
dignity of the City gave them. Whereupon the confession of Pope Pius the second
is notable: who in the one hundred eighty eighth Epistle to Martin Mayer speaks
thus of the Churches of the first ages: Sibi quisque vivebat, and ad Ecclesiam
Romanam parvus habebatur respectus.
Every one then lived for himself, and the Church of Rome was little regarded.

CHAP. III. That in the third Age the Bishops of Rome were not acknowledged
Heads of the Universal Church.
WE have now seen two hundred years next after the coming of Christ, before
any Papal Monarchy was born. Then the Bishops of Rome governed the Church of
the City, and meddled not with the government of other Churches. They were
respected because of the greatness of Rome, and for the holiness of their
lives, and by reason of the received opinion, that St. Peter had been the
founder of the Roman Church; yet all that got them no power over the other
Bishops. For the Decretal Epistles of the Popes of the first Ages are
supposititious, forged on purpose by one Riculfus Bishop of Mentz, in the ninth
Age, to strengthen the Papal Empire, as I will show hereafter. It seems that M.
du Perron makes no great account of them; for I see not that in all his books
he makes any use of their authority.

In the year of our Lord 204. according to Baronius, Zepherinus succeeded
Victor in the Bishopric of Rome. Then lived Tertullian an African Priest, a
learned and zealous man, but choleric, and harsh alike in his manners and
style. This man was offended that Zepherinus admitted the adulterers repenting
unto the communion: And spoke thus to Zepherinus in the twenty first chapter of
the book of chastity; Si quia dixerat Petro Dominus, Super hanc petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, Tibi dedi claves regni coelestis, vel Quaecunque
alligaveris vel solveris in terra, erunt alligata vel soluta in coelis; idcirco
praesumis and ad te derivasse solvendi and ligandi potestatem, id est ad omnem
Ecclesiam Petro propinquam; qualis es, convertens atque commutans manifestam
Domini intentionem personaliter hoc Petro conferentem?
If because the Lord said unto Peter, Upon this stone I shall build my Church,
and I have given thee the keys of the heavenly Kingdom, or all that thou shall
bind or loose in earth shall be bound or loosed in heaven, thou think that
thereby the power of binding and loosing is derived unto thee, that is, unto
all the Churh allied unto Peter: who art thou that overthrowest and changest
the evident intention of the Lord, who conferreth that upon Peter personally?
This man did not believe that the Bishop of Rome was heir of the power given
unto Peter, but took those words of Christ, whereby he conferreth the keys upon
Peter, as said personally to Peter. Yet none of the Ancients reckons that
among the errors of Tertullian.

In the first chapter of the same book, he calls Zepherinus in derision Summum
Pontificem, as if he had been a successor of the Pagan Pontifices; for in that
time Christian Bishops did not assume that title. It was then proper to the
Emperors. And if any had assumed it, he had been guilty of treason. The
Emperor Gratianus who lived about 170. years after, was the first that
renounced that title, as we shall see in the proper place. He calls him also in
scorn, Bishop of Bishops, which is the title that was given to all the
Metropolitan Bishops. Thus Sidonius l. 6. Epist. 1: Tu Pater Patrum, and
Episcopus Episcoporum, and alter saeculi tui Jacobus.
Sidonius Apollinaris calls Lupus Bishop of Troyes, Father of Fathers, and
Bishop of Bishops. And we have seen in the first Age that Clement Bishop of
Rome gives that title unto James Bishop of Jerusalem. Yet Cyprian laugheth at
that title as too arrogant, saying at the opening of the Council which he
convocated against Stephen Bishop of Rome, None of us calls himself Bishop of
Bishops, or constrains his companions to obey by a tyrannical terror.

The same Tertullian in the twentieth chapter of the book of Prescriptions
rejects all primacy among the Churches, saying that they are omnes primae,
omnes Apostolicae, all first, all Apostolical.

It will not serve to answer that it is no wonder if Tertullian speaks of the
Bishop of Rome contemptuously, seeing that he was of the heresy of Montanus;
and that in the reception of the adulterers penitent, Zepherinus was in the
right. For it was ever reckoned among the errors of the Montanists, that they
would not acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for Head of the Universal Church. And
none believed then that he could not err in the faith.

In the year of our Lord 217. Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage called a Council of
the Bishops of Africa and Numidia, where it was resolved and determined that
all that had been baptized by Heretics must be rebaptized when they are
converted, and that the Baptism conferred by Heretics is null.

That doctrine was contrary to the Roman Church which received and receives
still the Baptism of Heretics. Yet Zepherinus who then was Bishop of Rome,
knowing that the Bishops of Africa were not subject to him, did not oppose
himself to it, and took no knowledge of that cause.

St. Cyprian who after Agrippin was Bishop of Carthage, approved Agrippins
proceeding, and defended him against the Roman Church, by the example of his
predecessor, speaking thus in the seventy first Epistle; Quod and Agrippinus
bonae in moriae vir cum caeteris coepiscopis suis statuit, and librato consilii
communis examine firmavit, quorum s^ntentiam and religiosam and legitimam and
salutare^ fidei, and Ecclesiae Catholicae congruentem, nos etiam secuti sumus.
That which Agrippin of blessed memory with his fellow-Bishops who then
governed the Church of God in Africa and Numidia, has ordained, and by common
sent confirmed, having well weighed and examined the matter, whose judgment we
have followed as religious and lawful, and wholesome for the faith, and
agreeing with the Catholic faith. That Agrippin did not fear to dissent from
the Roman Church, and is praised for it by St. Cyprian, who declares by these
words that one can follow the Catholic faith, and yet dissent from the Roman
Church. It is not material who was in the right, in the question of Baptism:
For we bring this only to show that the African Bishops did not hold themselves
subject to the Bishop of Rome. We shall see hereafter that they were both in
the wrong, and fell into contrary extremes, Steven receiving indifferently the
Baptism of all Heretics, wherein the Council of Nice dissenteth from him: and
Cyprian rejecting indifferently the baptism of all heretics without any
exception.

Then to follow the thread of the history; In the year of our Lord 250. Donatus
Bishop of Carthage being dead, Cyprian was elected in his place by the
suffrages of the people and Clergy. For that, he had no need of the Popes
approbation or letters of investiture, as it is practiced in our time. To that
election a Priest called Felicissimus opposed himself, who with some seditious
persons withdrew himself into a mountain near Carthage. A little after an
African Bishop, called Novatus, came from Carthage to Rome, when the Sea of
Rome was vacant. This Novatus joining himself with Novatian a Roman Bishop, did
strive by faction, to get Novatianus created Bishop of Rome. Being come short
of his ends, and Cornelius being elected by the people, Novatianus caused
himself to be created Bishop by a clandestine election by some Bishops of his
faction, Baron. an. 2 4.. 64.
and made a schim at Rome against Cornelius, because Cornelius received those
that were fallen, unto repentance and to the Communion.

Cyprian hearing these news, sent two Legates from Carthage to Rome, to
endeavor to appease that tumult by their intervention, as Cyprian says in the
forty second Epistle, which is very notable. For if some trouble happened now
in the Church of the City of Rome, it would be thought a rash and presumptuous
part, or rather a mad man's deed, if the Bishop of Roven or Lions sent Legates
to Rome to make himself arbitrator of the difference, and to make a peace
between the Bishop of Rome and his Clergy or people.

Upon that Novatianus sent Deputies from Rome to Carthage, whereby he desired
Cyprian. Epist. 42. ad Cornelium. Cum flagitarent ut crimina quae se afferre ac
probare dicebant, public a nobis and a plebe cognoscerentur, gravitati nostrae
negavimus convenire ut collegae nostri jam delecti and ordinati, and laudabili
multorum sententia comprobati, ventilari ultra famam ore maledico and
aemulantium voce pateremur.
Cyprian to be judge of the difference between him and Cornelius, and to take
knowledge of the crimes which he objected to Cornelius. Which shows evidently
that the Bishop of Rome was not held in those days the Head of the Universal
Church, since another Bishop might be called to judge of the cause of the
Bishop of Rome.

To that motion what does Cyprian answer? He says not, Far be it from me to
make my self his Judge, whom I acknowledge to be my superior, or to be so rash
as to judge him, by whom I must be judged. No such thing. But knowing that
Cornelius had been lawfully elected, and that Novatianus was a factious man, He
answers, that it was not convenient to his gravity to suffer the fame of his
colleague lawfully elected and created, to be longer torn by reviling tongues.
And upon that he excommunicateth Novatianus and all the men of his faction, not
expecting the will of Cornelius.

In Cyprians Epistles, whenever he speaks to Cornelius, or Lucius, or Steven,
Bishops of Rome, he never calls them but brethren and colleagues, and gives
them no higher title. How would that familiarity be taken in our days by the
Bishop of Rome, if a Bishop of France or Spain writing to him, gave him no
title of honor or pre-eminence, but called him only brother and colleague? Mr.
Du. Perron in the 45 chapter of his first book, Page 256.
says, that Cyprian spoke so to show that the Popes Monarchy, is gentle and
brotherly, and to represent the unnity of communion; and upon that, brings
examples to no purpose. For either they are not examples of inferiors speaking
to their superior, but examples of superiors, who out of humility call their
inferiors brethren, which is seemly; or of inferiors speaking to their
superiors of a third person: Or if any inferior calls his superior brother,
other passages will be found where he gives him other and honorable titles;
which Cyprian never does. After M. Du. Perron has excused that style, he
cannot but acknowledge that it would not be suffered in these days. And the
more examples he brings to that purpose, the more he condemns the pride of
the Popes of the last ages, which suffer that style no more.

In the year of our Lord, 258 two Bishops of Spain, Basilides Bishop of Leon,
and Martial Bishop of Astur or Asturga, for diverse crimes were deposed from
their charges by the Bishops of Spain. Basilides made great means to be
restored; and seeing he could obtain nothing of the Bishops of Spain, he went
up to Rome, Page 356.
where having possessed Steven Bishop of Rome with many untrue suggestions, he
desired him to employ his credit for his restitution: Which Steven labored to
do, but could not effect it. For that which the Cardinal says that Steven
restored him, is false; for he was never restored. Steven writ to the Bishops
of Spain in the behalf of Basilides and Martial, advising and exhorting them to
restore them to their charges. Upon that the Bishops of Spain write to Epist.
68.
Cyprian, asking him counsel whether they should restore them accordding to the
counsel of the Bishop of Rome. Cyprian answers that they should not hearken
to Stevens advice; and that Basilides having given a false information to
Steven, had rather increased then diminished his fault. They followed his
counsel, and rejected that of Steven; for they held not themselves subject to
the Bishop of Rome; who also did not complain that the Spaniards had rejected
his counsel, and would not condescend to his will. One would think that the
Spaniards could do no less then to send deputies to Rome to make remonstrances
to Steven, and represent their excuses and the reasons of their disobedience:
But they forgot it, as not owing so much duty to the Bishop of Rome.

But here is more. For the strife grew hot between Steven Bishop of Rome, and
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage about the question of rebaptizing Heretics. Steven
Verba Stephanisunt in Epist. 74. Cypriani. Si quis ergo a quacunque haeresi
venerit ad nos, nihil innovetur nisi quod traditum est ut manus illi imponatur
ad paenitentiam.
saying that all that were converted from any heresy whatsoever, were to be
received without rebaptizing; and Cyprian saying that all heretics whatsoever
ought to be rebaptized. These two opinions have bin condemned since by the (...)
Council of Nice, Can 19. which makes a difference between heretics, giving
order that some of them be rebaptized, designing especially the Samosatenians,
or Paulianists. And the Council of Laodicea in the eighth Canon gives the same
order about the Montanists. And the first Council of Constantinople, in the
seventh Canon does the like about the Eunomians, the Montanists, and the
Sabellians. To whom Basil in the Epistle to Amphilochius, Can. 47. adds the
Eucratites, the Pepusians, the Saccophores, and the Apotacticks: An evident
proof that the Ancient Church held not her self obliged to follow the decisions
of the Bishop of Rome.

Cyprian then rebaptizing all the converted heretics, according to the custom
of his predecessors, resisted Steven vigorously, so far as to come to ill
words. In his Epistle to Pompeius which is the seventy fourth, he speaks thus
of Steven. Misi tibi rescripti ejus exemplum, quo lecto magis ac magis errorem
ejus denotabis qui haereticorum causam contra Christianos and contra Ecclesiam
Dei asserere conatur. Nam inter caetera vel superba vel ad rem non pertinentia,
quae imperite atque improvide scripsit, etc.
I have sent thee a copy of Stevens writing, which when thou have read, thou will more and more acknowledge that man's error, who endeavors to defend the
cause of the heretics against the Christians, and against the Church of God.
For among other either proud or impertinent things, and such as contradict
themselves, which he ignorantly and imprudently writes, he has added this, to
say if any person comes from any heresy whatsoever, that nothing be innovated,
but that which is given by tradition, that is, that hands be laid upon him in
sign of repentance. And a little after; What obstinacy and presumption is that,
to prefer humane tradition before divine disposition? He adds, that by
Stevens doctrine Christians do that which Antichrists do: and after many the
like discourses he adds, Dat honorem Deo qui haereticorum amicus and inimicus
Christianorii, Sacerdot^s Deo veritat^m Christi and Ecclesiae tuentes
abstinendos putat etc.
Does that man give glory to God, who being a friend to Heretics, and enemy to
Christians, thinks that Gods Priests that defend the truth of Christ, and the
unity of the Church, must be excommunicated, etc. Then speaking Ironically
Tradantur Diabolo ordinatio Evangelu, etc.
Let us give (says he) to the Devil the ordination of the Gospel, the
disposition of Christ, the Majesty of God. Let truth yield unto untruth, and
Christ to Antichrist. In my opinion this dealing is no flattery; but a very
great and plain contempt of the authority of the Bishop of Rome. Now by these
Priests which Steven judged worthy of excommunication, Cyprian means himself.
For Steven would gladly have excommunicated him, if he might, as that which
followed showed it.

Neither was Cyprian contented with that; but having convocated a Council of
eighty seven Bishops, he caused the doctrine of Steven, and of the Roman Church
to be condemned. Some person ignorant in Antiquity, may presuppose that for
such an action the Pope excommunicated Cyprian immediately, struck him down
with thundering anathema's, and degraded him of his Office. The Pope in our
days would incense the people to fall upon such a man, and would persecute him
with fire and sword. But no such thing followed, and Steven pronounced not any
condemnation against Cyprian; knowing that Cyprian would have served him in the
same kind, and that his judgments were of no account in Africa. All the
revenge he took of Cyprian, was, that he would not Epist. 75. sect. 8. ^^g^tos
nec ad sermonem saltem colloquii communis admitteret, praeciperi^ fraternitati
ne quis eos in domum suam reciperet.
speak with Cyprians Legates, and forbad the Christians of Rome to give them
lodging, calling Cyprian a Sect. 22. Non pudet Stephanum propter haereticos
asserendos fraternitatem scindere? In super Cyprianum pseudo-Christum and
pseudo-Apostolum and dolosum operarium dicere?
false Christ, and a false Apostle, and a deceitful Workman, as Firmilianus
testifies it in an Epistle of his to Cyprian, which is the seventy fifth among
Cyprians Epistles.

The same Cyprian Epist. 72. representing his doctrine to Steven about the
rebaptizing of heretics, shows a fear that Steven should think that he would
prescribe him Laws; wherefore he shuts up his Epistle in these words. Qua in re
nec nos vim cui quam facimus, aut legem damus, cum habeat in Ecclesiae
administratione voluntatis suae arbitrium unusquisque praepositus.
Wherein we constrain no man, and give no laws, seeing that every Pastor has
the freedom of his will in the Government of the Church, of which he must give
account to God. In our days that modesty would be both injurious and
ridiculous, if one said to the Pope: Sir Pope, I prescribe no laws to you, for
you are free in the Government of your own Church.

The same Cyprian in the Council which he convocated, exhorting every one to
speak his mind, taxes thus Steven obliquely, as Baronius acknowledges
Concilium convocatum An. 25^. sect. 42. Superest ut de hac ipsa re singuli quid
sentiamus proferamus. Neminem judicantes aut a jure communionis alique^ si
diversum senserit amoventes. Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcoporum se
Episcopum constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas
suos adigit.
It remains that we speak every one his opinion concerning this point; judging
no body, and cutting off no man from the communion for being of a contrary
mind. For none of us calls himself Bishop of Bishops, or constrains his
colleagues to the necessity of obedience by a tyrannical terror, seeing that
every Bishop has the liberty and disposition of his own will, and can no more
be judged by any, then himself can judge any. But we all expect the judgment
of the Lord Jesus, etc.

We have represented before what Cyprians opinion was concerning St. Peter,
namely that Jesus Christ before his resurrection established Peter the only
Head of the Universal Church, but that after his resurrection he made all his
Apostles alike in honor and power; so that he makes Peter's primacy to continue
but two years at the most. Also that Christ would that in the beginning the
conduct of the Church should belong to one only, to show the unity of the
Church: and that the office of Pastor in the Church should issue and have its
origin from the unity. Cyprian also believed that St. Peter had founded the
Roman Church, which he calls principal; because of the dignity of the City. For
Cyprians actions which I have here represented, show sufficiently, that he held
not himself subject to the Bishop of Rome.

The above named Priest Felicissimus being excommunicated by Cyprian, crossed the
seas, and came to Rome, hoping to find a support in Cornelius Bishop of Rome:
Cornelius having received Cyprians letter somewhat late, lent his ear a little
too much to the clamours of Felicissimus and his adherents against Cyprian; who
in the fifty fifth Epistle to Cornelius, complains of it, and represents to
him, that it belongs not to his care to judge of the causes already judged in
Africa, nor to admit those whom he had excommunicated. For in that age they
knew not yet the way of appealing to Rome.

But that he might gently insinuate himself into the mind of Cornelius, and
guild the pill which he would have him to swallow, he uses a Preface of
praises of the Roman Church. Post ista adhuc pseudo-Episcopo sibi ab haereticis
constituto, navigare aud^nt ad Petri cathedram atque Ecclesiam principalem,
unde unitas sacerdotalis exorta est, and a schismaticis and profanis literas
far, nec cogitare eos esse Romanos quorum fides Apostolo praedicante, laudata
est, ad quos perfidia habere non potest accessum.
After these things (says he) having set up to themselves a Bishop made by
heretics, yet they are so bold as to make voyages to St. Peter's chair, and to
the principal Church whence the sacerdotal unity is sprung, and to bring
letters from schismatics and heretics: Not considering that you are Romans,
whose faith was commended by the Apostle, and to which perfidiousness can have
no access. Meaning that traitors and perfidious men, as this Felicissimus,
could not get support from them. Which words exalt the dignity of the Church of
Rome, but ascribe no power or jurisdiction to it over other Churches. As in
effect he denies to the Roman Church in the next words the knowledge of the
causes already judged in other Churches, speaking thus. Whereas it is a general
order, which is just and equitable that the cause be heard where the crime was
committed; and that to every Pastor a portion of the flock is assigned to
conduct and govern, of the care whereof he must give an account unto the Lord;
it is not fit that those over which we preside go up and down, making Bishops
living in a well united concord to dash one against another, divided by a
fraudulent and deceitful rashness; But that they should plead Oportet illic
agere causam suam ubi and accusatores and testes habere sui criminis possunt,
nisi si paucis desperatis and perditis minor videtur esse authoritas
Episcoporum in Africa constitutoru^ qui jam de illis judicarunt.
their cause where they may have accusers and witnesses of their crimes. Unless
it seem to a few desperate and lost men, that the authority of Bishops
established in Africa is less, who have already judged of them, and by the
gravity of their judgment have condemned their own conscience, already bound
with many snares of sins; Already their cause is tried, Already their sentence
is pronounced. The effect of this discourse is, that it belongs not to
Cornelius nor to the Roman Church to take knowledge of a cause already judged
in Africa; and that the authority of the African Church is no less then that of
the Roman. For the whole drift of the discourse shows that this word less is
comparative of the African with the Roman, and that it is not a comparative put
instead of a positive, as p. 360. Falsification of Card. du Perron.
M. du Perron will persuade us: For to break the strength of that place he
clips it, and alleges but the first lines, and leaves out the last. He
acknowledges also that the least causes indeed were judged in Africa without
appeal, but he says that they appealed to Rome for the more important causes:
Which is clearly confuted by that we have seen before. For the controversy of
rebaptizing heretics, and the convocation of a Council against the doctrine
received in the Roman Church, are important points. About which nevertheless
Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage having condemned the doctrine received in the
Roman Church, none of the Africans did appeal, and the Bishops of Rome did not
stir about it. Cyprian likewise and the Bishops of Africa made no difficulty to
condemn the Bishop of Rome; so far were they from believing, that any could
appeal from them to the Roman See. The Canon of the Council of Carthage, which
the Cardinal alleges to this purpose, is not of the age of which we now
speak; being made 150. years after. We will show, God willing, in its proper
place, that the Cardinal did not understand it, or would not.

Our Adversaries abuse a testimony of Cyprian in the same Epistle. Epist 55.
sect. 6.
Heresies and Schisms come from no other cause, but that the Priest of God is
not obeyed, and that one Priest is not acknowledged in the Church to judge for
a time in Christ's stead. For Cyprian in that place speaks not of the Universal
Church, but of every particular Church; of that of Carthage especially. In
which he being Bishop, he complains of the faction that would establish another
Bishop, one Fortunatus. Thus in the 6 book of the history of Eusebius chapter 42.
there is Epistle of Cornelius Bishop of Rome, where he says, that in a
Catholic Church there must be but one Bishop. But by the Catholic Church, he
means the Orthodox Church of the City of Rome; not the Universal Church, as the
following words show it, where he says that in that Catholic Church, there
was forty six Priests, etc. for the Universal Church had a thousand times more.

In the same time lived in the East St. Firmilianus Archbishop of Cesarea in
Cappadocia, whose name is in the Menology or Calender of the Greeks, being
remembered as a holy man, and greatly honored by posterity. Of this man Theod*
de haeresibus in ^aulo Samosateno. (...).
Theoderet exalts the praises, saying that he was a famous man, learned both
in divine and humane sciences. Likewise Basil, chap. 29. in the book of the
Holy Ghost, reckons him among the defenders of the truth. This Firmilianus
was President of the Council of Antioch, in which Paulus Samosatenus was
condemned, An. 264. Baronius also on the year 258. yields him that testimony
that he was not inferior to any in holiness of life. This holy man being of
Cyprians opinion, contradicted Steven Bishop of Rome. His Epistle to Cyprian is
the seventy fifth among the Epistles of Cyprian, where he speaks thus of
Steven; Gratiam refer Stephano in isto po^^umus, quod perillius inhamanitatem
effectum est ut fidei and sapientiae vestrae fidem cape^emus.
We may thank Steven for this, that by his inhumanity it is come to pass that
we had an experience of your faith and wisdom. And a little after, comparing
Steven unto Judas, he adds, Sed haec interim quae a Stephano gesta sunt
praetereantur, ne dum audaciae and insolentiae ejus meminimus, de rebus ab eo
improbe g^stis longiorem moesti^iam nobis inferamus.
Let us pass by the things that Steven has done, least that by remembering his
audaciousness and insolence we grieve too long for the things which he has
wickedly done: Then he adds Eos qui Romae sunt no^ in omnibus observare quae
sunt ab origin tradita, and frustra Apostolorum authoritatem praetendere.
that they that are at Rome, practice not all the things that have been given
from the beginning; and in vain pretend to defend themselves with the authority
of the Apostles. And that they practice not all things that are practiced at
Jerusalem That holy man held not himself subject to the Roman Church, and wished
that the Roman Church would conform her self to that of Jerusalem. Then
condemning Steven for troubling the peace of the Church, Epist. 75.. 15. Just
indignor ad hanc tam apertam and manifestam Stephani stultitiam.
I am (says he) justly incensed against such an evident and manifest folly of
Steven. Finally he says that the reproaches which Stephen had applied unto
Cyprian, calling him false Christ and false Apostle, and deceitful workman,
did justly belong to Steven.

Another famous man for holiness and learning in those times, was Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt; who in the contention of Cyprian with Steven,
took Cyprians part, as Hierom testifies in the Catalogue of Ecclesiastical
Writers. Hic in Cypriani and Africanae Synodi dogma consentiens de
rebaptizandis haereticis, ad diversos plurimas scripsit Epistolas.
This man (says he) consenting with Cyprian, and with the Synod of Africa,
has written many Epistles to diverse persons, about the rebaptizing of
heretics. Yea he writ about it unto Eusebius also, as Eusebius Eusebius. l. 7. c.
4, and 5, Idem l. 7. c. 26.
testifies. Whence it appears that this Dionysius held not himself subject to
the Bishop of Rome.

About the year of our Lord 264. this same Dionysius being suspected to incline
to the opinion of those that denied Jesus Christ to be God, and being informed
that he had been blamed for it before Dionysius Bishop of Rome, writ an Apology
to purge himself of that imputation. That Apology had four books, and impugned
the opinion of Sabellius. The book he dedicated to Sabellius Bishop of Rome, as
to his friend, not his Judge or Superior; for he was not cited nor brought in
question about it: and Dionysius the Roman pronounced no Judgment upon that
business. The Egyptians that carried this blame to the ears of Dionysius or
Denis of Rome, against Denis of Alexandria, did it because they could not
complain to the Synod of Egypt, which could not assemble without the authority
and consent of Denis Bishop of Alexandria, who governed the Churches of Egypt.

Briefly, in all that third Age no trace appears of the Primacy or Sovereign
power of the Roman Bishop over the Universal Church: No appeal to Rome from the
remote Churches: No Law from Rome to the Universal Church: No heretic taxed
for dissenting from the Roman High Priest. For then (as we heard before Pius
II. saying Ep. 88. l. 1.) the Roman Church was little regarded. Which Doctor
Boulenger in his book against Causabon, page 21. does freely acknowledge. If
sometimes (says he) in Eusebius or some other Authors thou see that it is
not spoken of the power of the Apostolic See, but somewhat obscurely; know
that before the happy age of Constantine, the Church of Christ the Lord was
hidden in darkness, and that in the confusion of the times, and among those
perpetual combats of crosses and sufferings, the Popes were not raised to that
greatness, which afterward was deferred unto them.

That reason moved M. du Perron to confine himself to the time of the four
first Universal Councils; the first whereof begins but in the year 325. For in
all the time before, he finds nothing that with any color can be alleged for
the Popes Primacy.

CHAP. 4. That the Cardinal would not make use of the authority of the
Decretals to prove the Popes primacy in the three first Ages. And of the
authority of the said Decretals.
HEre I owe a just defense to my Lord Cardinal against some Jesuits and others
of the like disposition, who being used to produce the Decretals of the Ancient
Bishops of Rome for the Popes primacy, may find it strange that M. du Perron
makes so little account of them; having never alleged them, but in some places
As in the 31. chap. of the first book. p. 189. where he says that the first
Epistle of Clement to James is Apocrypha, and supposititious.
where he speaks of them with contempt: Whence it is that in his book the
proofs of the Popes Primacy in the three first Ages are so thin sown.

Yet those Decretal Epistles attributed to the Bishops of Rome of the first
Age, are of great authority in the Roman Church. For they are inserted in the
first Tome of the Councils; and it is above seven hundred years since they have
been received in the Roman Church as divine Oracles, so far as to be equalled
with the holy Scriptures, and to be put among the Canonical books. In the Roman
Decree the inscription of the Canon In Canonicis Did. 19. is such, Inter
Canonicas Scripturas Decretales Epistolae co^numerant^r.
The Decretal Epistles are reckoned among the Canonical Scriptures. And Pope
Nicolas the first, Canone Si Romanorum, maintains that Capitulum sancti
Innocentii Papae, cujus authoritate docetur a nobis utrumque Testamentum esse
recipiendum, quanquam in ipsis paternis Canonibus nullum eorum ex toto
contineatur insertum, etc. Sio Vetus and Novum Testamentum sunt recipienda, non
quod ex toto Canonum codici videantur annexa, sed quod de his recipiendis
sancti Papae Innocentii prolata videatur esse sententia.
these Decretals must be received, because Pope Leo did so command it, although
they be not inserted in the Code of the Canons of the Fathers, in the same
manner as the holy Scripture is received, because Pope Innocent commanded it
so, although it be not inserted in the Code of the Canons of the Fathers.
Wherefore also he added according to the constitution of Pope Leo, If any sin
against these Decretals, it shall not be forgiven him.

Wherefore they that have compiled the Canons and Decrees of the Roman Church,
namely Burchardus, Yvo Carnutensis, and Gratianus, have filled their books with
Canons excerped out of these Decretals. In the Roman Decree of Gratian there is
above four hundred Canons taken from them. L. 2. de iummo Pontifice, c. 14.
Sect. Primum.
Bellarmine makes use of them to prove the Popes Primacy. And the Jesuit
Costerus in his Enchiridion in the chapter de summo Pontifice: Sect. Constat.
Stapleton princip. doctrine. l. 6. c. 15.
Which is more, Turrianus a Jesuit writ a great book purposely to defend these
Decretals: And his work is exalted by Stapleton, Baron. Annal. an. 102. Sect.
12. Gretser. defens. Bellarmini Controv. lib. 3. cap. 5. col. 1290.
Baronius, Gretserus, and many others.

There is more yet, The Roman Decree collected by Gratian, a great part whereof
is drawn from these Decretals, is the field and the study of the Canonists. And
for the exposition of that Decree, Schools of Canon Law have been erected in
Universities. An honor which the Roman Church never did to the holy
Scriptures; for whose Exposition no Schools are erected, and no Doctorate is
instituted purposely for that Science.

These Epistles bearing the names of the Ancient Bishops of Rome, and received
with so much respect so many ages, and approved by the Popes that came since,
who have used them to ground their authoriry, could have furnished the Cardinal
with a pile of proofs for the Popes primacy. For in them the Roman High Priests
speak like Monarchs, and call themselves Heads of the Universal Church, by
virtue of Christ's words, Thou art Peter, and upon this stone, etc. give laws to
the Churches of all the world; Pretend that the judgment of all the great and
important causes must be reserved to them; Void and disannul all the judgments
of other Prelates: Say that Peter having established the seat of the primacy at
Antioch, has since transported it to Rome: Abrogate the Laws of Emperors,
though they were Pagans in those days: Forbid that Laymen be heard in
testimony against a Bishop, though he be never so wicked. Forbid Pagans to
accuse a Christian, or to sue him for any cause whatsoever, and the secular
judges to judge the causes of Churchmen. And certainly if these Epistles be
true, they are the strongest weapons of our Adversaries, who have whereof to
triumph.

For although no body ought to be judge and witness in his own cause, and
though these words which exalt the Papal power, would have been more becoming
in the mouth of another then the Bishops of Rome; yet the show of a great
antiquity makes these Epistles considerable, seeing that most of those Bishops
have been Martyrs; and ancient histories bear witness to their zeal and piety.

All these considerations did not move the Cardinal to make use of these
Epistles to maintain the Papal authority, but upon occasions he speaks of them
with contempt, and chooses rather to make use of the testimony of of which
more hereafter.
Aurelianus a Pagan Emperor, then of the oracles and judgments of the old
Bishop of Rome. Whosoever knows how much this Prelat is versed in Antiquity, and
how ingenious in wresting the testimonies of the Ancient to his intention,
shall easily judge that it was not without a great cause that he has despised
these Decretals attributed to the ancient Bishops of Rome.

CHAP. 5. The first cause why M. du Perron would not make use of the Decretal
Epistles of the Bishops of Rome of the three first Ages. Even, because in many
places they are contrary to the Roman Church of this time.
THE Cardinal being a learned man, has so employed himself to maintain the
Papal primacy, that he has together avoided to defend it by ways that might
impugn the other doctrines of the Roman Church, and expose the Papal See to
derision. Wherefore he was afraid to give credit unto these Epistles which in
many things agree not with the belief of the Church of Rome, and are indecent
to the Papal dignity.

For example; the first Epistle of Clement is written to James brother of the
Lord, Bishop of Jerusalem, whom he calls Bishop of Bishops, governing all the
Churches which God by his providence has founded everywhere. If that be, James
governed also the Roman Church, and was Head of the Universal Church.

In the second Epistle, the same Clement makes bold to instruct St. James, who
was an Apostle, about the use of the sacred vessels and clothes, where he
warns him to beware ubi non murium stercora inter fragmenta Dominicae
portionis appareant.
least among the pieces or fragments of the Lords body, there should be
mice-dung seen: thereby impugning or forgetting transubstantion for the natural
body of Christ has no pieces, and cannot be broken. That cannot be said but of
the Sacramental and figurative body, which is the consecrated bread.

In the second and third Epistle, the Stoical immobility without any passion is
taught; and this doctrine is delivered, homines per pietatem possunt esse
impassibiles, Men by piety may become impassible.

The fourth Epistle does exceedingly exalt the virtue of water to purify and
regenerate the Souls: Which Binius has observed in his Notes upon these
Epistles Clements words contain a subtle kind of Divinity: Images are made
with iron, ^ron is made in the fire, fire is quenched with water, water is
moved by the Spirit, who is carried upon the waters. Ergo etc. which is a
concatenation of recreative conceits.

Bellarmine in the book of Ecclesiastical writers, speaks thus of the fifth
Epistle of Clement. In the fifth Epistle the community of all things, and the
very community of wives is commended. Whence he gathers that these words have
been foisted into that Epistle by some body. See in Gratians Decree Causa 12.
Can. Dilectissimis.
that goodly doctrine of Clement set down at large, where Plato is praised, and
called the wisest of the Grecians, for teaching that women must be common.

In the first Epistle of Anacletus, Masses without communicants are condemned,
in these words, Peracta consecratione omnes communicent qui noluerint
Ecclesiasticis carere liminibus.
The consecration being ended, all they must communicate that will not be cut
off from the Church. And in the second Epistle of Clement. Tanta in altario
holocausta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debeant.
Let as many offerings be offered upon the Altar as are sufficient for the
people.

In the first Decretal of Pius the first, Hermes is called Doctor of the faith,
and of the Scriptures: and it is related how an Angel appeared upon him in a
Sepherds habit, saying to him that the Passover must be celebrated upon the
Lords day. Yet the Roman Church holds that book of Hermes to be fabulous. Pope
Gelasius puts it among the Apochrypha, and Hierome in his Prelogus Galeatus,
and Eusebius in the third book of his history, chapter 3.

To the same Pius a Decree Causa. 21. qu. 1. Can. Si quis. Si quis per
creaturas juraverit, acerrime castigetur.
is attributed, which forbids upon heavy penalties to swear by the creatures. A
law which the Roman Church of this time observes not, permitting to swear by
the relics of the Saints, as it is expressly said in the Catechism of the
Council of Trent upon these words of the law, Thou shall not take the name of
the Lord thy God in vain. And Pope Nicolas the first in his answer to the
questions of the Bulgares says the same.

The Decretal of Pope Urban the first speaks of some persons qui sine fide
mortui sunt, and tamen bona opera egerunt: who are dead without faith, and yet
have done good works. How can one do good works without faith, seeing that all
that is done without faith is sin? Romans 14.23.

The first Decretal of Pope Eutychianus commands that beans and grapes be
offered upon the Altar. Which the Roman Church practices no more.

The second Epistle of Pope Sixtus the second Magis gratias referemus illi
grano sinapis.
makes humble thanksgivings to the grain of mustard seed.

The Decretal of Pope Dionysius begins by a false and absurd sentence. Summum
bonum est amare amantes se. He says, that the sovereign good is for one to
love those that love him. Truly many wicked men love one another fervently.

In those Decretals Clarks are called Spiritual above twenty times, and Laymen
carnal, although there be Laymen that live with a spiritual life, and many
Clarks that live with a carnal life. The Apostle St Paul, 1 Cor. 2. by the
spiritual man understands every man regenerated by Gods spirit.

In most of these Epistles it is forbidden to Laymen to prefer any accusation
against a Bishop or Priest for any cause whatsoever, save only in case of
heresy. So that if a Bishop has killed a Lay-mans Father, or lain with his
Wife, it is not lawful for the wronged party to frame any complaint for it.

The Decretal of Telesphorus appoints Lent only for Clarks.

The second Epistle of Clement forbids to Tanta in altario holocausta
offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debeant. Quod si remanserint in crastinum,
non reserventur, sed cum timore and tremore clericorum diligentia consumantur.
keep any part of the consecrated bread till the next day: But prescribes that
the remnant be diligently eaten by the Clarks with fear and trembling. In those
days they reserved no consecrated hosts.

CHAP. 6. Other causes why the Cardinal would make no use of the Decretals of
the three first Ages. Of the barbarousness of those Decretals, and how
Scripture is profaned in them.
IT is very like that M. du Perron disgusted the style of the Decretals, which
is ridiculous, full of incongruities, and of an absurd barbarousness: A thing
altogether intolerable in the first and second age after the Apostles, in which
the Latin tongue was yet in its purity. Besides, the same incongruities and
barbarisms are found in the Epistles of several Popes, and the style is so
like, that it is evident that all these Epistles come out of the same shop, and
belong to the same Author.

These are some of the flowers of elegancy which are found in these Decretals.
Clem. ep. 2.
Altario. Anacl^ti^ ep. 1.
Odientes. Ejusdem. ep. 2.
Consolari and venerari, for being comforted and respected. Ejusdem. ep. 3.
Calumniari, for being calumniated. Gaii Papae and Evaristi secundi.
Titulandus ad urbem honorabilem. In a hundred places the words of taliter and
qualiter are repeated. And these phrases, Alex. ep. 1.
Episcopi sunt obediendi and non detrahendi, nec injuriandi, sed portandi and
supportandi. Et Telesphori ep.
confessio debet profiteri, that is, must be freely pronounced. In the second
Epistle of Sixtus the first, Ab hac sancta sede a sanctis Apostolis Episcopi
tueri and defendi jussi sunt. Et sicut egerit ita recipiet, si been been, si
grave grave, si pessime pessime. Also se cavere, for take heed, and Patres sunt
venerandi non insidiandi. And it is ordinary with those Epistles to say
persequi for being persecuted. The first Decretal of Victor says tantum
Christianae confessione creduliatis clarificata baptizentur. And in the second,
Nocere fratres instead of fratribus. And in the second Epistle of Calixtus,
ullum nocere, for, be hurtful to any. And Zepherinus Epist. 2. praesentem
fraternam syllabam exposuimus. These words Detrahere aliquem, for detracting of
one; and Urbani Decretalis.
modernus for new: and Bontiani Ep.
exiet for exibit; and Fab. Ep. 3.
suspiciosus, for suspect; and rigorosus, and charitative, and perserverabilis,
and injuriare, and praelibatus, and pretexatus, and a thousand of the like are
frequent there. Steven in the second Decretal comes out with his Latin
elegancy, Nullus anathema suscipiatur, Never poor Priscian was so kicked and
boxed. It seems that the forger of these Epistles believed that barbarousness
and incongruities are decent in Oracles.

Also the novelty of these Decretals appears, in that they are full of the
terms of the Capitularies of Charlemayn, and Lewis the Meek, and of the
Councils held in France and Germany in their time.

In those Decretals some impious sentences are found, as that which is said in
the third Epistle of Clement; That Quicunque obediunt Episcopis sui^; videntur
aliquid gratiae confer Deo.
they that obey their Bishops, seem to confer some grace unto God, as if God
were much obliged to them for it. And that which Calixtus the first says in
his first Decretal, As the Son of God is come to do the will of his Father, so
you must fulfill the will of the Roman Church your mother; where, by the Roman
Church, the Pope must be understood, for all is ruled by his will. Who is able
to suffer the ugly words of the second Decretal of the same Calixtus, who
having called the Bishop husband of the Church, calls also the ordination or
installing of the Bishop Ejus concubitu frui, id est ordinatione.
concubitum cum sua uxore? This is no better. Alexander the first, in his first
Decretal speaks thus; We bless water unto the people with the conspersion of
salt, that all they that are besprinkled with it may be sanctified and
purified. For if (as the Apostle says, Heb. 9.) the ashes of the heifer
sprinkled over with blood did sanctify and cleanse the people, how much more
does the water aspersed with salt, sanctify the people? etc. And if we doubt
not but that the sick were healed by touching the hemm of our Saviors garment;
how much more by the virtue of his sacred words are the elements consecrated,
whereby humane frailty receives the health of body and soul? By these elements
he understands water and salt, which he will have to be effectual to the
healing of the soul.

It is ordinary with these Decretals to play with Scripture, and to wrest it to
an absurd sense, contrary to the right meaning. Clement in the first Decretal,
and Anacletus, and Alexander after him, prove that Clarks must not be offended,
because it is written, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye,
Zech. 2.8. But there Zechariah speaks of the care that God has of his people
in general, not of the Priests alone. And Steph. Ep. 2.
Steven proves the same, because Christ said, Matthew. 18.6. If any offend one
of these little ones, it were better for him to have a mil-stone hanged about
his neck, etc. as if by these little ones the Clergy only were meant.

The first Decretal of Anacletus says, We prohibit strangers judgments;
intending thereby to prohibit Laymen to be Judges of Clergy men. For (says he)
the Lord speaking of Lot by the mouth of Moses, says, Thou art come in as a
stranger; did thou come to be our Judge? He makes God say that which was said
by the Sodomites.

With the like depravation the second Decretal says, that God has reserved
unto himself the judgment of the sins of Priests and Bishops, and would not
have men to judge them. For, says he, the Lord himself has given an example
of it, when himself, not by another, but in person, cast the sellers and buyers
out of the Temple, and with his own whip overthrew the tables of the
money changers. That Coyner of false Decretals believed that those buyers and
sellers were Priests. A jolly argument! The Lord has himself cast out the
money changers, Ergo, there is none but God that can judge Priests and Bishops.
For he presumes that the Papal chair is Gods chair. In the same place the
excellency of Priests and Bishops is proved, because it is written, God sits
in the assembly of the Gods, and I have said you are Gods, Psalm. 82. where
there is no mention of Priests or Bishops, but of Judges and temporal Princes.

The same Decretal of Anacletus, proves that Christ dwells not in the
calumniators of Priests, because it is written Luke 9. The Foxes have holes,
and the Birds of Heaven have nests, but the Son of God has not where to lay
his head.

In the same place he labors to show that the Son is not inferior to the
Father, although it be written, Verbum faciet Dominus abbreviatum universo
orbi, The Lord shall abbreviate his word in all the world.

The third Epistle proves the Popes primacy, because St. Peter is call Cephas,
that is a head; not knowing that Cephas signifies a stone.

The first Decretal of Alexander proves that no harm must be done to Bishops,
because the Lord has said by Joel, Shall ye return vengeance unto me? and by
Hosea 14. Who is he that is wise? let him understand these things. And if by
force some Paper or signed writing be taken from some one [of them] he
declares that it will be no prejudice to him, because Hosea says, Let the
Trumpet be at thy throat, etc. And because Christ said, When thou prayest,
enter into thy Closet. And Alexand. Decretal. Pejus malum fore non aestimo quam
Christianos suis invidere sacerdotibus. Novit enim Dominus qui sunt ejus.
there is no greater crime then to bear envy unto Priests, because the Apostle
says, God knows them that are his.

Steven in the second Decretal teaches that Laymen must not be heard in
accusation against a Bishop, because Bishops are the throne of God; And that
the Prophet speaks of them when he says, The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows his handy work. And Eutychian in the second Epistle
proves that Clarks must not be offended, because it is written, that the Angel
of the Lord encampeth about them that fear him. I bring few examples of many.
For the whole stuff of these Epistles is a perpetual depravation of Scripture,
compelled in a ridiculous way to the advantage of Priests and Bishops; and of
the Bishop of Rome especially.

CHAP. 7. Evident untruths in the Decretals of the three first Ages. The gross
ignorance in history of him that coined them.
THAT these Epistles are false in their title, it appears by the falsehood of
their Contents, for they are all over stuffed with lies. Many false and absurd
things, which could not have been said in those days, and neither consonant
with the time, nor with the truth, are there ascribed to the ancient Bishops of
Rome.

Those Decretal Epistles attributed to the Bishops of Rome of the three first
ages are fifty seven, or fifty eight in number, almost all dated from the
Consulat of certain Consuls, all which dates, save only five or six are false:
Those Consuls are either imaginary, or not agreeing with the time of those
Bishops. That is seen by the Fasti of Onuphrius, and the Chronicles of
Marcellinus, Cassiodorus and Eusebius; but especially by Baroniu^ an. 66.. 35,
36, 37, 38. and an. 80.. 3. and saepe alibi.
Baronius, who in his Annals carefully observes the untruth of those dates;
which he imputes to this, that the Collector or Author of these Epistles has
followed the Pontifical of Damasus, which is all full of error in history.

These Epistles make a frequent mention of Clem. Ep. 1. Anacl. Ep. 1. and 2.
Patriarchs, Primates, and Archbishops, which were unknown names in the three
first Ages. The title of Archbishop began toward the end of the fourth Age.
That word is found in the twenty fourth Oration of Gregory Nazianzen, and in
Epiphanius in the sixty eighth and sixty ninth heresy, where Peter and
Alexander are called Archbishops of Alexandria. It is found also in the
Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon.

As for the word Patriarch, the Montanists had their Patriarchs, as we learn of
Epist. 54. Montanistae habent primos de Pepuza Phrygiae Patriarchas.
Hierom. Of the Patriarchs of the Jews, mention is made in the sixteenth book
of the Theodosian Code. Tit. 8. lege 1. Judaeis and majoribus eorum and
Patriarchis volumus intimari, etc. and lege 2.
For the Jews scattered in the Roman Empire, had their Patriarchs in diverse
Provinces.

In the same Epistles frequent mention is made of Temples and of the Sanctuary;
but then the Christians had no Temples. It was a great favor if sometimes the
Emperors after fierce persecutions gave them leave to meet in burying places.
Sometimes in certain intervals of peace, they have built Temples; but that
continued but little.

The first Decretal of Anacletus takes from them that are not Christians the
liberty of being witnesses or accusers in Law. In that time the Bishops of Rome
were hidden, and were eminent only in martyrdom. How could they have given
Laws to the Pagan Emperors, or hinder those that were of the Emperors and the
Senates religion, to be received to be witnesses?

In the same Epistle Anacletus speak thus. Idem habes Ep. 1. Hygini Episcopi,
and Ep. 3. Fabiani.
Peregrina judicia submovemus. Could that Bishop that lived under the Cross
hinder the exercise of the judicial Courts of the Roman Praetor? or hinder the
Christians from appearing before the ordinary Magistrates? In the same place
that supposititious Anacletus speaks like an Emperor. Let every Province both
according to the Laws of the Church, and the civil Laws, have her own just
Judges, and none from without (meaning the Pagans) unless the authority of this
Apostolic See have otherwise decreed about it.

In the same Epistle the word Comes is found (that is a Count or an Earl) A
word which was not in use, but since the Emperor Adrian, who traveling
through the whole Empire, carried with him an itinerant Senate. Hence it came
that the Officers of his Court were called Comites, and his Court Comitatus,
because they had accompanied him in his journey.

These Epistles also speak often of Archiflamines who were Pagans, to whom the
Archbishops and Primates have succeeded, which is a gross error: For in
Greece, Asia, Egypt, etc. yea in all the Provinces of the Roman Empire there
were no Flamines no Archiflamines, but in Italy only; Rome had her Flamines
Diales and Quirinales, but they had nothing to do out of Italy; Neither do I
believe that the word Archiflamines is found in any ancient Author.

The same second Decretal of Anacletus says Sacra unctione exemplo Prophetarum
and Regum capita eorum more Apostolorum and Mosis ungentes.
that Moses and the Apostles were anointed with oil. That's false. The Apostles
never received any anointing with oil. They anointed the sick to heal them,
not the Pastors of the Church in their Ordination.

The same Epistle speaks of those that could not have their recourse to the
Court of Emperors and Kings. Who knows not that then there was no King under
the Roman Empire?

The second Epistle of Pius the first, and that of Urban, speak de praediis, of
the Lands and Possessions of the Church, and of great riches. Yet in that time
the Church suffered grievous persecutions, and the Christians were stripped of
all their goods. Laurentius a Roman Deacon being commanded by the Praefectus
Vrbi.
Prefect of the City, to deliver unto him the treasures of the Christian
Church, brought to his door a company of lame and maimed people, as Prudentius
relates in the hymn of Laurentius.

With great absurdity in the second Decretal attributed to The same is found in
Epist. 2. of Fabianus.
Pius the first, that Bishop is made to say, That if any Priest be disobedient
to his Bishop, mox Curiae tradatur; let him be presently delivered to the
temporal Court. Now the Emperors were then Pagans and cruel persecutors. And
those men were said tradi Curiae, who by a kind of punishment or disgrace were
delivered to the Officers which the Emperor had in the several Cities, to be
punished and employed in some sordid service. A thing which belonged neither to
the knowledge, nor to the power of Bishops, who had then enough to do to hide
themselves, and were far from delivering their Priests to the Magistrate: which
if they had done, they had delivered them to death, not for their disobedience
to the Bishop, but for Christian Religion.

The first Epistle of Victor is written to Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, who
was Bishop of that City under the Emperor Arcadius, and came to Constantinople
to condemn Chrysostom in the year of Christ four hundred and three; two
hundred years after the death of this Victor; for there was no other Theophilus
Bishop of Alexandria.

The second Epistle of Calixtus says, that by the Civil Laws it is forbidden
to Laymen to conspire against Bishops. Who will believe that Pagan Emperors
persecuting the Church with all their might, were careful that the Christian
people should bear respect to their Pastors?

In the same Epistle the forger of these Decretals discovers himself, and
shows in whose time he lived, namely of Charlemagne or his children; In which
time there was two Empires, the one of the Greek Emperors, the other of the
Emperors of the West, styling themselves Roman Emperors. For that Epistle
says, Eos consanguineos dicimus quos divinae and Imperatorum Romanorum atque
Graecorum leges consanguineos appellant.
We call those kin whom the divine Laws, and those of the Roman Emperors, and
of the Greeks, call kin.

The Decretal of Urban says falsely, that Scimus vos non ignorare quia hactenus
vita communis inter bonos Christianos viguit, and adhuc gratia Dei viget.
to his time goods had been common among Christians, and were still, and that
they had nothing proper. Now Urban was Bishop in the year of Christ 222. And
that which is most false and absurd, is, that the same Epistle Quod si quis
fecerit, perpetua damnetur infamia, and carceri tradatur, aut exilio perpetuae
deportationis utatur.
condemns to imprisonment and perpetual Exile, and brandeth with a note of
infamy those that usurp the goods and the possessions of the Church. The
Bishops of Rome being then persecuted and exposed to martyrdom, had no civil
jurisdiction. Yea in time of peace the power of exiling and branding with
infamy belonged not unto Bishops, but to the secular power. Before that the
Popes by the liberality of Pepin and Charlemagne became temporal Princes, it
was not in their power to punish any man with exile.

There is a plain untruth observed by Baron. an. 238. Sect. 9. Binius in Notis.
Possevinus Apparat.
Baronius, Binius, and Possevinus in the Epistle of Fabian; Fabian is made to
say that in his time Novatus came from Africa to Rome, and drew Novatian and
some others to his ill doctrine. Yet that did not happen but in the time of
Cornelius successor to Fabian, as it may be seen in Cyprians Epistles 49, 52,
and 76. and in the Chronicle of Eusebius.

Fabian in the third Decretal decrees that those that are led to be executed
be not barred from appealing, as if the Roman Praetor in that Age had been
subject to the Laws of the Bishop of Rome, or as if leave had been given to
appeal from Judges sitting upon life and death in the Emperors name, unto the
Bishop. That Fabian was so far from pretending to that power, that himself
after a long and hard prison was finally executed to death, by the sentence of
the Judges.

With the like impudence the same Decretal makes that Fabian to say, By a
general ordinance we prohibit strangers jugdements, that is, that Pagans be
Judges of Christians, saving in all things the Apostolical authority. That Law
deposes the Emperor, and reverseth the judgments of the Roman Praetor. Those
good Bishops did little think of a temporal power over the Emperor, being
busy to avoid executions, or to prepare themselves for them. They thought of
losing their lives to save their souls, not of getting an Empire in the world.

In the first Epistle of Cornelius, that Bishop says, that he had taken away
the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul from the Catacombs, and laid St. Peter's
body in Apollo's Temple. A fable confuted by Baronius in his An. 221.. 3, 4,
and 5.
Annals, and by Binius in his Notes upon these Epistles. Had that Cornelius
(who suffered Martyrdom) the Temple of Apollo in his power? And if he had been
the owner of it, would he have put St. Peter's body in a Temple of Idols?
Neither did the Pagans suffer sepulchers in Temples, much less then the
sepulchers of Christians, and much less yet an executed man's body.

Can any thing be more grossly forged then the second Decretal of Sixtus the
second, in which he restores some Spanish Bishops unjustly condemned and stripped
of their goods by the Princes of Spain? Spain in that Age had no Princes, but
Presidents or Lieutenants of the Roman Emperor, who was an enemy to the
Christian name, for which that very Sixtus suffered Martyrdom. Yet see how he
speaks to those Princes, Fratres quos timore terreno injuste damnastis, sci^ote
a nobis esse restitutos. Quibus ex sancti Petri and Apostolica authoritate
omnia quae eis ablata sunt integerrime reddi jubemus, si non vultis vos and
principes vestri a collegio nostro and membris Ecclesiae separari.
Know ye that we have justly restored the brethren by you unjustly condemned.
To whom, that all be fully restored that was taken from them, we command you by
the Apostolical authority of St. Peter, unless you and your Princes will be
separated from our College, and from the members of the Church. All that no
less ridiculous, then if the Bishop of Lions did excommunicate the Bashaes of
Natolia, and the King of Maroco, commanding them to make restitution of all
that they have taken, if they would be absolved.

With the like imposture in the second Decretal of Eutychianus, it is said that
not only the Ecclesiastical Laws, but also the Laws of this world, that is, the
Imperial Laws, prohibit to receive a man that despises Christian Religion, to
be a witness against a Christian. Never was such a Law made by Pagan Emperors
in favor of the Christians: Less yet in the time of Eutychianus who suffered
Martyrdom.

Thus the Decretal of Gaius disableth a Pagan and an heretic from inditing a
Christian, or offering him any disgrace; And all kinds of men from inditing
Bishops and Clarks before secular Judges. How could that Bishop (that
Pontificale Damasi in Gaio.
lived in underground Caves, which they called cryptae, to avoid Diocletians
persecution, and who in the end was taken and executed to death) have the
authority of giving Laws to Emperors, and exempting Christians from the
subjection of the civil Magistrate? seeing that even under the Christian
Emperors that since reigned at Rome, the Roman Bishops never undertook any
such thing.

In a word, these untruths are so enormous, and these pieces forged with such a
gross imposture, that we shall see hereafter a Decretal of Marcel, to the
Emperor Maxentius, a Pagan and a Persecutor, whereby that Marcel being brought
by that persecution to be a groom in a Stable, writes to that Empetour in a
masterfull style, We command thee; and bids him to take notice that Priests are
Gods, commanding him to keep, the constitutions of Pope Clement, who was dead
two hundred years before.

CHAP. 8. That many of our Adversaries have acknowledged the untruth of these
Decretals.
ALL that was said before, is more then sufficient to bring to open view the
untruth of these Decretals; unto which, and the stupidity of the Kings that
succeeded Charlemagne, the Papal Empire owes its settlement. Whence it
appears that it was not without cause that the Cardinal was ashamed to employ
them for the Popes primacy, which in them is so highly exalted. And truly if we
wanted proofs of their falsehood, our very adversaries would give us enough.

Gratian who has stuffed the body of the Roman Decree with pieces taken out of
these Decretals, has inserted into his Decree, a Canon of Leo the fourth,
which makes it evident that in the year of our Lord 847. these Decretals were
not yet forged, or at least had no course as yet. That Leo who was created Pope
in the year 847. in an Epistle to the Bishops of the Isle of Britain gives a
list of the Books, and Councils, and Decretals out of which the rules are
taken, by which the Church is ruled, and which the Bishops must carefully
observe when they judge. And he makes a Catalogue of those Bishops that made
the Decretals that are received in the Roman Church: Which are Sylvester,
Syricius, Innocent, Zozimus, Celestin, Leo, Hilary, Gelasius, Hormisdas, and
Gregory the younger, Bishops of Rome, the Elder of which is of the fourth Age.
Whence it appears that all the Decretals from Clement to Sylvester are false
and suppositious, since this Leo the fourth did not know them. This Canon is
found in the twentyeth Distinction of the Decree, Can. de libellis.

Ballarmine uses the testimony of these Epistles for the Popes primacy in the
2. chapter de Pontifice, chapter 14. Yet he says in the same place; Aliquos errores in
has Epistolas irrepsisse non negaverim, nec indabitatos esse affirmare audeam.
I deny not but that some errors are crept in these Epistles, and I cannot
affirm that they are undoubted.

Baronius in his Annals upon the year 865.. 5. speaking of the collection of
these Decretals made by Isidorus Mercator, says, Merces illas nimiorum Isidori
Mercatoris per Riculfum primum illatas in Gallias ex Hispania. Ne quis
calumniari possit ab Ecclesia Romana aliquid hujusmodi commentum esse.
That Merchandise (alluding to Mercators name) was first brought out of Spain
into Gauls by Riculfus Archbishop of Mentz, in the time of Charlemagne; that
none may calumniate, saying that the Roman Church has forged these things. And
a little after. 8. The At vero ex multis eas reddi suspectas Epistolas, quae
dictae sunt secundo Annalium tomo, satis est demonstratu^, simulque ostensum
illis non indigere Romanam Ecclesiam ut si falsitatis arguantur, suis
destituatur juribus, etc.
things that we have said in the second Tome of the Annals, show sufficiently
that these Epistles are of a dubious faith in many things: and together we have
showed that the Roman Church has no need of them, so that she should be
destitute of her rights and privileges, if these Epistles were convinced of
untruth: seeing that without these Epistles she is established enough by the
true, and not supposititious Epistles of the other Bishops.

Himself in his Notes upon the Martyrologe October. 16. See to what danger that
Isidorus collector of these Epistles brings our businesses; so that on that
side the Church seems to be in danger, if we hold those things for true and
certain which he has collected, or rather forged. I bear him testimony (to
speak with the Apostle) that he had a zeal, but not according to knowledge. But
what zeal can there be in forging false writings? Must the truth of God be
helped with lies?

Binius in his Notes upon the Decretal of Boniface the second, calls that
Isidorus, Impostorem and mendaciorum frigidum concinnatorem, callidumque
veteratorem: an impostor and an absurd inventer of lies, and a cunning old fox.

George Cassander a Divine of Collen Cassander defens. libell. de officio viri
pii Sect. Quod autem. De reliquis quae Clemenis, Anacleti, Evaristi, Alexandri,
Telesphori, etc. nomine circumferuntur, qui credi possit ut ea homo veritatis
and sinceritatis amantissimus tantopere probet, cum pleraque eorum and olim ab
ipsis Pontificibus inter Apochrypha sint rejecta, and postremis hisce saeculis
and nostra aetate a viris prudentissimis and doctissimis adjectis gravissimis
and firmissimis rationibus in dubium sint vocata?
As for the other works that go under the name of Clemens, Anacletus,
Evaristus, Telesphorus, etc. who will ever believe that a lover of truth and
sincerity can so much approve them, Ecce in quoa discrimen unus Isidorus
Mercator illarum Epistolarum collector res nostras adduxit, ut ex ea part
periclatari videatur Ecclesia si quae ipse collegit vel potius affinxit, firma
certaque esse dixerimus.
seeing that most of them have been long since rejected by the Popes
themselves, and put among the Apochrypha; and that in these last Ages, and in
our time, their truth was questioned by most learned men, upon most grave and
strong reasons?

And upon that he alleges the testimony of Cusanns and Erasmus. To which we
may add Marsilius of Padua, the Cardinal Torquemada, the Jesuit Possevinus in
his Apparat, and many more. Upon which, as also upon this whole matter, who so
will have an ample and exact instruction, let him read the Pseudo-Isidorus of
our learned David Blondel, a work full of doctrine, and made with a diligence
beyond all example.

CHAP. 9. Of the Popes motives for causing these false Decretals to be forged,
and when and by whom they were forged.
THE time when the Popes power did most increase, and in with the Papal See
received the greatest alteration, was the age of the reign of Pepin,
Charlemagne, Lewis the Meek, and Charles the Bald: For in that time the Pope
from a Bishop became a temporal Monarch by the immense liberalities of those
Kings, who made use of the Popes service in their wars of Italy.

See Sigonius de regno Italiae. Blondw. Volateranus, Baronius, Sigebertus.
In the year of Christ 755. or 756. Pepin having overcome Arstulfus King of the
Lombards, took many Towns and Lordships from him, which he bestowed upon Pope
Steven the second, whose predecessors Gregory the second, and Gregory the third
had shaken off the yoke of the Emperor of Constantinople their Sovereign Lord.
This change happened 666. years after the Apostle St. John had seen the
Revelations, which expressly point that term of years Rev. 13. even the time
upon which the Second Beast was to sit in the place of the first, which is the
Roman Empire, and usurp an earthly domination in the Capital City of the Empire
of Rome.

Charlemagne having put down the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy, added many
far greater gifts unto the liberalities of his Father Pepin; And being entered
into Rome was elected Roman Emperor by the Senate and the people. Pope Leo the
third made the ceremony of the Coronation. But in the following ages the Popes
would infer out of that Ceremony, that the Pope had given the Empire unto
Charles; as if the Archbishop of Rhemes, whose place is to anoint his King,
did boast that he has given him the Kingdom of France. In that Coronation Leo
worshipped Charles, as Ado perfectis laudibus a Pontifice more Principum
antiquorum adoratus est. See also President Fauchet in his Antiquities, who
says the same, and Monsieur Pitau a Counselor of the Court in his Preface
before the Chronicles of Eusebius and Sigebertus.
Ado testifies it, who lived in the same age. And Aventinus in the fourth book
of the Annals of Baniers: For that Emperor reserved unto himself the
Sovereignty of Rome and Italy. The same Emperor against the will of the French
Bishops brought in the Roman service into France, abolishing the old service
which was called the Ambrosian.

Lewis the Meek son to Charlemagne added much to his fathers liberalities, of
which we have some example in the Canon, Ego Ludovicus Did. 63. for all is not
set down there. Which donation made by the French Kings, Gratian has inserted
in his decree, with little consideration; for having put in the 96.
Distinction, the donation of Constantine, yet he put in that of Lewis also,
although the first was purposely forged to abolish the memory of the second.
The recompense which that Emperor had from the Pope, was, that the Pope
Gregory the fourth entered into a League with the sons of Lewis Sigebertus
Chronico, Ann. 832. Gregor. Papa in Gall am veniens contra Imperatorem cum
filiis agebat.
to dispossess him from the Empire, and to imprison him, as also they did; as
it is related by Sigebertus and Amoinas, and the Chronicle of St. Denis. But
shortly after they were forced to release him.

Charles the Bald succeeds his Father in the Kingdom of France. A soft Prince
and of little virtue, who hoping by the Popes help to attain to the Imperial
Crown, favored the Pope with all his power, and brought the Clergy of France
to the subjection of the Roman See as much as he could. Then began the Popes
Legates to come to the Councils of France, and there to preside. Then also the
French Kings began to tremble under the thunderbolts of the Vatican, and to
fear the excommunications of the Pope.

The first Pope that made a trial of his excommunications against them, was
Pope Nicolas the first, who threatened Lothary to excommunicate him, unless he
recalled Tietberga his Wife whom he had put away, to take Waldrada whom he
loved; which also this Pope did excommunicate. Whereupon there was great
murmuring of the Prelates, and people of France against the Pope, being
displeased both at the Popes usurpations, and the pusillanimity of their Kings.
These things happened from the year 863. to 866.

After that Nicolas, came Adrian the second, who favoring Lewis, grandchild
to Lewis the Meek, against Charles the Bald his Uncle, sent peremptory Letters
into France, whereby he declared, that Quod si quis praesumpserit, non solum
per suae authoritatis ministerium infirmabitur, verum etiam vinclis anathematis
obligatus nomine Christianitatis privatus, cum Diabolo omnino locabitur.
if any presumed to make an enterprise upon the Kingdom of Lewis, not only he
would make void by his authority all that he should do, but also that such a
man being bound with the bonds of Anathema, and deprived of the name of
Christian, should be lodged altogether with the Devil.

This is seen in the Epistle which Hinckmarus Archbishop of Rhemes writes to
the said Adrian upon that subject, where he says, that both Ecclesiastical and
secular men being assembled at Rhemes, would say in a reproachful way, that
never any such mandat was sent from that See to any of the Kings predecessors.
Adding that the Bishops of Rome had never withdrawn themselves from the
obedience of heretic Emperors. Wherefore (said they) we will not believe that
we cannot otherwise attain to the Kingdom of heaven, but by receiving him for a
temporal King, whom this Apostolical Lord recommends to us.

Thus was the Popes power growing in France, in Germany, and in Italy, misusing
Kings, and daily usurping new things. But the Churches of Greece, Asia and
Egypt, and all the East, laughed at that pride, and detested it. For at that
same time Photius Patriarch of Constantinople fulminated an excommunication
against Pope Nicolas. Then the Greek Church and the Roman made a schism, and
ever since that time they have been separated in communion, even to this day.

But as it is ordinary with those that from a low state, are suddenly raised to
the first charges of the Kingdom, to forge titles; and they never want proofs
for the Antiquity of their house. Likewise the Popes of that time seeing
themselves suddenly promoted to a greatness, which they durst never have hoped
for; and seeing together that their succession in St. Peter's primacy had no
ground in the Word of God, and that the holy Scripture speaks not of the Bishop
of Rome, and gives no successor to St. Peter in his Apostleship, employed some
of their most confiding Prelates to forge false Deeds, and Epistles, and
Decrees of the Bishops of Rome next to the time of the Apostles, in which they
speak like Monarchs, and attribute to themselves a sovereign power over the
Churches of the whole world; yea and upon the temporal of the Roman Empire.

It was in that time, that is, in the ninth Age, under the reign of
Charlemagne, and of his Son Lewis the meek, that these Decretals were forged,
being unknown before, and never mentioned in all Antiquity, bearing on the
front the name of Isidorus Peccator, and in some Copies Isidorus Mercator, a
man unknown, and a name forged at will.

That collection of Decretals began to go about in France in the beginning of
the reign of Charles the Bald. The first that used them, was Hinckmar Bishop of
Laon upon this occasion.

Hinckmar Archbishop of Rhemes had promoted to the Bishopric of Laon, another
Hinckmar his nephew; who having excommunicated his Clergy, and hindered the
divine service, and the baptism of children in his own Bishopric, and
committed diverse crimes and excesses, was cited to appear before his Uncle, who
was his Metropolitan. But he would not obey, nor appear. Upon that, Hinckmar of
Rhemes disannulled all the Acts of Hinckmar of Laon, and would Synodically
proceed against him. But Hinckmar of Laon to defend himself, brought forth the
collection of the Decretals of the ancient Popes made by Isidorus, where by the
Popes Decrees such causes are reserved to the Apostolic See.

Hinckmar of Rhemes, being not learned enough to know the forgery of the Author
of these Decretals, and not daring to reject them openly, brought diverse things
to invalid their authority. He said that Hinckmar. l. 35. capitum c. 24. Forte
putasti neminem alium easdem sententias vel ipsas Epistolas praeter te habere,
etc. Res mira est cum de ipsis sententiis plena sit ista terra, sicut and de
libro collectarum Epistolarum ab Isidoro quem de Hispania allatum Riculsus
Moguntinus Episcopus obtinuit; and istas regiones ex istis repleri fecit.
Hinckmar of Laon was mistaken, if he thought that he was the only man that had
those Epistles: That the Country was full of them: And that Riculfus Bishop of
Mentz had published the Book of Epistles collected by Isidorus, which was
brought to him out of Spain. Now that Riculfus the first publisher of these
Epistles, lived in the same Age, and is but few years more ancient then
Hinckmar. For he outlived Charlemagne, who died in the year of Christ 814.
since (as Baronius says in the year of Christ 865.. 6.) he was one of those
that subscribed the will of that Emperor.

Hinckmar said also to defend himself against those Epistles, Hinckmar. lib.
55. cap. c. 25. Illae Epistolae suis temporibus congruentes fuerun^: donec
Patres nostri in unum convenientes mansuras, usque in finem leges condiderunt,
etc. Cum leguntur, Apostolica illa praecedat sententia, quae dicit, omnia
probate, quod bonum est tenete. Et haec dico non quod quaedam in eis dicam esse
non bona, sed non per omnia sacris Canonibus Patrumque Consiliis consona, etc.
Lex bona sed in temporibus suis.
that they had been good in their time; but that the Fathers assembled in
Council, had altered those things, and made Canons of greater authority, which
are to remain perpetually. And that those Decretals were never put in among the
Canons of the Church. He will have then those Epistles to be received with this
condition, Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete. Try all things, retain that
which is good. That strife between the two Hinckmars happened in the year of
the Lord 870.

Hereupon Pope Nicolas the first bestirred himself with violence against
Hinckmar of Rhemes, complaining that he despised the Decretals collected by
Isidorus, and saying that the Can. Si Romanorum Did. 19.
Decretals are nothing the less receivable for not being inserted in the Code
of the Canons of the Church, seeing that the Canons of the New and Old
Testament are no more inserted into that Code, and yet are received, because
Pope Innocent has decreed it so. But though Nicolas did storm and threatened
never so much, Hinckmar resisted him stiffly, and had the better of the Bishop
of Rome: neither did he ever suffer the causes which he had judged, to be
revised at Rome, nor any man that had been deposed by the Synods of France, to
be restored by the Pope. And all his life time he maintained with great
constancy so much liberty as remained to the Gallican Church, which liberty
suffered by his death a great diminution. The Popes durst not touch him,
because he was the Kings Uncle.

Yet in one point he was mistaken, that he believed the report spread by
Riculfus, that those Epistles had been sent to him out of Spain, which at that
time was possessed by the Saracens, Mahumetans. Riculfus had raised that report
to persuade the world that he was not the forger of these Decretals, but that
Isidorus of Sevilia dead in the year of Christ 636. that is two hundred years
before this Riculfus was the Collector of them. Herein the forgery is evident
that this false Isidorus has put in his collection in the Epistles of Gregory
the second, and Gregory the third, and Zachary, who lived long since the death
of Isidorus of Sevilia. And that in the beginning of the same collection there
is a chapter of the order of celebrating a Council, where he alleges a Canon
of the XI. Council of Toledo held in the year of Christ 675. And that in the
Preface he speaks of Pope Agathon dead about forty six years since the death of
Isidorus of Sevilia.

Whence Errant Hinckmarus Rhemensis Episcopus, Trithemius and alii qui illam
collectionem tribuunt Isidoro Hispalensi*
Baronius in his Martyrologium upon April 4. gathers, that those men are
mistaken that attribute that collection to Isidorus of Sevilia. Which
collection we have proved to have been unknown to Leo the IV. dead in the year
of our Lord 853.

See the Prolegomen. of M. David Blondell, chapter 2.
These Decretals then have been forged by Riculfus, or some Frenchman, or German
of the same time. But Riculfus is with good reason suspected for inventing
them, because he did publish them under a false title. And because at that
time, and a long time after, the Ach-bishops of Mentz were the strong pillars
of Popery, and the first promoters of the Papal authority in Germany. For I
dare affirm that nothing has helped more to the establishment of the Papal
Empire then these Epistles, which have been a long time held for Oracles in the
West; By them the Father of lies has wrought very powerfully.

I will for the end mark here a notable lie of Baronius about this Hinckmar of
Rhemes, who has made us a way to find out the origin of these Decretals.
Baronius on the year of our Lord 849.. 13. says upon the Testimony of
Frodoard, that Hinckmarus obtained of Pope Leo the fourth by the mediation of
the Emperor Lothary, a Pallium or Archiepiscopal Cloak, with a privilege to
use it every day. But Hinckmarus himself in the book of the fifty five Chapters
says the contrary, speaking in this manner, Quanquam and quarti Leonis nomine
ac Benedicti authoritas mihi privilegia non a me quaesita contulerit; quia
sufficient mihi quae per sacros Canones unicuique sunt Metropolitano collata.
Leo the fourth, and Benedictus did conferr upon me some privileges, which I
did not ask for; For the privileges which are conferred upon every
Metropolitan by the sacred Canons are sufficient for me.

It was one of the Popes tricks to send Palls, and to grant privileges to them
that asked not for them, and had nothing to do with them: And to give to a
Prince or Prelate that which he had before: Then to go about to persuade the
world that the power of that Prince or Prelate was out of his grant and
liberality. It was a generous part of Hinckmarus to declare that he had no need
of the Popes privileges, and that he held his dignity from the Canons, not
from the Roman Prelate.

BOOK IV. PROVING By the HISTORY of the BISHOPS OF ROME FROM The year 300. of
the Lord, till two years after the death of Constantine the Emperor, which is
the year of the Lord 340. That in that Age the Bishop of Rome was not
acknowledged Head of the Universal Church.
CHAP. I. Of the Idolatry of Marcellinus Bishop of Rome, and of the Council of
Sinuessa.
LET us follow the thread of this History. In the year of our Lord 302.
Marcellinus Bishop of Rome burnt incense before the Idols, as we read in the
Pontifical of Damasus; Anastasius says the same, and Pope Nicolas the first in
his Epistle to the Emperor Michael. In those days they believed not that the
Pope could not err in the faith. This gave occasion to the forging of the
Council of Sinuessa, which is so ridiculously contrived, that it is not
possible that things should have been so carried. There Marcellinus lying down
on the ground, condemns himself, Baron. an. 303.. 88. and 101, 102.
the other Bishops saying that it belonged not to them to condemn him. Baronius
acknowledges plain forgery in this Council, and says that there is imposture
in it.

CHAP. 2. Of the Judges given by Constantine to Cecilian, and to the Donatists.
And of the Council of Arles.
IN the year 312 the Emperor Constantine newly turned to the Christian
religion, heard the complaints of the Donatists against Cecilian Bishop of
Carthage, and Felix Bishop of Aptunga, who had ordained him. To judge of their
grievances he appointed for their judges Melchiades Bishop of Rome, Maternus
Bishop of Collen, Reticius Bishop of Autun, and Marinus Bishop of Arles, with
other Bishops living near the City of Rome. The Emperor would not make the
Bishop of Rome the only judge, but joined others in Commission with him. And
Melchiades complained not that the Emperor disparaged his dignity. This action
of the Emperor displeases Cardinal du Perron: For in p. 363. and 366.
chapter 46. he says plainly that Constantine did that against all Ecclesiastical
order, taxing that act of irregularity and nullity; and that Constantine
protested so much. Baronius likewise, Ann. 314. Sect. 36. says that Ut Ethnico
Principe Aureliano hac in part long inferior Constantinus declaretur.
Constantine in that point was much inferior unto Aurelian a Pagan Prince, that
is, that a Pagan behaved himself better then he, and knew better what honor
was due to the Bishop of Rome. It is true that Constantine protested that it
belonged not to him to judge of the cause of the Donatists, which was purely
Ecclesiastical, saying that it belonged not to him to judge of a Bishops cause;
but he did not protest that his giving of Ecclesiastical judges to judge of it
was against all order. No doubt but that when Austin says, Ep. 162. and 166.
that Constantine delegated the trial of that business unto Bishops, among those
Bishops Melchiades was comprehended. Wherefore also he calls the other Bishops
August Ep. 162. Judicante Melchiade tunc Romanae urbis Episcopo, cum collegis
suis.
colleagues of Melchiades and his companions of Office. Eusebius likewise and
Optatus relating that History, put him in the same rank as the others.

For that Melchiades did not bear himself as judge of that question of his own
authority, but only by the Emperors command, St. Austin shows it, Ep. 162.
saying, Quid quod ipse non usurpavit? Rogatus quippe Jmperator judic^s m^sit
Episcopos.
Melchiades did not usurp that judgment: for the Emperor at the request of the
Donatists sent Bishops to be judges to sit with him, and to determine what they
should think just about that cause. Which I say, because the Cardinal has the
confidence to deny that Melchiades was appointed judge by the Emperor.

By these Bishops, the Emperors delegates, the Donatists were condemned, and
Cecilian absolved. But from that judgment the Donatists appealed to the
Emperor; who being overcome by their importunity, gave order that the cause
should be judged again in a Council at Arles; where the judgment pronounced by
Melchiades and his associates was examined. That Council was assembled by the
Emperors absolute command, as he says himself in his Epistle to Chrestus
Bishop of Syracusa, which Eusebius has inserted in the tenth book of his
history, chapter 5. We have (says he) commanded that a great number of Bishops
should meet at Arles the first of August. For Constantine thought not that the
judgment of the Bishop of Rome could not be retracted. Certainly the Bishops
assembled at Arles would never have made themselves judges of the judgment of
the Roman Bishop, if they had acknowledged him head of the Universal Church.
And Melchiades would have complained that the dignity of his See was thereby
damnified, and his authority diminisht: which yet he did not, and suffered his
judgment to undergo the test of a particular Council.

That this Council of Arles did not acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for their
superior and judge of their actions, it appears, not only because they were
assembled to be judges of Melchiades, and to examine his sentence given against
the Donatists: but also by the Acts of the said Synod related by An. 324.. 58.
Baronius. For that Synod writes to Sylvester Bishop of Rome, commanding him in
these words. Domino and Sanctissimo fratri Sylvestro Episcopo Marinus and
coetus Episcoporum qui adunati fuerunt in Synodo Arelatensi. Quae decrevimus
communi consilio charitati tuae significavimus, ut omnes sciant quid in futurum
observare debeant.
To our Lord, and most holy brother Sylvester Roman Bishop, Marinus and the
Assembly of the Bishops convocated at Arles. We have signified unto your
charity that which we have by common consent decreed, that all may know what
they must hereafter observe. They call Sylvester their brother, and give him no
higher style then that of Bishop. They ask him no approbation of their decrees,
but signify unto him what they have decreed.

An. 314.. 68.
Baronius brings forth another Epistle of the same Synod, which the learned
Pithoeus lent him, where that Synod gives a reason why they signify to him
what they had decreed, that he should make it known unto others. Placuit etiam
a te qui majores Dioceses tenes, per te potissimum omnibus insinuari.
We have given order that this should be declared unto all, by thee that
hold the greatest Dioceses. They say not, it is because he was the head of
the Church, but because he had a larger Diocese.

CHAP. 3. Of the deliverance and establishment of the Church under Constantine.
THat was the time when the Emperor Constantine having embraced, and professed
Christian religion, the Christian Church which had been cruelly persecuted for
the space of three hundred years, was delivered from that horrible oppression.
Then were Churches planted over all the Empire, and upon a sudden the Church
had a new face; and Bishops might meet with all liberty, to look to the
Government of the Church, and the union in doctrine. It was then or never that
the Bishop of Rome should have showed himself to take order with all things,
and give force to that new establishment, if he had been head of the Universal
Church. Then deputies from all parts should have come to him to be ruled and
guided in that raising of the Church, which Constantine did labor for with all
his power. At least the Emperor should have taken Counsel of the Roman Bishop,
and desired him to assist him with his authority. But no such matter. At that
time Sylvester was Bishop of Rome, who never appeared in that great work, and
of him the ancient Histories speak little more then if he had not been in the
world. Not one Epistle, not one action of his is recorded, whereby he
contributed to that new Creation: Which is largely and exactly descibed by
Eusebius, Theodoret, Socrates and Sozomenus. Upon these historians, all but
Sozomenus, M. du Perron bestows many ill words, as upon men ill affected to
the Roman Church; calling one Arian, another Novatian, another enemy to the
Church of Rome: And all these mere calumnies. That Is a short way to answer
objections drawn from the Fathers, to revile them. The Emperor had near his
person some Bishops whom he loved, as Hosius Bishop of Cordova in Spain;
Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea in Palestina; and some others, by whose counsel he
guided that so holy and so excellent work; not expecting the counsel, and much
less the will of the Bishop of Rome.

CHAP. 4. Of Arius, and of Hosius sent to Alexandria. Of Sylvester, and of the
Roman Council.
IN the year of the Lord 315. Arius began to trouble the Church of Alexandria
with his doctrine. That spark having met with fuel, grew to a great flame,
which has wrought greart ruins in the Church for many Ages. Alexander Bishop
of Alexandria, did virtuously oppose Arius; and the faithful Bishops of Africa,
Asia and Egypt, labored to quench that fire. The Bishop of Rome alone held his
peace, and being far from the evil, left to others the care of that matter. Had
he been head of the Universal Church, it was his part to impose silence unto
Arius, or to cite the contending parties, summoning them to appear before the
Papal See, or to send Legates to judge his name. But that was beyond his power,
and his judgment had no more authority then that of another. Therefore he did
not meddle with that business.

Ten years past in contentions, till the Emperor Constantine put his hand to
it. To that end he sent the above named Hosius to Alexandria, to appease that
trouble by his prudence. Here the boldness of Baronius is shamefully
licentious, presuming without bringing any proof, to affirm that Hosius was
Legate to Sylvester: seeing that the Historians testify that he was sent by
Constantine, and make no mention here of the Bishop of Rome.

Socrates in book 1. In the Greek it is chapter 7.
chapter 4. says, that Constantine sent Hosius, because the Emperor loved him
dearly, and bore him great respect. Wherefore Hosius returned not to Sylvester,
but to the Emperor who had sent him. Also Socrat. l. 2. c. 7.
Hosius had his letters and instructions from Constantine, not from Sylvester,
in book. 2. of Eusebius, of the life of Constantine, ch 63. there are letters
of the Emperor to the Bishops of Egypt, of which Hosius was the bearer,
wherein the Emperor declares why he had sent Hosius unto them. And in those
letters no mention of the Bishop of Rome. All that our Adversaries bring of the
Actions of Sylvester, is taken not from the authors of that Age or the next,
but from ridiculous Legends, which say that Sylvester baptized Constantine, and
healed him of the leprosy, when that Emperor would have prepared a Bath for
himself with the blood of infants. That he gave to Sylvester the Empire of the
West, and the City of Rome, and held his horses bridle. There is also mention
of a Dragon with whom Sylvester fought, and a thousand idle tales, which any
man that has common sense, and some small knowledge in ancient history, will
acknowledge to be false. Wherefore the Cardinal makes no use of them, and no
mention.

Of the like stuff is the Roman Council, which is found in the first Tome of
the Councils, where Sylvester is President, and where it is decreed that no
Kings shall be judges of the Bishop of Rome. But in that time there was no King
in all the Roman Empire. And the date of the Consuls is false: For Constantine
never had any colleague in the Consulat whose name was Priscus. And Crispus
Constantines son was dead before the time of the Council of Nice, after which
they set that forged Roman Council. That poor Council is a ridiculous fiction,
written in a barbarous style, where An. 324. Sect. 123.
Baronius acknowledges that there is not one line without a fault.

CHAP. 4. Of the diversity of the Churches in observing the day of Easter.
THE 324. year of our Lord, is the year immediately preceding the Council of
Nice. Then many Churches in the East retained yet the old custom to celebrate
the Feast of Easter upon the 14 day of the Moon of March, after the example of
the Jews: therein dissenting from the custom of the Church of Rome, and the
judgment which Victor Bishop of Rome had pronounced above sixscore years
before; and yet were they not therefore held for schismatics or heretics;
Eusebius. de vita Constantini, l. 3. c. 5. Sozom lib. 2. cap. 15.
for the other neigbouring Churches which kept Easter on the Lords day, chose
rather to live in peace with them, then to defer to the judgment of the Bishop
of Rome.

CHAP. 5. Of the Convocation of the Council of Nice. Answer to Chapter 42. of the
first book.
Cardinal du Perron.
IN the year 325. the Arians and Meletians continuing to trouble the Churches
of Egypt, Constantine was advised to assemble an Universal Council at Nice:
that is, a Council gathered from all the countries subject unto the Roman
Empire. It was not the Bishop of Rome that called that Council, but the Emperor
Constantine by his own authority only.

(...).
Eusebius in book 3. of Constantines life, chapter 6. says, that he assembled an
Universal Council, inviting all Bishops by honorable Letters, to come out of
all parts. Socrates book 1. chapter 8. Constantine convocated an Ecumenical
Council, inviting Bishops from all parts by letters to meet at Nice. Epiphanius
says the same in the heresy of the Ariomanitae, and (...).
Theodoret, book 1. chapter 7. And Ruffinus book. 1. chapter 1. And Sozomenus book 1.
chapter 17. Of the Bishop of Rome not a word among them all. The Bishops themselves
being met at Nice, in their Synodical Epistle to the Church of Alexandria,
which is in Theodoret, book 1. chapter 9. (...).
say that they were convocated by Constantines order, and say nothing of the
Bishop of Rome. And yet if he had been acknowledged head of the Universal
Church, the Council could not have been convocated but by him. Our Adversaries
confess themselves, that the Emperor did assemble the Councils. Pope Pius the
second before he was Pope, writ the Acts of the Council of Basil, where he
speaks thus in the first book; At ego dum veteres lego historias, dum actus
percipio Apostolorum, hunc equidem usum non invenio, ut soli Papae Concilia
congregaverint etc.
When I read the ancient histories, I find not that custom that the Popes only
have assembled Councils. And a little after. Nec post tempora Constantini and
aliorum Augustorum ad congreganda Concilia quaesitus est magnopere assensus
Papae.
Since the time of Constantine, and the other Emperors, the Popes consent was
not much sought for. And Cardinal Bellarmine, Bell. l. 1. r. de Conc. c. 13.
Because (says he) the Pope acknowledged the Emperor for his Sovereign Lord,
he desired him to convocate a Synod: but since that time things are altered.
Socrates in the Preface, book 5. says that (...).
the great Councils held before, and held still, by the will of the Emperors.
Wherefore also Hierome in the 2. Apology against Ruffinus, Doce qui eo anno
Consules fuerint? quis Imperator hanc Synodum jusserit congregari?
What Emperor (says he) has commanded that Synod to be convocated?
presupposing that it could not be assembled but by the Emperors commandment.

This hinders not but that the Emperor took advice of the Bishops that were
near his person, and was moved by their supplications, as Ruffinus says, that
Lib. 1. c. 1. Constantinus ex sacerdotum sententia apud urbem Nicaem Episcopale
Concilium convocat.
the Emperor by the advice of his Bishops did convocate a Council at Nice. Page
323.
The Cardinal says that Ruffinus would not make a particular mention of the
Bishop of Rome, out of the hatred which he bore to the Roman Church: But why
does he not say the same of Epiphanius? who in the 68. heresy In haeresi
Melatianorum. (...).
says that the care of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria induced Constantine to
assemble that Council? why should we charge Ruffinus of untruth there being not
one ancient Author that contradicts him? By the same reason any one might
confute with one word all that the Cardinal says in defense of the Pope,
saying that he speaks so out of the affection which he bears to the Roman
Church.

To so many forealledged witnesses the Cardinal oppseth only the Acts of the
sixth Ecumenical Council in the 18. Action; where these words are found,
Constantinus Augustus, and the Pope Sylvester of venerable memory did convocate
the famous Council at Nice. But this is taken from the Greek Copies of the Acts
of Councils, which are stuffed with lies, and which are but lately come forth
in print out of the Popes Vatican Library; From which nothing of that and the
like matters comes out but of dubious faith. And these Greek Copies contradict
the Latin, which are as bad. Besides, that sixth Council was assembled above
three hundred fifty five years after that of Nice, and cannot be opposed to so
many witnesses of greater antiquity, especially to the very Bishops of the
Council of Nice whose testimony we have produced. Wherein the Cardinals dealing
is unjust, Cap. 42. page 316.
to offer to allege in this question new Authors, and things happened many
ages after. For the question between us, is, whether in the time of the four
first Councils the Popes did convocate the Universal Council?

M. du Perron to escape out of this straight Ibid.
makes a distinction of two sorts of authorities: The one temporal, which the
Emperors used to convocate Councils; the other spiritual, which belonged to the
Popes. So that he makes a double convocation of Councils, the one temporal, the
other spiritual. Let us receive this new coined distinction. For it is much
already that he devesteth the Popes of that temporal power which they usurp in
our days. But he ought to have showed by ancient examples that the Bishops of
Rome made use of that spiritual power to convocate the Synod of Nice: which he
could not do. For the Emperor did not so much as ask the advice of the Roman
Bishop. The Pope did not convocate the Council, neither in his temporal, nor in
his spiritual capacity: For that which the Cardinal alleges of the following
Councils, convocated (as he pretends) some by the authority of the Popes,
some by their consent, (about which he spends almost the whole chapter) shall
be found false when the order of this matter will bring us to the time of their
convocation. And as for that Canon mentioned by Socrates, Socrat. l. 2. c. 8.
(...).
That Canons must not be made for Churches against the advice of the Bishop of
Rome, which M. du Perron has never done alleging and repeating, Aeneas
Sylvius de Gestis Conc. Basil. l. 1. Nec illud video semper obs^rvatum, ut sine
a^thoritate Papae Concilium non sit habitum, etc.
we shall see hereafter what force it may have, and how it is to be understood.
I will say before hand that the Page 316.
Cardinal falsifieth that Canon, translating (...), it ought not, instead of it
could not.

Pope Pius the second before he was Pope, did not acknowledge that rule. (r) I
see not (says he) that this was always observed, that a Council cannot be
held without the Popes authority: For the Council of Pisa was not assembled by
the authority of any Pope, seeing that Pope Gregory detested it, and Benedict
did abhor it, etc. Now if the Council of Pisa was not lawful, John was no true
Pope. For John was made Pope by that Council. But this Author being made Pope
since, altered his opinion, and craved pardon of himself.

CHAP. 6. That the Bishop of Rome did not preside in the Council of Nice.
Confutation of the Cardnials assertion, that Hosius was Legate of the Roman
Church in that Council.
IN the year of our Lord 325. that famous Council of Nice sat, which is the
first Universal, where 318. Bishops of the Roman Empire were present. There
were the Bishops of Alexandria, and Antioch. As for the Bishop of Rome,
Eusebius speaks thus of him in book 3. of the life of Constantine chapter 7. (...).
The Bishop of the City, which is the Capital of the Empire, was not there,
because of his old age, but his Priests there present filled up his place. It
seems that he regarded not so much Sylvester as to name him; and he speaks of
no other persons sent by him, but Roman Priest, that our Adversaries may not do
here according to their custom, saying without proofs, when another then the
Pope has been President of a Council, that the Pope had given him his place.

The Council then being assembled, if the Bishop of Rome had been acknowledged
the head of the Universal Church, his Legates had been Presidents without
question, and had taken the first place among the Bishops: which they did not:
for as for the exterior order, the Emperor Constantine was President, as it is
said in the Canon Futuram. C. 12. Q. 1. Constantine was president in the holy
Synod assembled at Nice: And that taken from a Decretal Epistle of Pope
Melchiades. And Lib. 3. de vita Constantini cap. 1. (...).
Eusebius says that he went into the highest of the ranks. And Theodoret l. 2
cap. 7.
says that he sat in the midst between the two ranks of the seats of the
Bishops.

But among the Bishops, he that presided, and conducted the action, was Hosius
Bishop of Corduba in Spain. This appears by the subscriptions, where H sius
subscribeth the first; And after him Victor and Vincentius, the Roman Bishops
Deputies. Athanas. Apol. 2. de fuga sua loquens de Hosio. (...), etc. (...)?
Athanasius who was there present, speaks thus of Hosius: Above all, and
especially was eminent that old man; for of what Synod was he not the
conductor? What Church has not the fairest marks of his presidence? And
Socrates in book. 1. chapter 1. does marshal them in this order, Hosius Bishop of
Corduba, Victor, and Vincentius Priests, Alexander of Egypt, Eustathius of
great Antioch, Macarius of Jerusalem. In that choice the Synod did not regard
the dignity of the chairs, but the virtue and the merit of the person.
Wherefore also Athanasius calls Hosius Athan. Ep. ad solitarios.
Father of Bishops, President of Synods, and says he made the Symbol of Nice.

M. du Perron, page 648. and 651. acknowledges that Hosius had presided in
that Council, but he says that he was Legate of the Roman Church; and that to
him were joined Victor and Vincentius as Legates a latere to represent the Popes
person. But he says that without warrant; for in the whole Antiquity no trace
is found that Hosius was the Popes Legate, or sitting there for the Roman Church
in the Council of Nice. For Eusebius, Sozomenus, Theodoret, and all that write
of of that history, speak but of two Legates sent by the Bishop of Rome. Had
Hosius been the Popes Legate to represent the Roman Church, he would have taken
that quality in his subscription. But thus he subscribes; In Tomis Conc. in
fine Concilii. Nicen. Hosius Episopus civitatis Cordubensis provinciae
Hispaniae dixit; Ita credo sicut superius scriptum est. Victor and Vincentius
Presbyteri urbis Romae pro venerabili viro Papa and Episcopo nostro sancto
Sylvestro subscripsimus.
I Hosius Bishop of Corduba, in the Province of Spain, believe as it is
written. And after him Victor and Vincentius in a line by it self, subscribe
thus, Victor and Vincentius Priests of the City of Rome have subscribed for and
instead of St. Sylvester our venerable Pope. Certainly if they had been all
three Legates sent by the Bishop of Rome, they would have subscribed together;
or at least Hosius had not omitted the quality, in virtue whereof he was
President of that Council.

Eusebius who was present in that Council, speaks thus of it, in book 3. of the
life of Cinstantine, chapter 7. (...).
Out of Spain there was one of very great esteem sitting with the whole
company: But the Bishop of the Capital City of the Empire did not come by
reason of his old age, but Priests which were present filled his place. Where
he does expressly distinguish Hosius from the Legates of the Bishop of Rome.
Theod. l: 1. c. 7. (...).
Theodoret says the same, But he of Rome, by reason of his old age sent two
Priests, etc. Sozomenus the same; Sozomen. book 1. c. 17.
For the Bishop of Rome, Victor and Vincentius Priests were present. Wherefore
Hosius subscribes for himself, not as a Deputy for another. Photius in the book
of Councils says the same, and Nicephorus in book 8. chapter 14.

To so many witnesses M. du Perron opposes the testimony of Gelasius
Cysicenus, who about 170 years after the Council of Nice writ the Acts of it.
That Author says that Hosius in the Council of Nice held the place of the
Bishop of great Rome. But this Cardinal should have been ashamed to produce a
place so notoriously falsified: For his Galasius in that place does copy and
transcribe the whole seventh chapter of Eusebius of the third book of
Constantines life; Which he ought to have faithfully transcribed, without
adding those words by such a gross and evident falsification. Certainly
Eusebius is more to be believed then he that has ill transcribed him. But
perhaps the fault is not in Gelasius but in him that has corrupted his book.
Besides that only Author who is later and of small authority ought not to be
put in the balance against so many others, that are more ancient, and of more
credit.

The distinction of those two sorts of Legates which the Cardinal brings, some
representing the Popes person, some representing the Roman Church, can have no
place here. For when the Western Church sent some Bishops to the General Synods
to speak for her, they called a particular Council before to make that
Deputation, and to give instructions to the Deputies. Shall we say then that
Hosius was named Deputy in some Synod held in the West, before the Council of
Nice? But we find no such thing, and no Author makes mention of it. To guess
that such a Synod was called as the Cardinal does without any proof, is a very
rash part. And to say that all that have omitted to speak of that, have done it
out of hatred to the Roman Church, is a confession of want of strength, and
that he finds no help in all antiquity.

In the same Council of Nice it was decreed that the Bishop of Alexandria
should signify to all the Bishops of the Empire, and by consequent to that of
Rome, the day of the feast of Easter. See Pope Leo Ep. 64. to Marcian, and Ep.
93. to the Bishops of Gauls and Spain. And the Paschal Epistles of Theophilus.
In the 135. Canon of the Code of the Canons of the Church of Africa, Cyrillus
Bishop of Alexandria signifies to the Council of Carthage that (...). etc.
Easter should be the seventeenth of the Calends of May. Had the Bishop of Rome
been the head of the Universal Church, he would never have received this order
from the Bishop of Alexandria.

CHAP. 7. Of the Canon of Nice, which sets limits to the Roman Bishopric: and
of the suburbicary Churches. Absurdity of the Cardinals interpretation.
IN the time of that famous Council lived one Meletius Bishop of Lycopolis in
the Thebaid of Egypt, who would withdraw himself from the subjection of the
Bishop of Alexandria, and confer orders without his consent.

The Council of Nice to bring him into order, made this Canon. (...).
Let the Ancient customs that were in Egypt or Lybia, and Pentapolis, remain
in force: so that the Bishop of Alexandria have power over all these, since it
is also the custom of the Bishop of Rome, etc.

This Canon being contrary to the pretended primacy of the Bishop of Rome, yet
the Legates of the Bishop of Rome alleged it in the Council of Chalcedon, to
establish the primacy of the Roman Pope, but adding by a notorious
falsification these words, That the Roman Church ever had the primacy. Acta
Council. Chalced. Action. 16.
But the whole Council with one voice exclamed against that, saying that these
words were not found in the originals and true Copies, which were produced. But
of that more hereafter. The sense of that Canon is clear. It was a received
custom in the ancient Church, that the dignity of Bishops was according to the
dignity of the place of their residence. As it is said in the 17. Canon of the
Council of Chalcedon, (...).
Let the rank of the Ecclesiastical Parishes follow the form of the civil or
public. (...).
The Council of Trul says the same in the 38. Canon. Wherefore the Bishops
jurisdiction extended as far as the Civil jurisdiction of the Magistrate of the
place. By that order and custom Meletius Bishop of Lycopolis was subject to
the Bishop of Alexandria, because the Prefect of Alexandria extended his civil
jurisdiction so far. So the Council of Nice will have that order to be
followed, and brings the Bishop of Rome for an example, who extended his
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to all the towns and places subject to the Prefect
of the town, which jurisdiction was of a hundred miles about Rome. Within which
space the old and the new Latium was contained, Valeria, Marcae d' Ancona
suburbicaria, and Toscana suburbicaria. The other Provinces of Italy, without
that compass, were called Annonariae. That was then the ancient limit of the
Bishopric of Rome, which the Pope from age to age has enlarged, and vastly
increased.

Herein Book 1. chapter 30. page 175. and 176.
Cardinal du Perron deals falsely and foully. He says that Augustus and the
following Emperors gave to the Praefectus Vrbicus of Rome the power of judging
of all the appeals from all the Provinces of the Roman Empire: and alleges
for testimony chapter 4. of the comment upon Notitia Imperii; where the clean
contrary is found, even that the power of the Prefect of Rome is limited to a
hundred miles about Rome. Augustus (says he) Cui omnem Imperii potestatem
Augustus concesserat, non tantum in urbe, sed and extra, intra centesimum ab
urbe lapidem, etc.
had given to the Prefect of the town all the power of the Empire, not only in
the town, but also without, unto a hundred thousand paces. And in the same
place Dio is alleged, who limits that power unto 550. stades or furlongs. But
the Cardinal takes hold only of these words; Augustus had given to the Prefect
of the Town all the power of the Empire, and leaves out the rest. Cassiod. l.
6. diversorum. Epist. 4. Ditioni tuae non solum Roma commissa est, quamvis in
ea contineantur universa, verum etiam intra centesimu^ mill^ariu^ potestatem
procedere antiqua jura voluerunt.
Cassidorus relates that the King of Italy speaks thus to the Prefect of Rome;
To thy jurisdiction not only the City of Rome is committed, although all things
be comprehended in it; but also the ancient laws would have thy power to extend
unto a hunded miles. And in the Theodosian Code in the second law de integri
restitutione, Codex, Theodos. lege. 2. Placuit usque ad anni tricesimi extremu^
diem spatia proregari, and intra ceutesimu^ urbis Romae milliariu^, si tamen ab
iis judicibus qui sunt Romae fuerit judicandum.
It is our pleasure that the Term be prolonged unto the last day of the
thirtieth year; and that within a hundred miles about Rome, if the business is
to be judged by the Judges that are at Rome.

The regions comprehended within that space of a hundred miles about Rome were
called suburbicariae: The others without that space were called Annonariae, of
which Trebellius Pollio makes a list in the chapter of the thirty tyrants. All
the testimonies alleged by the Cardinal in page 176. to show that the power of
the Prefect of Rome extended over all the Empire, say no such thing: and are
some false, some to no purpose.

Of the suburbicary regions frequent mention is made in the forealledged book
Notitia Imperii Occidentis, c. 4.
Notitia Imperii: where they are called suburbanae provinciae, because suburbia
Romae pertingebant, they touched the suburbs of Rome. In the Theodosian Code in
the 12. Law, de indulgentiis debitorum, these words are found; Picenum and
Thusciam suburbicarias regiones. Macca d' Ancona and Toscana which are
suburbicary regions. For the same reason the Churches comprehended within the
hundred miles about Rome, were called suburbicary.

Such then is the sense of the Canon of Nice. Let the Bishop of Alexandria have
the Government of the Churches of Egypt, of Lybia, and of Pentapolis; because
these regions are subject to the civil jurisdiction of the Prefect of Egypt:
According as the Bishop of Rome extends also his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
according to the extent of the civil jurisdiction of the Prefect of the City of
Rome.

Ruffin hist. l. 1. Et ut apud Alexandriam and in urbe Roma vetusta co^suetudo
servetur ut vel ille Aegypti, vel hic suburbicaru^ Ecclesiaru^ sollicitudine^
gerat.
Ruffinus relating that Canon of Nice, makes a Paraphrasis of it which
expresses the true sense; Let the ancient custom be kept both in Alexandria,
and at Rome; so that the one take care of the Churches of Egypt, add the other
of the suburbicary Churches.

To this exposition of Ruffinus the Council of Constantinople agrees; which
Council the Church of Rome receives, and reckons it the eighth Universal
Council. The 17. Canon is such, Sancta and universalis Niceae prior Synodus
antiquam consuetudinem jubet servari per Aegyptu^ and provincias quae sub ipsa
sunt; Ita ut horu^ omnium Alexand. habeat potestatem, dicens quia and in
Romanorum civitate hujusmodi mos praevaluit.
The holy and Universal first Council of Nice commands that the ancient
custom be kept in Egypt, and the Provinces subject unto it; so that the Bishop
of Alexandria have power over them all, saying that the like custom prevailed
in the City of Rome. That like custom is to have power over the neighboring
country: For the custom should have been very unlike, if the Bishop of Rome
had had power over all the Churches of the world, and by consequent over that
of Alexandria, which had no authority but over the neighboring Churches.

That exposition, though most certain and true, displeases M. du Perron,
because it sets very narrow limits unto the Bishop of Rome. The word
suburbicary, especially displeases him in that Canon. Wherefore he bestows
many ill words upon Ruffinus, unto which, though most of them injust, we need
not give any answer, because the Jesuit Sirmondus, who has written of the
Suburbicary Churches and regions, justifies Ruffinus as for that word of
Suburbicary, saying that this Canon is found in the Vatican Library, in an old
exemplary with the word of Suburbicary, which so troubles our Adversaries.

Others, as Baronius, extend the Suburbicary Churches further, even out of
Italy. Cardinal du Perron alone by the Suburbicary Churches, understands the
Churches of the whole Roman Empire, which is confuted by the words of the Canon
of Ruffinus, where the Churches of Egypt are expressly distinguished from the
Suburbicary Churches. It is a prodigious absurdity to call the Churches of
Asia, Syria, and Egypt, the Suburbicary Churches of Rome, that is, the
Churches that are accounted as the Suburbs of Rome. Never any man spoke so. By
that interpretation the Canon becomes ridiculous; for book 1. chapter 30 p. 177.
M. du Perron will have the sense to be this, Let the Bishop of Alexandria have
power over the Churches of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, since the Bishop of
Rome by the like custom governs all the Churches of the whole world. It is
indeed an intolerable bold part to sew such a strange piece of his own making
unto such a famous Canon; for after these words since it is also the custom of
the Bishop of Rome, he adds these, over all the world, or in all the Universal
Church: But in that Canon the Bishop of Rome is not set forth, as he upon whom
the power of the Bishop of Alexandria is founded, but as one that had an old
custom unto which the Bishop of Alexandria might justly conform himself.

Upon this matter we have already observed some falsifications of the Cardinal,
unto which this must be added. He makes Greg. Naz in carminib. de vita sua.
(...).
Gregory Nazianzen to say this; The Ancient Rome treads aright in the faith,
holding all the West bound by the salutary Verb, as it is fit for her that
presideth over the whole world. He translateth (...), her that presideth over
the whole world. But the precedent line shows that Gregory speaks of all the
West, not of all the world. He should there have translated, She holds all the
West bound by the salutary Verb, as she that has the precedence before all.
The Reader that will take the pains to consult the place, shall find that
Gregory speaks of the power of the Cities of Rome and Constantinople, and
regards as much the civil power as the spiritual, or rather more. Now Gregory
was not so ignorant as to think that Rome had a temporal power over all the
world, seeing that the Roman Empire did not reach to the tenth part of the
world.

In the same page he falsely alleges Irenaeus, making him say; Iren. lib. 3.
c. 3. Ad hanc Ecsiam propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse est omnem
convenire Ecclesiam.
With the Roman Church by reason of the more powerful principality it is
necessary that every Church agree. He should have translated, To that Church
because of the more powerful principality, (which is the power of the Empire
whose seat was at Rome) it is necessary that all Churches resort. For convenire
ad Ecclesiam is not to agree with the Church, but to resort to it.

Of the place of Austin, who says, that in the Roman Church the principality
of the Apostolical See did always flourish, we shall speak when we come to St.
Austins time. He that says that in the race of Hugh Capet the principality or
Royal sovereignty has always flourished, says not thereby that there are no
other Kings and no other sovereignty in the world. We shall see hereafter that
the same principality or pre-eminence of the Apostolic See was also attributed
to he Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem.

CHAP. 8. Of the Convocation of the Council of Tire.
IN the year of Christ 335. the Emperor Constantine commanded the assembling
of a Council at Tire, Eusebius. de vita Constantini, l. 4 c. 42.
without asking the advice of the Bishop of Rome. The Letters whereby he
commands the Bishops to resort from all parts to Tire, speak thus. If any
(which I think shall not happen) rejecting or despising our command, refuse to
come, we shall send some, who sending him into exile, will teach him how ill it
becomes [him] to resist the commands of the Sovereign Emperor made for the
defense of the truth.

That Emperor spoke thus indifferently to all Bishops, not excepting the
Bishop of Rome.

CHAP. 9. Death of Sylvester Bishop of Rome. How little his authority was.
AT the same time dyed Sylvester Bishop of Rome, of whom the Ancients make
almost no mention, as if he had been an unknown man: He was 22. years a Bishop
according to the computation of Baronius. And having lived in the most happy
and the most flourishing Age of the Christian Church, in which so many things
happened to the exaltation of the Christian faith, and so many constitutions
were made, yet was no Actor in any important action; but only that in obedience
to the Emperor he sent two Priests to be his Deputies in his place, to the
Council of Nice. And yet some doubt whether it was he or his successor Julius
that sent them: For Sozomenus, and Cassiodorus, and Beda and many more affirm
that it was Julius that sent those Priests. Upon which Cap. 35. page 279.
M. du Perron suspecteth that in Sozomenus instead of (...) it should be (...),
and says that (...) signifies venerable. Wherein he shows his ignorance in
the Greek tongue; For (...) signifies hoary or gray headed, not venerable. I
think indeed that Sozomenus was mistaken; Only I observe by this variation in
the history, that Sylvester was but little famous, and of small account, since
his actions are so little considered.

CHAP. 10. Baptism and death of Constantine.
IN the year 338. Constantine finding himself sick to death, caused himself to
be baptized at Nicomedia; Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constant. and in Chronico.
Eusebius writes it who was present, and Ambrose upon the death of Theodosius,
and Sozomenus in book 4. cap. 17. and Theodoret, lib. 1. cap. 31.

M. du Perron himself does acknowledge it, Chapter 35. of book. 1. p. 284.
Which I observe, to confute the fable of the Baptism of Constantine by
Sylvester, when Constantine turned Christian. A fable taken from the Acts or
Legends of Sylvester which Baronius gives gives us for current coin, herein
opposing all Antiquity, But Lib. 1. cap. 35. p. 289.
our Cardinal overcome by the truth, taxes Baronius upon that without naming
him.

Hitherto we have seen no trace of the Papal Monarchy. No appeal from the
Churches without the Roman Bishopric. No laws given to the Universal Church.
No persons of the East, or of Africa appearing before the Papal See to be
judged. No communication with the Churches without the Roman Empire. No
communication of Councils. No precedence in Councils. Yet we are come already
to the year of Christ. 338. Only some testimonies are found of the Ancients
that speak of the Bishops of Rome, as of successors of St. Peter. Not in the
Apostleship, or in the primacy over the universal Church, but in the Episcopacy
of the City of Rome. So all the Ancients speak. Eusebius in chapter 2. of the third
book of his History, Linus has held the Bishopric of the Romans the first
after the martyrdom of Paul and Peter. St. Hierome in the book of
Ecclesiastical writers, Clement is the fourth Bishop of Rome after Peter.
Tertullian in chapter 32. of the book of Prescriptions, The Church of the Smyrneans
relates that Polycarpus has been established by John. That of the Romans
gives Clement established by Peter. And we have heard before the same
Tertullian in chapter 2. of the book of Pudicity, taxing Zepherinus Bishop of Rome
for attributing to himself the authority of binding and loosing, which the Lord
gave unto Peter personally. Leo the first had his share of ambition. Yet the
ordinary title which he takes in the beginning of his Epistles, is, Leo
Episcopus urbis Romae, Leo Bishop of the City of Rome: And already it was the
450. year of the Lord. Why does he not call himself Apostle or Head of the
Church of all the world? Would the King of France in his Edicts style himself
only Lord of Paris, or Count of Tolose, leaving out the title of King?

CHAP. 11. How poor and weak and few are the proofs which Cardinal du Perron
brings out of the three first Ages, till the year of Christ 340. to defend the
Popes primacy.
OUR Adversaries are at no time more gravelled then in two points. When they
are put to prove out of the word of God that the Bishop of Rome is successor to
St. Peter in the Office of Head of the Universal Church; and when they are
called upon to show out of the history of the three first Ages after Christ's
death, that the Pope was then acknowledged the Head of the Universal Church.

Of them all M. du Perron is the man who with most diligence has searched the
Ancient History. Yet when question is of the History of the three first Ages,
and part of the fourth, it is woeful to behold what trouble he is put to, and
how little the first Antiquity is favorable to him in this matter. Which to
avoid he confineth himself to the time of the four first Councils, whereof the
first was held in the year of our Lord 325.

Yet that he may not seem altogether destitute of strength on that side, he
treats that matter in chapter 25. book 1. and from page 97. unto page 101. he
lays up all he could find in the first Ages which may serve to help up the
Popes Primacy.

He begins by Irenaeus, whom he puts in the next Age to that of the Apostles,
although he writ about the year 200. of Christ, or in the beginning of the
third Age. Out of his book 3. and chapter 3. he alleges ten or twelve times a
text, which he has falsified in the interpretation, making him say that with
the Church of Rome all Churches must agree, because of the sovereign
principality; whereas the right English of the Latin of Irenaeus is, That to
that Church (meaning the Roman) all Churches must resort because of the
sovereign principality; that is, because Rome was the seat of the Empire, where
the Christians of all Churches had businesses. The Latin text of this place of
Irenaeus we alleged in chapter 7. of this 4. book

Here the Cardinal needs not to trouble the order of times to bring an
authority of Austin, and another of Prosper, that have written above 200. years
after Irenaeus; who say, that in the Roman Church the principality of the
Apostolic See has always flourished. For we willingly acknowledge that the
Roman Church was the most eminent in honor, and the principal Church of the
Roman Empire, by reason of the dignity of the town, although it had no Empire
or jurisdiction over the other Churches, which, as well as the Roman, were
called principal and Apostolical, as the Churches of Antioch and Alexandria.
But of that, and of this place of St. Austin more hereafter.

His second authority is of Victor Bishop of Rome, who excommunicated the
Churches of Asia, because they observed the Feast of Easter upon the 14. day of
the Moon of March. We have showed that the sentence of Victor, whether he did
excommunicate them, or only separate himself from their Communion, was
altogether without effect; And that the Oriental Churches which were of the
same opinion as Victor, did not for that separate themselves from the communion
of the Churches condemned by Victor: Wherefore Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26. (...).
Eusebius says only that he endeavored to cut them off from the common union,
but that the action of Victor was not approved, and that many Bishops were
offended at it, and sent remonstrances to him about it. Irenaeus especially,
whose Epistle full of just reprehensions is related by Eusebius. Above in chapter
2. of this book. 4.
We have showed that in old time not only the equals did excommunicate their
equals, but also that inferior Bishops and less in dignity have often
excommunicated their superiors, and such as were of a higher degree then they.
That history of Victor we know only by the testimony of Eusebius and Ruffinus,
whom, because they speak to the disadvantage of Victor, M. du Perron rejects
as heretics and enemies to the Church of Rome, which is the shorter way to
answer the Fathers, when they say things that displease the Church of Rome. But
these accusations are false as we have showed. chapter 2. of this book 4.
And though they had been heretics, it follows not that their histories are
false. We believe Tacitus and Livy, though they were Pagans.

That which M. du Perron adds, that the Censure of Victor was followed by the
two Councils of Nice, and Ephesus, is most untrue. Indeed the Council of Nice
has condemned the Quarto-decimani; but without speaking of Victor, or
regarding his censure, which never was approved, and had no other effect, but
that Victor incurred the blame and the reprehensions of the holiest Bishops of
his time, as of Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, and of Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus.
The Council of Nice, which sat 125. years after Victor, took care of the peace
and conformity of the Churches, without any reflection to Victor, whose memory
was either forgotten or odious.

The Cardinal adds that it appears by Tertullian against Praxeas that the
Bishop of Rome had received into his communion the Montanists excommunicated by
the Oriental Churches: Whence he infers that the Bishop of Rome was Head and
Superintendent of the Universal Church.

He should have past by that example with silence, for the credit of the Bishop
of Rome, who cannot be praised for receiving Heretics into his communion.
Having failed in one point, which was to communicate with heretics, he might
also fail in another, which was to violate the Discipline of the Church, in
receiving to his communion those that had been excommnicated by other Bishops.
Besides, to receive those that had been excommunicated by others into his
communion, may be a proof of his dissenting from others, not of his superiority
over them.

He alleges also the same Tertullian, Above, 3. chapter of book 4.
who in his book of Pudicity calls the Bishop of Rome in scorn Pontifex
Maximus, and Bishop of Bishops. We have showed that at that time the Bishops of
Rome had not yet taken the title of Pontifex Maximus: For it was one of the
Emperors titles: and for another to assume it, would have been high treason.
The Emperor Gratian about the year of the Lord 379. or 380. renounced that
dignity, as ill beseeming a Christian Prince. We have seen also that the title
of Bishop of Bishops was given to all the Bishops of the first Sees of
Provinces, as well as to the Bishop of Rome: And that Cyprian at the entry of
the Council of Carthage does tax the Bishop of Rome upon the by, for taking
that title upon him. But the Cardinal was more wary then to add that Qualis es,
evertens atque commutans manifestam Domini intentionem personaliter hoc Petro
conferentem? lib. de pudicitia cap. 2.
Tertullian in the same place taxes Zepherinus, that under pretense of the
succession of St. Peter he usurped the power of binding and loosing, which he
says to have been conferred upon Peter personally, not upon the Bishop of Rome.

Thence the Cardinal passes to Cyprian, between whom and Tertullian there is
about 50 years, in which the Cardinal can find no proof of the primacy of the
Bishop of Rome. It would be a strange thing, if since the establishment of the
French Monarchy there was an interval of fifty years, in which it appeared not
that there was any King of France. Of Cyprian we have showed at large that he
held not himself in any thing inferior to the Bishop of Rome; and that he
called the Bishops of Rome his brothers and colleagues. And that he never
suffered the Bishops of Rome to take knowledge of businesses already judged by
the Bishops of Africa. That he called a Council purposely to oppose Steven
Bishop of Rome, and condemn his doctrine. That he writ letters full of high
reproaches to Steven. That the Bishops of Spain chose to follow his advice,
rather then that of the Bishop of Rome. That he believed that all the Apostles
were equal in power and honor since Christ's resurrection. Of all that we have
treated fully before, and examined the places which the Cardinal alleges out
of Cyprian.

To no purpose the Page 79.
Cardinal says, that Epist. 67.
Cyprian writing to Steven, tells him, Thou must write letters into Province,
and to the people dwelling at Arles, whereby Martianus being deposed, another
be substituted into his room. For Arles being nearer to the Roman See, Cyprian
thought that the Bishop of Rome had some authority at Arles. And Cyprian
labored about the same thing with those of Arles, as well as Steven. But what
does that to make him Bishop of the Church of all the world?

He adds that Firmilianus upbraideth Steven Bishop of Rome, that he boasted
of St. Peter's succession, upon which the foundation of the Church had been
laid, and yet he brought other stones, that is, other Churches. But he does not
faithfully allege the words of Firmilian, which are these; I am justly angry
against that folly of Steven, so evident and so manifest; that he should boast
of the place of his Episcopacy, and maintain that he has Peter's succession
upon whom the foundation of the Church was laid, and yet bring in other stones.
And a little after, Steven boasts that he has St. Peter's chair by
succession. He says that Steven boasts of it, but whether he has a just
title to it, he says not. Besides, that succession was only in the Episcopacy
of Rome, and Steven pretended to no more: Not in the Apostleship, nor in the
Office of head of the Universal Church. Which if Firmilian, a man of holy life,
had believed to have belonged to the Bishop of Rome, he would never have
opposed Steven, nor impugned his doctrine, nor given him so many ill words,
which are to be seen in his Epistle.

Yet the Page 99. and 100.
Cardinals words are notable. He says that Steven deprived Firmilianus and the
other Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Galatia from his communion, for the
same error of Cyprian, but more obstinately defended. He durst not say that he
excommunicated them, but only that he deprived them from his communion, that
is, he separated himself from them: For they did not leave for him to
communicate in their provinces, and to live in peace with their neighbors,
though of different opinion. Note also, that if Firmilian was deprived of the
communion with Steven for Cyprians error; much more should Cyprian the head of
that opinion, who persevered in it unto the end, have been dealt with alike;
and yet Cyprian remained in the communion of the universal Church; and Steven,
though condemned by Cyprian in full Council, never durst pronounce any censure
against him. Note also a manifest contradiction of the Cardinal. He says that
Firmilian and the other Bishops of the East retracted themselves, and left
Cyprians opinion; and yet he says that they defended his opinion more
obstinately then Cyprian himself, who yet persevered in his opinion till death.
They were then less obstinate then Cyprian.

But it will not be found that Firmilian did ever alter his opinion. Neither
Contra Crescentium, l. 3. c. 3.
Austin nor Hierome say so much. They speak not of Firmilian, but of the
Oriental men. For as for Firmilian, Lib. de Sp. S. cap. 29. (...).
Basil, Archbishop of the same town, not only put him in the rank of his
Catholic predecessors, but also partly followed his opinion. For in that
Epistle to Amphilochius he sets down a list of heretics which ought to be
rebaptized, as we have proved In chapter 1. book 4.
before. Eusebius Eusebius: l. 7. c. 5.
indeed says that Dionysius, Alexandrinus was a suitor to Steven for the
Oriental men, but he says not that he desired bim to forgive them, but he
entreated Steven to be reconciled with them.

The next allegation of the Cardinal, is, that Dionysius, Patriarch of
Alexandria, being suspected of heresy, the Catholics of Alexandria, instead
of calling upon the Synods of their Province, came to Rome to indite him before
Dionysius Bishop of Rome. This is deceiving ones self knowingly. For since the
provincial Synods of Egypt could not assemble without the authority and
permission of Dionysius the first Bishop of Egypt, how could the Egyptians
have recourse to their provincial Synods against Dionysius? Therefore the
enemies of Dionysius not being able to do him harm in Egypt, endeavored to
defame him everywhere, and carried that defamation to the ears of the Bishop of
Rome, to make use of his credit for persuading the other Bishops of Italy to
meet in a Synod, and examine the doctrine of that Dionysius. Which also was
done. But Dionysius Bishop of Rome commanded not Dionysius of Alexandria to
appear before his See. He pronounced no judgment in that cause. Only he
Athanas. de Synod. Arim. and Seleuc.
writ letters to Dionysius of Alexandria whereby he warned him that the Bishops
of the Synod were offended at some terms that were found in his writings, that
he might think to justify himself by writing, as also he did. But for any
action of judge or superior, none is found in the Bishop of Romes proceeding.

For want of better proofs, the Cardinal brings a Pagan Emperor Aurelianus,
who, when Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch, condemned by the Synod of
Antioch, and deposed, would not leave the Church nor the Episcopal house, gave
order that the Church should be given to them that were of the same belief as
the Bishops of Italy and Rome. That Emperor knew not what belonged to St.
Peter's succession, but esteeming the Bishops according to the dignity of the
Cities and Country, he named the Bishops of Italy and Rome for arbitratours.
If that passage may serve to raise the Bishop of Rome, the same may be said of
all the Bishops of Italy. For Aurelianus put them in the same rank.

Between that Aurelianus and the time of Julius Bishop of Rome, who was created
Bishop in the year of Christ 337. there is above 60. years. In all that time
Cardinal du Perron could not produce one example, nor one single action of the
Bishops of Rome, nor any text of some ancient Author that can serve for the
establishing of the Popes primacy. Which is the more considerable, because the
Empire of Constantine falls out in that interval, and with it the deliverance
and exaltation of the Christian Church, and a new establishment of Churches
over the whole Roman Empire. Then or never the Bishop of Rome should have
appeared, and there should have been a recourse to him from all the Churches.
But the Cardinal with all his diligent search could find nothing to that
purpose. And skipping sixty years with one leap, he comes to Julius Bishop of
Rome, who began to offer to raise himself, but without success, because of the
resistance which he met with, as we will show.

The Reader then may observe that from the Lords death unto the year 341. the
Cardinal brings but one testimony of Irenaeus, which he corrupts, and takes
in a wrong sense. Then an excommunication of the Bishop of Asia by Victor, an
idle action, and without success, and generally condemned. Then two places of
Tertullian, where he derideth and blames the Bishop of Rome. Then the example
of Cyprian and Firmilian, who resisted Pope Steven, and despised his authority,
so far that Cyprian assembled a Council against the doctrine received at Rome,
and defamed the Bishop of Rome with bitter invectives. Also the example of
Dionysius of Alexandria altogether useless and to no purpose. And finally a
judgment given by a Pagan Emperor, which puts the Bishops of Italy in the same
rank as the Bishop of Rome, and speaks not at all of Primacy, nor of
succession, in St. Peter's quality of Head of the Church; For in those matters
that Emperor had no skill.

Every careful Reader will consider the length of the time which is above 300.
years, and the weakness and small number of proofs, which yet are more against
then for the Popes; and will acknowledge that in the first ages of the Church
the Popes Primacy was an unknown thing. Also that the cause that made him more
eminent at that time, was, the dignity of the City of Rome, and the opinion
that St. Peter had founded the Roman Church; of whom the Bishop of Rome called
himself successor, not in the Apostleship, nor in the Office of Head of the
Universal Church, but in the Episcopacy over that City.

Here we must allways remember that all that M. du Perron alleges of those
Ages, as also of the following, for the Popes authority, is enclosed within the
limits of the Roman Empire: For he durst not affirm that the Pope had at that
time any superiority without the precincts of the Roman Empire.

CHAP. 12. Showing how our Adversaries being destitute of true proofs of the
Popes Primacy in the time that followed next to the three first Ages, have
forged false Epistles and supposititious Decrees.
IT is an an evident sign of an ill cause, when to defend it, the parties make
use of false titles. The truth is not defended with lies, nor Gods cause by
borrowing weapons from the Devil. Every man of good sense will carefully weigh
this, and judge what that Primacy may be which the Pope pretends unto, since to
establish it, so many false deeds have been forged. Of this I have brought
before great number of proofs, and intend now to bring more of the like kind.

In the beginning of the fourth Age, the Christian Church of the Roman Empire
being delivered from persecution, and settled in a flourishing State by the
Emperor Constantine, it was then or never that the authority of the Roman
Primate should have appeared, to give an order and form to that first
establishment, and to convocate Councils, and preside in them. But of that no
trace is found in all Antiquity. But we find that in that time the Bishop of
Rome sat still; and had no part in the government of public businesses.

To supply that defect, when the Popes Empire began to rise, many false
writings and supposititious Decrees were forged, in which the Popes power is
exalted to heaven. False Epistles of Marcellus, Eusebius, Melchiades, and
Marcus, were coined, where they made those good Bishops to say things which
they never thought on, and such as suit not with the time, and are repugnant to
common sense.

First the style thereof is barbarous, and has a relish of the cloister of
later Ages. These are some of their elegancies, Marcell, Ep. 1.
augmentande and eligimus persequi, to say we choose rather to be persecuted;
and Eusebius. Ep. 1.
nimis contristatus, to say very sad; and Eusebius. Ep. 2.
praesentialiter, and odiet; and Marcel. Ep. 2.
vos non potestis, speaking to one single person; and many the like flowers,
for which petty Scholars of the lower forms are whipped.

It is ordinary with those Epistles to wrest the words and texts of Scripture.
The first Epistle ascribed to Eusebius, calls Clarks spiritual, and Laymen
carnal. In the second he says that Jesus Christ has declared that he has
reserved Bishops and Priests to his judgment; when himself expelled the buyers
and sellers out of the Temple, and with his own whip. The Decretal of
Melchiades proves that after Baptism it is necessary to receive Confirmation,
because it is written, Psalm. 127. Unless the Lord keep the City, they that keep
it watch in vain, which is a very pregnant allegation.

In these Decretals the forgery is herein most evident, that they are stuffed
with lies, and things unsuitable to the time, and repugnant to the truth of the
history. First the date of most of these Epistles is false; For they are dated
from the Consulat of Consuls that never were in the world, or never were
Consuls, or such as were not Consuls together, nor at that time. For example,
the second Decretal Epistle of Marcellus is dated from the Consulate of
Maxentius and Maximus, but in the Fasti (or Chronological Annals) there is no
Consulate of Maxentius. Which Baron. Annot. An. 308.. 24.
Baronius also has observed.

The Pontifical of Damasus says, that Marcellus Bishop of Rome was condemned
by the Emperor Maxentius to serve naked in a stable, where he ended his days
in great misery. Yet there is a Decretal Epistle of that Marcellus to the
Emperor Maxentius, where he speaks to him masterfully; Haec vobis scienda
mandamus, ut ab his vos caveatis, We command you to know these things that you
may take heed of them. Who knows not that the Pagan Emperors that persecuted
the Church, assembled no Synods of Bishops? Such assemblies were made without
their knowledge as much as could be. Yet this pretended Marcellus speaks thus
to the Emperor Maxentius; Synodum ergo absque hujus sanctae sedis authoritate
Episcoporum non potestis regulariter facere, neque ullum Episcopum qui hanc
appellaverit sedem Apostolicam damnare.
You cannot regularly assemble a Synod of Bishops without the authority of this
holy See, nor condemn any Bishop appealing to this Apostolic See. If we
believe that impostour, in those days they appealed from the judgment of
Pagan Emperors to the Bishop of Rome; and Priests and Bishops were not to be
sentenced or tried by the Imperial Magistrates and Judges. Of which the reason
is added, That it is said of Bishops, I have said you are Gods, and you are all
children of the Almighty, Psalm. 82. That pretended Marcellus adds, that
Laymen must not be Judges of Bishops, because the Beat or blessed Clement has
so determined it by the instruction of the Apostles. Was not this well alleged
to the Emperor Maxentius? who questionless stood in great awe of Clements
constitutions, who was dead above 230. years before?

With the like imposture in the XI. clause of Gratians Decree, quest. 1. a
forged Decree of Marcellus speaks thus, Let no Bishop whether for a civil or a
criminal cause be sued before a civil or military Judge. For every Magistrate
that will be so bold, as to make such a command, shall be punished with the loss
of half his goods, and shall be deprived of his military girdle or belt. Is
there any man so stupid or senseless, as to believe that under the Pagan and
persecuting Emperors, it was in the power of the Roman Bishop to depose the
civil Magistrates, confiscate their goods, degrade them from honor, and
declare a soldier unworthy to carry the sword?

In the first Epistle of Eusebius, a prohibition is made to Laymen to accuse
the Clarks. And in the same Epistle, Eusebius writing to the Bishops of Gauls,
says, that he is very much grieved for their oppression. A palpable untruth.
For in the time of Eusebius, Constantine governed the Gauls, which had
suffered no persecution under him.

In the second Epistle it is said, that the statutes of Kings command that all
the estate of Bishops that are expelled or stripped of their goods, be restored
unto them, before any proceeding can be made in Synods against them. Never any
such Law was made by any Pagan King or Emperor. And there was none but Pagans
before the time of Eusebius. Besides, there was no King under the Roman Empire
in those days.

Crucis Domini nostri Jesu Christi, quae nuper nobis gubernacula sanctae
Romanae Ecclesiae tenentibus, 5. Nonas Maii inventa est.
In the third Epistle that false Eusebius speaks of the finding of the Cross, as
happened in his time, and commands the Bishops of Campania and Toscana to
celebrate the Feast of the same. But in the time of Eusebius Bishop of Rome,
Constantine was yet a Pagan, and turned Christian before his Mother Helena, of
whom Eusebius of Cesarea in the third book of Constantines life, chapter 46. says,
that she found the Cross of the Lord. Vide Baron. An. 311.. 41. and An. 326..
42.
Which could not be, but many years after the death of Eusebius the Roman
Bishop, who dyed in the year of our Lord 309. But Helena began to seek the
Cross a while after the Council of Nice, which was held in the year of our Lord
325.

The decretal of Melchiades to the Bishops of Spain, forbids them to judge of a
Bishop without the Popes authority, saying that it was always done so. This is
false. For the causes of the Bishops of Rome did not come to Rome by appeal.
This is seen by the example of Basilides and Martial Spanish Bishops, who being
deposed by the Bishops of Spain, had their recourse unto Steven Bishop of Rome,
who tried his credit to restore them, but the Bishops of Spain would not obey,
and followed the Counsel of Cyprian who dissuaded them from it. This is to be
seen in the 68. Epistle of Cyprian. The same Decretal of Melchiades declares
that Confirmation ought to be more reverenced then Baptism. Thus humane
tradition is set above Divine institution.

CHAP. 13. Of Constantines donation, and the untruth of it.
OF all the writings grossly and wickedly forged, the donation of Constantine
may well challenge the first place for bestial impudence and stupidity. That
Donation was long held for an Oracle in the Roman Church, and is inserted in
the first Tome of the Councils; and in the Roman Decree in the 96. Distinction,
Augustinus Steuchus the Popes Library Keeper, and Bartholomaeus Picerna, have
written in the defense of that Donation. Against which Laurentius Valla has
writ a Declamation, whereby one may see that in his time, it was an heresy to
doubt of the truth of that Donation; upon which the Popes have founded the
temporal power, which they pretend to have over the Empire.

The date and time of that Donation discovers the untruth of it. For it is
made by Constantine to Sylvester Bishop of Rome after Constantines baptism. And
yet there is another forged writing attributed to Melchiades, predecessor of
Sylvester, dead six years before the baptism of Constantine (if we believe
Baronius) where Melchiades speaks of that Donation, a thing done seven or eight
years after his death. That Epistle of Melchiades is inserted in the first Tome
of the Councels, and serves for a Preface to Constantines Donation. And
Gratian has put a piece of it in his Decree in the Canon Futuram, Causa 12.
qu. 1.
where also the Council of Nice is mentioned, which sat twelve years after
that Melchiades. In the same place Melchiades alleges a Canon of the Council
of Chalcedon, held in the year 451. a hundred and thirty seven years after his
death.

1. In the beginning of that Donation the Emperor Constantine calls himself
Hunnicus, as if he had defeated the Hunnes with whom he never had any war.

2. In the same place it is related, how Constantine being leprous was healed
of his leprousie by baptism, which was administered unto him at Rome by
Sylvester Bishop of Rome. But we will show in the following Chapter, that
Constantine was not baptized at Rome, but in the subburbs of Nicomedia; Nor
when he turned Christian, but on his deathbed.

3. In that goodly Donation, Constantine Vtile judicavimus una cum omnibus
nostris Satrapis and universo Senatu and cuncto populo Romano, gloriae imperii
subjacenti, etc. Successoris Principis Apostolorum potestatem amplius quam
terrenae nostrae imperialis serenitatis mansuetudo habere videtur.
says that he, and all his Satraps, and all his Senate, and all the people
subject to his Empire, have thought good to defer to the successors of St.
Peter, a greater Principality then to the Emperors: And that he has chosen to
himself the successors of St. Peter for Patrons toward God. How many
absurdities and untruths heapt up in few words! For this word of Satrap is a
Persian word, which the Roman Emperors have never used. To say the Satraps of
Rome, is such another mungrel expression, as if one said the Basha's and
Viziers of France, and the Sultans of England, and the Caliph of the Vatican.
How could Constantine have made such a Decreee by the consent of all the people
of his Empire and of the Roman Senate, seeing that most part of that people
were Pagans, and that the Roman Senate did consist of none almost but Pagan
Senators, and so was for long time after? Witness that designed Consul, who
said to Damasus Bishop of Rome, Hieron. ad Pammachium adversus errores Johannis
H^erosol.
Make me a Bishop of the City of Rome, and I shall be a Christian presently, as
Hierom relates in his Epistle to Pammachius. The same is seen in the 54.
Epistle of the tenth Book of the Epistles of Symmachus Prefect of the City of
Rome, written to Valentinian, Theodosius and Arcadius Emperors; where
Symmachus, as Orator for the whole Roman Senate, and for all the Citizens of
Rome, beseeches the Emperors to preserve the ancient Religion, that is, the
Pagan. And this was about the year 377.

4. By the same donation Et sicut nostram terrenam imperialem potentiam, sic
ejus. sacrosanctam Romanam Ecclesiam decrevimus reverenter honorari, and
amplius quam nostrum imperium and terrenum thronum sedem sacratissimam beati
Petri gloriose exaltari, tribuentes ei potestatem and gloriae dignitatem
imperialem, etc.
Constantine gives to the Bishop of Rome an Imperial power, and makes him
Emperor: Gives him power over the four principal Sees, of Alexandria,
Antioch, Jerusalem, and Constantinople, and over all the Churches of the
universal world: Whereas when Constantine turned Christian, the word of
Constantinople was not yet in the world, neither was then any speech of the Sea
of that place. The name of the Town was Bysantium, and the Bishop of the same
was but a Suffragant of the Bishop of Perinthus or Heraclea. And how could
Constantine have given power to the Bishop of Rome over all the Churches of the
world, seeing that many great Provinces and Churches were not subject unto his
Empire? Besides, if the Pope has received that power immediately from God,
what need had he of a Donation from the Emperor?

5. In the same Donation Constantine is made to say, that Eorum corpora cum
magno honor recondentes thecas ipsorii ex electro cui nulla fortitudo
praevalet elementorum, construximus.
he has enclosed the bodies of Peter and Paul in shrines of Amber, and built
the Churches of Peter and Paul at Rome; to which he has given great
possessions in Judea, Greece, Asia, Thracia, Africa, Italy, and in diverse
Islands, to furnish lights unto the said Churches. These candles were very
costly since so many mighty Provinces did contribute toward them. And to what
purpose did he give possessions to the Bishop of Rome in Judea to furnish the
Churches of Rome with candles, as if Italy had not been sufficient to afford
candles?

6. By that Donation De praesenti contradimus palatiu^ imperii nostri
Lateranense, quod omnibus in toto terrarum orb praefertur palatiis. Deinde
diadema, videlicet coronam capitis nostri, simulque Phrygium, id est mitram,
etc. and omnia imperialia indumenta, sed and dignitatem imperialium
praesidentium equitum, etc.
Constantine gives to Sylvester and to his successors his Palace of Lateran,
and the right of wearing a Crown like that of the Emperor, made with pure
gold, and set with precious stones, and to be clad in purple, and to bear an
Imperial Scepter, and all the Imperial Ornaments, and to have an Imperial
Power. Things which every one knows, not to have been in the Popes possession
in Constantines time, nor many ages after. And which Constantine could not give
without devesting himself of the Empire, and wronging his children.

7. Among the marks of Empire which Constantine gives to Sylvester, he puts
banta vel banda, words which Constantine and his Court understood not. And they
are much like the words that are found in the Capitularies of Charles and
Lewis. For that Donation was forged since their time, and was made purposely to
blot out the memory of their Donations. For the Popes will not have the world
to believe that they are obliged to the Kings of France.

8. The same Donation commands Viris reverendissimis Clericis in diversis
ordinibus eidem sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae servientibus, illud culmen
singularitate potentiae and praecellentiae habere sancimus, cujus amplissimus
noster Senatus videtur gloria adornari, id est Patricios and Consules effici.
that the Clarks of several Orders of the Roman Church be Senators, and
Fatricians, and Consuls of Rome. Upon that score the Roman Empire had multitude
of Consuls, and the Consulares Fasti; and the Chronicles of Eusebius, of
Marcellinus, of Cassiodorus and Baronius were mistaken when they put two
Consuls for every year, since all the Roman Priests and Deacons were Consuls,
yea perpetual Consuls.

9. With the like absurdity that Donation commands that Decernimus and hoc
Clericorum ejusdem sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae manipulis and linteaminibus, id
est candidissimo color decorari equos, etc.
the Roman Church, that is the Popes Court, have Chamberlans, Ushers, and
guards of the body, like the Emperor. And that the Clarks of the Roman Church
ride upon horses harnessed with rich trappings; that they be clad in white, and
wear white pumps; Things very suitable to the Apostolical simplicity, and which
in Constantines time had been looked upon as prodigies. Hier. ep. ad Eusto. c.
de virg. scru.
St. Hierom a Priest living at Rome, did not march in that equipage, and
derides a Priest that had fine horses, saying that he was called in scorn
Veredarius urbis, the Post-horse or the Postilion of the Town.

10. In the same place Constantine says Nos Phrygium candidissimi nitoris
sacratissimo Papae vertici imposuimus, and tenentes fraenum equi illius pro
reverentia Petri Stratoris officium ei exhibuimus.
that he had held the bridle of the horse of Sylvester the Roman Bishop, and
had done to him the office of a groom to help him to get on horseback. Was
there ever a fable so impudently invented? Is the least trace of that found in
so many ancient Historians, who have written the history of that time? Is it
credible that the Bishops of Rome that lived in the four or five following ages
(of whom some were pretty well stored with pride, as Gelasius, Hormisdas,
Vigilius,) would have forgotten such a submission of the Emperor to the Pope?
It is certain that this feigned passage was put in that forged donation to
bring the Emperors of Germany, and the Kings of the West to that ignoble
servitude unto which some have basely submitted themselves, defiling by a
shameful submission the dignity of their crowns.

11. By the same Donation Vrbem Romam and omnes totius Italiae and
Occidentalium regionum provincias, loca and civitates praefato beatissimo
Pontifici nostro Universally Papae concedimus, etc.
Constantine makes an absolute gift to the Bishop of Rome and his successors
for ever of the City of Rome and Italy and all the Occidental Provinces, that
is, France, Spain, the Isle of Britain, Sicily, Corsica, Sardinia, and part of
Germany; to possess all those Countries with power to dispose of them
absolutely and soveraignly. He adds that to yield the place unto the Pope, and
divest himself of the domination of those Provinces, he withdrew himself from
Rome, and transported the seat of his Empire to the Byzantine province, it
being not just that an earthly Emperor should have any power where God had
established the principality and the Head of Christian Religion.

If these things be true, we must say that Constantine has revoked his
Donation, and made it void. For Socrat. hist. Eccl. l. 3. cap. ult. Cum tres
filios haberet, singulos eorum imperii sui participes esse constituit. Primum
quidem filium Occidentalium partium, etc. Zozimus lib. hist. p. 2. Constantinus
natu maximus cum minimo natu Constante omnia trans Alps sita and Italiam and
Illyricum sortitus est. Vide and Aurelium Victorem and Sigonium.
Constantine dying shared the Empire among his three sons, Constantinus,
Constantius, and Constans; and gave to Constantinus Rome and Italy, as all
Historians testify it. And accordingly Constantius the eldest son kept his
Court at Rome and in Italy: And Constantius after his Fathers death, succeeding
in the Empire of the West, entered into Rome in great triumph, as it is to be
seen in Ammianus Marcellinus in book 16.. 1.

As for the Bishop of Rome, he was then so subject to the Emperor, that
Constantius commanded him to come to him, and when he could not bring him to
his opinion, he banished him, giving him five hundred crowns to keep him in his
exile, as Theodoret relates in the second book of his History, chapter 16. After
Constantius, Valentinian and Theodosius the great, and Gratian and Honorius and
two Valentinians reigned in Italy, and at Rome, in quality of Sovereigns, the
Bishop of Rome being subject unto them as the other Bishops of the Empire.

One only example will serve for all. In the year of Christ 418 two Bishops of
Rome, Eulatius and Bonifacius, were elected by two contrary factions of the
Roman people. The Emperor Honorius who at that time was at Ravenna, took notice
of it, and having expelled both the one and the other out of Rome, appointed
two Sergeants to keep Bonifacius. In the end both were cited before the
Emperor. The parties being heard, the Emperor gave sentence for Bonifacius, and
put back his Competitour: And thereupon made a Law which is found in the
seventy ninth Distinction of the Roman Decree in these words; Did. 79. Can. Si
duo. Si duo forte contra fas temeritate concertantium fuerint ordinati, nullum
ex eis futurum sacerdotem permittimus.
If it happen that two be created by the rashness of of the contenders, we will
not suffer any of them to be Bishop. The style of the Letters of Bonifacius to
the Emperor Honorius, is remarkable; Precamur sacra causa religionis, ut in
urbe mansuetudinis vestrae hoc animo quo postulatis and annuitis in perpetuu^
statui universalis Ecclesiae consulatis.
We beseech you for the love of holy Religion, that in the City of your
clemency, you provide for the State of the Universal Church, according as you
desire and grant. By these words he acknowledges that the City of Rome
belonged to the Emperor. As also the Emperor Constantius said to Liberius
Bishop of Rome in chapter 16. of book. 2. of Theodoret; Because thou art a
Christian, we have judged thee worthy to be a Bishop of our City.

The Roman Empire being overthrown in Italy by the Goths, Theodoricus King of
the Goths reigning at Rome, and in Italy, created the Magistrates of the City
of Rome, as one may see in Cassiodorus; (o) Among whose Epistles many Epstiles
of Theodoricus are found, where he disposes of the charges of the City of
Rome, and prescribes unto the Vicar and to the Prefect of the City the form of
governing.

In that Kings time Athanas. Paul. Diacon. Lib. Pontif. Sigebert. Platina,
Sigonius.
a schism happened between Symmachus and Laurentius, both elected Bishops of
Rome by two contrary factions. Of which, Theodoricus took notice, sending Peter
Bishop of Altina to make informations of the business, and to govern the Church
of Rome while that contention lasted.

In the year of our Lord 525. the Emperor Justinian had begun to persecute the
Arians. Theodoricus who himself was an Arian, sent Pope John Ambassador to the
Emperor to intercede for the Arians, and at his return from his Embassy put
him to death in prison.

To King Theodericus Athalaricus succeeded, who being informed of the Simony
and traffic that was used to get the Bishopric of Rome, prohibited by a Law,
and upon grievous penalties, the getting of the Papacy by faction, or bribery,
or selling of the sacred place, and caused that law to be set before the Roman
Bishops door. This is to be seen in book 9. of the Variarum lib. 9. cap. 15.
Diversities. Epist. 15.

The Emperor Justinian having by the means of Belizarius and Narses recovered
Italy, and destoyed the Kingdom of the Goths, became Master of Rome, as his
predecessors were. A law of his is extant, commanding the Bishops of Rome to
pay to their Emperor twenty pounds weight of gold for their entry into their
place, as holding it by the Emperors concession. That law is in the
Authenticks, or Novels of Justinian Novell. 123. cap. 3.
.

In the year of our Lord 654. the Emperor Constans bound Marinus Bishop of Rome
with chains, and banished him, appointing Chersonesus for the place of his
exile, where he dyed.

A thousand such examples I might bring, to prove that Constantines successors
had full power at Rome, and in Italy: and that the Bishop of Rome were their
subjects, having no temporal power. Else the Bishops of Rome ought to have
levied tribute and custom out of Spain and France, and created Magistrates,
and led armies, which never was done.

If Constantine made the Pope Emperor, and set an Imperial Crown on his head,
yiedling to him the whole Empire of the West; whence comes it that the Bishops
of Rome never took upon them the title of Emperors? Why did they not after that
donation create Magistrates in all the Cities of Italy and Gauls? And when
Theodosius divided the Empire between his two sons, leaving to Arcadius the
Empire of the East, to Honorius the Empire of the West; why did not the Bishop
of Rome oppose that distribution, saying that the Empire of the West belonged
unto them? How comes it that of a thing of such a principal importance, whereby
the Bishop of Rome is raised so high, no author of that time, or of many ages
after, makes any mention?

The reason which that donation alleges, is false, and contrary to the holy
Scripture: namely That it is not just that an earthly Emperor have any power on
the place where the Head of the Christian Church is residing. For unde the
reign of David and since, the residence of the Highpriests, Heads of the
Judaical Church, was at Jerusalem; which was also the place of the Kings
residence.

That prodigious ambition whereby a Bishop pretends that the Empire belongs to
him, and attributes a sovereign power to himself over the temporal of Kingdoms,
is contrary to the Apostles command, instructing thus his Disciple Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth, intangleth himself with the affairs of this
life. And to the 83. Canon of the Apostles. (...).
If any Bishop or Priest gave himself to war, and will have these two things
together, the Roman Empire, and the sacerdotal government, let him be deposed;
for the things of Caesar ought to be given unto Caesar, and the things of God
unto God.

12. Certainly that imposture, whereby of a Bishop of one City, subject unto
Emperors, and punishable by their laws, they will make an Emperor of Italy,
Gauls, Spain, etc. is so gross that I know not, which ought to be more admired,
either the shameless boldness of those that have forged these fables, or the
silliness of the people that would believe them, or the patience of God that
would suffer them, or his justice that punished the contempt of his word with
such an horrid blindness.

It is true that now of late some of our Adversaries are ashamed of these
things, and employ not that Donation to uphold the Popes power: and of those
some this Lord Cardinal du Perron is one. But as scaffolds are set up to build
a house, and when the house is built they are pulled down; So the Pope made use
of these forged writings to underprop his growing Empire, and made them pass
for good in an ignorant age. But now that his Monarchy is born up with the
power of Kings and nations, many have believed that they can reject these
supposititious things without shaking their Empire.

13. Finally that goodly Donation of Constantine Haec vero omnia and per alia
divalia decreta statuimus atque confirmavimus, usque in fin^m mundi illibata
and inconcussa p^rmanere decrevimus etc. Si quis autem. (quod no^ credimus) in
hoc temerator aut contemptor extiterit, aeternis condemnatio^ibus subjaceat
innodatus, and sanctos Dei, Princip^s Apostolorum, Petrum and Paulum sibi in
praesenti and futura vita s^ntiat contrarios, atque in i^ferno inferiori
concrematus cum diabolo and omnibus deficiat impiis.
enjoyneth that this pragmatick sanction of his remain firm unto the end of the
world. And if any transgress his ordinance, he will have him damned eternally,
and that he find the Apostles Peter and Paul contrary, both in this life, and
in the other; and that he be plunged into the lowest bottom of hell with the
Devil. So this Emperor sends into hell his own children that have reigned at
Rome, and in Italy, and in the West, in quality of Sovereigns. Yea he
condemns himself to be damned eternally, having retained the Empire of the
West for himself, and left it to his children. In which execration the Kings of
France and Spain, etc. are also inwrapped, since they style themselves and are
in effect Sovereigns in the Provinces which this Donation gives to the Bishops
of Rome unto the worlds end. And it is certain that by this Donation forged by
the Popes, the Kings of France, as also the Kings of Spain, are declared
usurpers and unjust possessors of their Kingdoms, since by that jolly deed they
belong to the Roman High Priest.

That the tail may be be like the body, this Donation is dated with a lie,
that is, with the Consulat of Constantine and Gallicanus, who never were
Consuls together. Read the Chronicles of Eusebius, Marcellinus, and
Cassiodorus, the Fasti Consulares of Onuphrius, and the Annals of Baronius, you
shall find no Consulate of Constantinus and Gallicanus together.

CHAP. 14. Of the Baptism of Constantine mentioned in the same Donation.
ALthough it is not material for the Popes primacy by whom Constantine was
baptized, yet the false coyners whom the Pope has employed, have thought that
it would increase the reverence of the nations toward the Papal See, if the
world believed that the first Christian Emperor was baptized by the Pope of
Rome in a miraculous way.

In that Donation it is related, that Constantine being covered with leprosy,
physicians prescribed him a bath of infants blood: But he being moved with the
cries of the mothers of those children, would not use that remedy. And that the
next night St. Peter and St. Paul appeared unto him in a dream, and warned him
that he should send for Sylvester Bishop of Rome, why lay hid in a hole of
mount Soract for fear of the persecution raised by Constantine against the
Christians, which Sylvester would give him another kind of bath that should
heal him. He sent then for Sylvester, of whom he asked what Gods Peter and Paul
were among the Christians: Then he received the Baptism from Sylvesters hand,
whereby he recovered health. That tale is taken out of the fabulous Legends of
Sylvester, whose Author is unknown. Pope Adrian the first tells that fable in
the first Action of the second Council of Nice, 360. years after Sylvesters
death.

We must know that Baronius, who receives this fable for a truth, puts that
Baptism in the nineteenth year of Constantine, eighteen years before his death,
in the year of Christ 324. choosing rather to give credence to these Acts of
Sylvester, which himself acknowledges to be much falsified and corrupted, then
to the testimony of so many ancient Authors, who testify with one accord, that
Constantine was baptized in the suburbs of Nicomedia in Bithynia, by Eusebius
Bishop of that place, a few days before his death.

Eusebius of Cesarea, one of the Emperors family, toward the end of the fourth
book of Constantines life, says, that he being sick in the Suburbs of
Nicomedia, he called the Bishops, and told them that he had purposed long
before to be baptized in the river Jordan, where our Savior was baptized. But
seeing that God disposed it otherwise, he desired them to confer baptism upon
him, which they presently did, a little before that Emperor gave up his spirit
unto God. To which Baronius answers, that Eusebius was an enemy to the Roman
Church, that he was an Arian, and that he devised that Fable. Truly Eusebius
in all his writings shows no enmity against the Roman Church: But that which
grieveth our adversaries, is, that he being the antientest and the most famous
Christian Historian, deferreth not any primacy to the Bishop of Rome, but
speaks of him as of another Bishop, and condemns the action of Victor, who
for a difference about the Feast of Easter, separated himself from the
Communion of the Oriental Church.

But what have they to object against Hierom, who in his Chronicle speaks thus,
Constantinus extremo vitae suae tempore, ab Eusebio Nicomediensi baptizatus, in
Arianum dogma declinat.
Constantine in the end of his life being baptized by Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, inclines toward Arianism?

Ambrose says the same in his Oration upon the death of Theodosius; Cui licet
baptismi gratia in ultimis constituto, omnia peccata dimiserit, etc.
Unto whom [speaking of Constantine] although the grace of Baptism conferred in
his last hour have pardoned all his sins, etc.

Socrates in the 39. Chapter of the first book of his History, (...).
Constantine went from Helenopolis, and came to Nicomedia, and there being
lodged in the suburbs, he received the baptism of Christian religion.

Theodoret in the 32. Chapter of his History; (...).
Constantine being at Nicomedia fell sick, and knowing the uncertainty of human
life, received the gift of the sacred baptism, which he had delayed till that
time, desiring to receive it in the river of Jordan.

Sozomenus in the last Chapter of the second book, (...).
Constantine was carried to Nicomedia, where, being in the suburbs, he was
consecrated with the holy baptism.

What more? a multitude of Bishops assembled at Remini write thus to
Constantius son to Constantine. Socrat. lib. 2. c. 37. (...).
Being gone from among men after he had been baptized, and transported to the
rest that was reserved to him. They speak of Constantines death. That Epistle
is found in Socrates in book 2. chap. 29. and in Sozomenus, book 4. chap. 17.

So many witnesses near Constantines time, ought in my opinion to be more
believed then a fabulous Legend of Sylvester, of which the Author is not known,
and which Baronius acknowledges to be full of untruths.

It is to be noted that Constantine embraced the Christian faith in the year of
the Lord 312. and that from his conversion he never ceased to do good to the
Christians. In that same year he made edicts in favor of the Christians,
granted immunities to Churchmen, and relieved with his own money those that
had been persecuted by Maxentius and Maximus, as is to be seen in Eusebius in
Constantines life.

In the year of our Lord 313. the Donatists appealed to Constantine as to a
Christian Prince, who gave them some Bishops for Judges, and convocated a Synod
at Arles.

In the year 318. having overcome Licinius, a cruel persecutor of the Church,
and being the sole possessour of the Empire, he raised Christian Religion in
honor and wealth everywhere; began to build magnificent Churches, gave to
Christians the Temples of the Pagans, and never gave over promoting Christian
Religion which he professed.

How can all that agree with the fabulous relation of the baptism of
Constantine by Sylvester, as it is set down in the Donation of Constantine? For
whereas that baptism was in the 324. year of Christ (if we believe Baronius)
that is eleven years after Constantines conversion, nevertheless in that
Donation the Emperor speaks as having received baptism immediately after his
conversion to Christian Religion, and as having always been a Pagan till that
time; saying, The Gods of the Gentiles which I have served hitherto are Devils;
and as having so little knowledge of Christian Religion, that he knew not
whether Peter and Paul were Gods or men: Which is repugnant to that Christian
profession which he had made twelve years before with so much zeal and
constancy; and to that which Baronius says, that Constantine from his infancy
had been instructed in the Christian Religion by his mother Helena.

But this is worse yet. That narration of Constantines baptism, which Baronius
will have to be in the year 324. speaks of that Emperor as of a persecutor,
who had persecuted the Church before his baptism; so that Sylvester Bishop of
Rome, was forced to hide himself in a Cave of Mount Soracte to avoid
persecution. Is it like that Constantine began to persecute the Church when he
was a Christian, and twelve years after his conversion to the faith, seeing
that even when he was a Pagan he never persecuted it? Does any Author speak of
any man whom he has put to death, or banished, or stripped of his goods for the
Christian faith? Such are the brakes of contradictions wherein those that have
sold their pen unto the Pope, entangle themselves; men to whom all fables are
good, so they may serve to exalt the Papal Empire.

BOOK V. PROVING BY THE Ecclesiastical History From the year of our Lord 340.
unto the year 400. That then first the Bishop of ROME would begin to exalt
himself, but missed of his attempt, and what hindrances he met with.
CHAP. 1. Of the persecutions happened to Athanasius. And how Julius Bishop of
Rome would make himself Judge of his cause. Of the convocating, sitting, and
success of the Council of Sardica.
NOw we are come to the time when the Bishop of Rome began to show his pride,
and to encroach upon the other Bishops of the Roman Empire; not by virtue of
St. Peter's primacy, or of any authority from the Word of God, but by virtue of
some Canons and Ecclesiastical constitutions. He called himself indeed
successor of St. Peter, as did also the Bishop of Antioch: But that succession
was only in his Office of Bishop of the City of Rome. In that consideration he
challenged no superiority.

A Council was convocated to Tire by Constantine. There Arius appeared,
protesting of his repentance, and giving a confession of faith conformable in
show to that of Nice. Wherefore the Emperor Constantine commanded Athanasius to
receive him to the Communion. Which Athanasius (knowing the hypocrisy of
Arius) refused to do. This with other causes so incensed Constantine, who was
desirous of peace, that he banished Athanasius, and sent him to live at Triers.
And the Council of Tire being transported to Jerusalem, sent back Arius to
Alexandria. Two years after, Constantine dies, having divided the Empire among
his three sons, Constantine, Constantius, and Constans; all three Orthodox at
the first; but Constantius, to whose lot Constantinople and the Empire of the
East was fallen, a Prince endowed with many virtues, yet was turned away from
the true faith by the Arians.

Constantine the eldest of the three, sent presently for Athanasius, and sent
him again to Alexandria, to be restored to his place. But shortly after, that
Constantine being slain, his brother Constantius that favored the Arians,
called a Council to Antioch, where Athanasius was deposed, and one Gregory a
Cappadocian was put in his place. Yet they that pronounced that judgment,
Socrates l. 2. c. 7. where they speak so; Nos neque Arii sumus sectatores,
neque aliam fidem quam quae ab initio divulgata* est recipimus.
made an open protestation that they were no Arians, and that they approved the
Council of Nice, as for the substance; only they were of opinion that the word
(...) or consubstantial, should not be used.

Gregory Socrat. l. 2. c. 8.
came to Alexandria attended with soldiers, where having environed the Church
with soldiers, Athanasius being within, officiating in Gods service with the
people, and in the crowd of the people going out, Athanasius escaped
undiscerned by his enemies that would lay hold of him; Then embarking himself
secretly, he came to Italy to live under the protection of the Emperor
Constans, who was Orthodox, and reigned in the West, having inherited his
brother Constantines share. That Emperor received favorably Athanasius:
Ruffinus l. 1. c. 19. Nihil sibi ultra jam tutu^ in regno Constantii
praesumens, ad Constantis parts profugus abscessit, a quo satis honorifice
religioseque susceptus est.
Athanasius (says Ruffinus) seeing that there was no more safety for him
within the dominions of Constantius, fled to Constans his side, who received
him with favor and reverence. Julius was then Bishop of Rome, to whom
Athanasius retired himself.

The Bishops of the East, who protested that they were no Arians, and that they
agreed in belief with Julius and Athanasius, to whom they imputed diverse
crimes, having heard that Athanasius was escaped from them, and fled to Rome,
sent a Legate to Julius to desire him to be Judge of their cause against
Athanasius, freely referring unto him the knowledge of the same, Socrat. l. 2.
c. 9. Legatum ad Julium Episcopum Romanum mittunt, ut ipse in causa Athanasii
judex esse vellet, litisque dijudicationem ad se transferret.
as Socrates says in the 9. chap. of the 2. book. And Athanasius in his second
Apology, (...).
They desired Julius to assemble a Synod, and to be judge himself if he would.

Socrat. l. 2. c. 12. Theodoret. l. 2. c. 4.
But Julius an ambitious man, and forward to lay hold of advantages, called
presently a Council of the neighboring Bishops: And the power that was
deferred unto him as an Arbitratour, he would use as a Master, and an absolute
Judge, alleging the prerogatives of his See above other Sees: So he undertook
the cause of Athanasius, and of Paul of Constantinople, and other Bishops
likewise exiled. And he writ letters with his Synod to the Bishops of the East,
rebuking them or their rash proceeding in the deposition of persons whom he
judged to be innocent. And by the will of the Emperor Constantius (as Ruffin.
l. 1. c. 19. Constantius simulata benignitate ultro venire ad se Athanasium
jubet, and levi increpatione perstrictum ad Ecclesiam suam permittit ire.
Ruffinus testifies) he sent Athanasius and Paul to their several Churches,
declaring that he restored them to their charges. They came then to their
Churches, but were presently expelled out of them. For the Bishops of the East
having received the letters of Julius, were very much amazed at his arrogance;
and assembling themselves at Antioch, they writ to him (as Sozomenus l. 3. c.
8. (...).
Sozomenus says) letters full of scorn and insultation, and of grievous
threatenings; saying, Socr. l. 2. c. 15. in Graeco (...).
That it belonged not to him to overruled them about those whom they would
expel out of the Church; as they also did not contradict him when he expelled
Novatus out of the Church. They said indeed that the Roman Church was
honorable, and had been a school of the Apostles, and had been from the
beginning the capital City for piety: But they added, that they that instructed
her, came out of the East; and that even themselves were not inferior to the
Roman Church, though they were unequal in greatness and number; yea that they
did even overcome the Roman Church in virtue. We see in the second Apology of
Athanasius, Page 579. (...).
that the Eusebians (for so the Bishops of the East, enemies to Athanasius
called themselves, because of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia their head) said
that they held all Bishops to be equal in honor, and that a Bishops honor did
not increase for being in a greater town: Which they said, to give to
understand unto Julius, that they held not themselves to be inferior unto him.

As for Athanasius, his living at Alexandria displeased the Emperor
Constantius, but because the people of Alexandria and Egypt maintained him
zealously, he held his peace at the first; but soon after upon new accusations
he threatened to put him to death. At which Athanasius being afraid, kept
himself hidden for the space of three years, till the fourth year after his
return; when being invited by secret letters of Julius, he escaped to Rome
again.

Socrat. l. 2. cap. 13. in latin.
The letters written with gall of the Oriental Bishops, to Julius Bishop of Rome
being delivered to him, he sent them an answer, but far milder and fuller of
respect then his former letter; having by that time learned that in vain he
justled against Bishops over whom he had no power. He told them that their
letters had very much grieved him, remonstrating unto them that in not calling
him to their Council, they had done against the Canons, seeing that there was
an Ecclesiastical Canon (...).
(...), that rules or laws must not be given to Churches against the advice of
the Bishop of Rome.

The Oriental men would not do so much for Julius as to answer his letters. And
Sozomenus in chapter 9. of book 2 says that Julius seeing how he profited nothing,
and made no progress in the cause of Athanasius, entreated the Emperor Constans
to take care of that business: And Constans favorably receiving Athanasius and
Paul, and many other Bishops who had been deposed and expelled from their
Churches, took that matter to heart, and writ to his brother Constantius,
Socrat. l. 2. cap. 14.
desiring him to send him three Bishops, that should declare to him the causes
why Athanasius, and Paul, and many other Bishops had been deposed and expelled
from their Churches. Constantius did so, and sent him three, who brought only
the confession of faith of the Oriental men, and without doing any thing else,
or speaking of the case of Athanasius, returned home. At which Constans being
sore displeased, writ to his brother again, desiring him, that since his
Ambassadors were thus gone away without doing any thing, a general Council
might be called by the consent and authority of them both; which was granted,
and the place was appointed at Sardica, a town of Slavonia, which town was
since called Triaditsa. This was eleven years after the death of Constantine,
father to these two Emperors.

Socrat. l. 2. c. 16.
When the Bishops were come to Sardica from all parts, the Oriental Bishops were
found to be but seventy six, many having excused themselves from coming, for
diverse causes. But by the diligence and solicitation of Julius and Athanasius,
about three hundred Occidental Bishops met at that Council. But the Oriental
Bishops foreseeing that they should be over-voted by number, would not enter
into the Council, and withdrew themselves to Philippolis in Thracia, where they
held a Council by themselves.

There they condemned the word (...) Consubstantial, and deposed and degraded
from the Episcopal charge, Julius Bishop of Rome, and Hosius Bishop of Corduba,
and all the favorers and adherents of Athanasius. On the contrary, the
Occidental Bishops assembled at Sardica, confirmed the doctrine of the Council
of Nice, and restored (as much as in them lay) unto their Offices and Churches
Athanasius, and the other expelled Bishops, deposed those that had deposed
them; And to anger the Oriental, who had deposed Julius the Roman Bishop, they
raised the dignity of Julius with all their power. Thus the East was separated
from the West, and the limit of the separation was a Mountain between Slavonia
and Thracia, named by Socrates Tisucis, and by Nicephorus Susacis.

The Council of Sardica being dissolved, the Emperor Constans seeing that he
had advanced nothing, came to the last remedy, and writ to his brother
Constantius, that unless he restored Athanasius and the others that were
unjustly expelled, he would denounce war unto him. These letters were of more
force then a Council; for presently after Constantius writ kind letters to
Athanasius, permitting him to return to Alexandria. But Athanasius, not daring
to trust him, staid at Aquileia, and stirred not till Constantius had written
to him three times. In the end after the third letters, he went to the Emperor,
who received him with very great kindness, and restored him by Imperial letters
patent, unto his Bishopric of Alexandria, giving him besides, letters directed
to the people of Alexandria for his restitution.

Athanasius now strong with these letters, goes from the Court, and passes
through Jerusalem, where Maximus was Bishop, who had consented to the
deposition of Athanasius; Athanasius signified to the said Maximus the Emperors
ordinance, and the Decree of the Council of Sardica: Of any sentence pronounced
by Julius Bishop of Rome he spoke not to him: as also Julius had given no
judgment this last exile of Athanasius. It is true that Athanasius brought
letters from Julius bishop of Rome to the Church of Alexandria, which letters
Socrates sets down whole in Latinis codicibus.
in chapter 18. of book 2. And indeed they are worth reading, for they contain no
sentence, and no judgment given by him for the restitution of Athanasius, but
only exhortations, and thanksgivings, that God had sent them again so good a
Pastor, who had been taken from them; and praises and justifications of
Athanasius.

Maximus Patriarch of Jerusalem, having heard the Emperors command, without
delay assembled many Bishops of Syria and Palestina, gave the communion again
to Athanasius, and restored unto him his charge of Bishop of Alexandria, as
Socrat. l. 2. c. 24. in Graecis exemplaribus. (...).
Socrates relates in chapter 24. of book 2. Maximus (says he) without delay
restored to Athanasius the Communion, and his dignity. This example is notable,
to show the power which all the Patriarchs pretended unto; Among whom that of
Jerusalem was the least of all.

That being done, Athanasius went from Jerusalem, and came to Alexandria, where
he was received with the applauses and unspeakable joy of the people of
Alexandria, and restored to his charge.

CHAP. 2. Three points which the Cardinal finds in this History to establish
the Popes Primacy. And the falsifications which he accumulateth in this matter.
AMong many things that abase the Bishop of Romes power in this history,
Cardinal du Perron finds three which he perpetually imployeth for the
establishing and exalting of the Popes power.

I. The first is that Ecclesiastical Canon which Julius produced, whereby it is
forbidden to give laws or Canons to the Churches against the advice of the
Bishop of Rome.

II. The second, that which Sozomenus says, that to Julius, because of the
pre-eminence of his See the care of all things belonged, and therefore he
restored every one to his Church. These two things are repeated and inculcated
in the Cardinals book above fifty times; so much he mistrusteth the Readers
memory. These two testimonies, with one of Irenaeus which he falsifieth, and
the appeal of Flavianus to Leo, help very much toward the bulk of his book, so
frequently he does repeat them.

III. The third point is, that Athanasius condemned by the Synod of Antioch,
appealed (as he says) to Julius Bishop of Rome. Of these three points it will
be easy for us to show the untruth, or the weakness, or the absurdity and
impertinence.

I. As for that pretended Canon forbiding to give any Laws to Churches against
the advice of the Bishop of Rome, it is not known by whom nor when it was made.
For before this Julius it is not found that ever it was spoken of, or that ever
any Bishop of Rome made use of it. The experience of the following ages will
show that it was the custom of the Bishops of Rome to suppose or corrupt
Canons, to advance their authority. So they did in the sixth Council of
Carthage, and since in the Council of Chalcedon, as we shall see hereafter. In
particular, as for that Canon which Julius produced, we have seen that in the
precedent ages the practice was contrary. For Agrippinus and Cyprian Bishops of
Carthage assembled Councils in diverse times, in which they made Orders and
gave Judgments contrary to the Roman Church, not expecting the advice of the
Roman Bishop, and thereby incurred no censure. And when the judgment of the
Roman Bishop Melchiades was revised and examined in the Council of Arles, the
Council expected not the advice of Melchiades, since it was in question of
voiding or confirming his sentence. Also we shall see hereafter many Canons and
Ordinances contrary to that Canon, as the Canons and Epistles of the Councils
of Africa, which excommunicate every African that appeals to Rome, and warn the
Pope that he take no more knowledge of their businesses. Wherefore the Bishops
rejected that Canon which Julius produced, and were so far from acknowledging,
Socrat. l. 2. c. 2
that they could decree nothing but with the consent of Julius Bishop of Rome;
that on the contrary, in that bitter Epistle which they write to him, they tell
him (using the very terms of that Canon) (...), that it belonged not to him to
make Canons for them, or to overruled them. They were Arians indeed, but they
were not ignorant of the Ecclesiastical Discipline. And this was never put
among the errors of the Arians, that they were disobedient to the Roman
Bishop, and did not acknowledge him head of the Universal Church.

But to do a kindness to our adversaries, I will grant to the Cardinal that
this Canon is not forged, nor suggested by the Bishop of Rome. But let him make
the best of it; it cannot serve to establish the Popes primacy over the
Churches of all the world, seeing that this Canon is but an order made among
the Bishops of the Roman Empire: As also the ancient Roman Bishops never made
use of this Canon, nor of any other to pretend a superiority over the Churches
without the precincts of the Roman Empire, and never meddled with their
businesses. Yea such Canons ruin and undermine the foundation of the Papal
Monarchy, and rob it of all that is alleged for it out of the Word of God. For
if God commands in his Word that the Bishop of Rome be head of the Universal
Church, what need is there of making Ecclesiastical Canons that command the
same thing? To what purpose had Julius alleged this Canon, if he had had a
divine rule at hand from his holy Word? Pope Gelasius who lived some 150. years
after this Julius, perceived that very well, and renounced all such Canons as
useless. For in the Roman Council held about the year 499. he speaks thus, The
holy Roman Church is preferred before all other Churches, not by any Synodical
constitutions, but by the voice of the Lord and Savior. But that which is the
strongest against that Canon which Julius alleges, and makes it of no use to
the Cardinal, is, that all the Patriarchs of the Roman Empire pretended to have
the same right, that no important thing should be concluded without them. John
Patriarch of Antioch grounding himself upon that rule, excommunicated and
deposed Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria, for proceeding to the condemnation of
Nestorius in the Council of Ephesus, without expecting his coming. And we shall
see in this same Chapter, that every Patriarch took care of all the
Ecclesiastical important affairs within the Roman Empire.

I must not omit that Chapter 32. p. 196.
M. du Perron alleging this Canon, commits three falsifications. He says,
that the Council of Antioch was taxed of nullity, because (says Socrates) the
Ecclesiastical Law Socrates l. 2. c. 8. (...).
prohibited the making of Canons or rules for Churches, without the sentence of
the Bishop of Rome. But it is false that Socrates says, that the Council of
Antioch was taxed of nullity. Then the Cardinal interprets ill (...) by because
instead of although. And these words (...) signify not as he thinks, without
the sentence, but against the advice.

He alleges many texts, either false, or taken in a wrong sense. He quoteth
in his margent the fifth Canon of Sardica, and sends us to the Comment of
Balsamon upon that Canon. That Canon of Sardica permits to the condemned
Bishops to appeal to the Bishops of Rome. But that rule is made only for the
Occidental Bishops, belonging to the Roman Patriarchat: For in that Synod there
was none but Occidental Bishops that could not make Laws binding the Bishops of
the East, who never obeyed this Council. And we shall see hereafter that in
Austins time, some 66. years after, these Canons of Sardica were unknown to the
Churches of Africa. Besides, these orders of Sardica were propounded by Hosius,
who presided in the Council, as a new thing, and submitted to the will of the
Council; As in effect, that honor was deferred to Julius Bishop of Rome to
spite the Oriental Bishops, who being assembled at the same time at
Philippolis, had degraded Julius and his adherents with disgrace. As for
Balsamon, the Cardinal was wiser then to produce his words upon the third
Canon, which is of the same sense as the fifth. These are his words, (...).
The things determined concerning the Pope, must be taken alike concerning the
Patriarch of Constantinople, because he was made equal in honor in all things
to the Pope by many Canons of Synods.

A little after, the Cardinal alleges an Epistle of the Council of Sardica to
Julius Bishop of Rome, which Epistle is not found in the Council of Sardica,
but in certain fragments of Hilary newly come forth. In that Epistle these
words are found, That it is most just and most convenient, that from all
Provinces the Bishops refer their businesses to their Head, that is, to the Sea
of Peter the Apostle. But that ought not to be understood of the Bishops of the
whole world, which is said only of the Bishops of the West that were within the
Patriarchate of Rome. The Bishops of the West only made this Canon, and made it
for themselves: For they could not give Laws to the Bishops of the East, or to
those of Africa. Much less could they give Laws to Bishops that lived without
the Roman Empire. And this word Head is attributed also to other Bishops, as we
hope to show in this Chapter, and is given to the Bishops of Rome in
consideration of the dignity of that Town.

The Cardinal adds, Page 197.
that when the Council of Capua delegated Theophilus to examine the cause of
Flavianus Patriarch of Alexandria, Ambrose writ to him, that after he has
judged it, he must get his judgment confirmed by the Pope. All that is full of
untruth.

St. Ambrose indeed, Epist. 78. writes to Theophilus, but not in the terms that
the Cardinal attributes unto him, but in these, Sane referendum arbitramur ad
sanctum fratrem nostrum Romanae Sacerdotem Ecclesiae, quoniam praesumimus te
judicaturum quae etiam illi displicere nequeant. Ita enim utile erit and
consultum sententiae, ita pacis and quietis securitati, si id vestro statuatur
consilio quod communioni nostrae dissensionem non afferat.
Truly we esteem that this should be referred to our holy brother the Priest of
the Roman Church; For we presume that thou will judge things that cannot
displease him. For so it shall be useful for the sentence and for the safety of
peace and rest, if that be established by your counsel, which shall bring no
dissension to our communion. He speaks only as giving Counsel. Yet Theophilus
Patriarch of Alexandria, and the Emperor Theodosius, did clean contrary to
that Counsel. For no report was made of it to the Bishop of Rome, who was
constrained to hold his peace, because he could not hinder it, as we shall see
hereafter. Which example, with many more, serves to give the lie to the Acts
of Ephesus produced by the Cardinal, which swarm with lies; as that the Church
of Antioch was always governed by the Roman: whereas the Roman Church never
had any power over that of Antioch. The thread of the times which we follow will
lead us to more examples. And that which the Cardinal adds of the appeal of
Flavianus, and of Theodoretus, and the like allegations, shall be examined in
their order.

A little after Chap. 32. page 198.
he alleges the 4. chapter of the 2. book of Evagrius, where it is said that the
Bishop of Rome is called the head of the Churches. A place alleged according
to the ordinary faith of the Cardinal, that is, falsely; for in that Chapter no
such thing can be found.

Indeed in that Chapter the Deputies of Leo Bishop of Rome, attribute unto
their Master more power then he had, saying that he had pardoned the Bishops of
the second Council of Ephesus, who yet never asked him pardon. For the Popes
will easily pardon those whom they cannot punish. But they call not Leo the
Head of all the Churches. And though they should have called him so, it would
have been of small force in the mouth of men that represented the Popes person.
The highest title they give him, is to call him, (...).
The most holy Archbishop of Rome the Great. They declare also that Leo had
deposed Dioscorus. Which hindered not the Council from judging whether he ought
to have been deposed, and from examining his cause.

As for the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, which the Cardinal brings in his
Margent, P. 198.
we shall see in the right place that the said Council has judged the clean
contrary; and that the places which he alleges in his text, are different
from the Greek which he has put in his Margent, as if he would have convinced
himself of falsehood. He makes the Council say, It appears thereby that all
primacy and principal honor has been always deferred to the Bishop of Rome.
These words all primacy, and this word always, are of the Cardinals addition.
There is according to the Greek, (...).
By the things done, and by the disposition of every one, we perceive that
before all things the privileges and the excellency of honor are kept
according to the Canons unto the most beloved of God, the Archbishop of the
ancient Rome. Is there any thing in that place that comes near the Cardinals
version?

Now they are Senators that speak, not the Council: and the excellency of
honor which they speak of, is a right of precedence, without any power of
jurisdiction. And that (say they) according to the Canons, not according to the
Word of God; declaring that precedence to be of Ecclesiastical, not of Divine
right. And in the same Tomo II. Council. Latin. Edit. Colon. An. 1572. p. 212.
Act. Conc. Chalced. Oportere aute^ and sanctissimum Archiepiscopum regiae
Constantinopolitanae urbis ejusdem primatus honoribus and ipsum dignum esse.
Session in spite of the Legates of Leo, the Bishop of Constantinople is
declared equal in all things to the Bishop of Rome, as we shall see hereafter.
And to go no further, the same Senators after the forealledged words add
these, The most holy Archbishop of the Royal City of Constantinople must have
also the dignity of the same honors of primacy. To examine all the
falsifications of the Cardinal, there is need of a volume by it self.

II. The second point in which the Book 1. chapter 43. p. 332.
Cardinal finds matter of triumph, is the testimony Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 2.
(...).
of Sozomenus, that because to Julius the care of all things belonged, by
reason of the dignity of his See, he restored to every one his Church.

Here first of all it is needful to know what was the dignity of the Sea of
Julius the Bishop of Rome at that time. His dignity was not to be Head of the
Church of all the world by Divine right. For that he brought no text of the
Word of God. About that there was no dispute at that time. But that which he
pretended by virtue of the forementioned Canon was, that being Bishop of the
first City of the Empire, a Council could not be assembled within the Roman
Empire, nor any Laws made to oblige all the Churches of the Empire, without his
consent.

We must know then that in the time of Julius there were four principal Bishops
in the Roman Empire, which were since called Patriarchs. That of Rome, that of
Alexandria, that of Antioch, and that of Jerusalem, (for that of Constantinople
was added since) which sat according to the rank and dignity of their Towns in
civil matters. All these Prelates, the three first especially, had that power to
take care of all the Churches of the Roman Empire, and wheresoever any disorder
did arise in any Church of the Empire, it was their duty to put their hand to
it, and to endeavor to mend it. Thus Basilius in the 52. Epistle says, that
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria (...).
had care of all the Churches as of his own; and he calls him (...), the head
and Sovereign of all. Which is the title that Sidonius Apollinaris in the first
Epistle of the 6. book, gives to Lupus Bishop of Troyes. Cum sis procul
ambiguo primus omnium toto qua patet orb Pontificum.
Thou art (says he) without difficulty, the first Prelate of the whole world.
The same Basilius in the 10. Epistle says, that Meletius Patriarch of Antioch
(...).
presided over the whole body of the Church. Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration
upon Cyprian speaks thus of him, Cyprian (...).
presided not only over the Church of Carthage, nor over Africa only, but also
well nigh over all the West, and even over the quarters of the East, from the
South to the North.

And in the Oration of the praises of Athanasius. They committed unto him the
presidency of the people of Alexandria, which is as much as saying, the
government of the whole earth. And Theodoretus in the book of Heresies, in the
Chapter that speaks of Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople, (...).
They committed unto him the government of the Catholic Church of the Orthodox
people of Constantinople, and together of the whole habitable earth. And John
of Jerusalem writ so to Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria. Thou like a man of
God bear the care of all the Churches, as Hierom relates in his Epistle to
Panmachius. Wherefore also these Patriarchs were taken for one only head,
making but one head among them; as Balsamon says, Theodorus Balsamon de
Patriarcharu^ legib. apud Leunclavium. (...).
We acknowledge the five most holy Patriarchs to be one head of the holy body
of the Church of God. And Gregory the first Bishop of Rome, in the 37. Epistle
of the 6. book, speaking of the three Sees, of Rome, Alexandria and Antioch,
says that Cum ergo unius atque una sit seeds, cui ex authoritate divina tres
Episcopi praesident.
it is but one See upon which three Bishops are sitting. It is then to be
observed, that all these Patriarchs attributed to themselves the care of all
the Churches of the world, according to the style then in use, and a long time
after, to call the Roman Emperors, Emperors of all the world; and the Roman
Empire, orbem Romanum, the Roman world; of which the examples are numberless.

According to that order taken among the Bishops of the Roman Empire, Theod. l.
5. c. 8 Vita Gregorii Nazianzeni praefixa ejus operibus.
Meletius Patriarch of Antioch confirmed the Bishopric of Constantinople unto
Gregory Nazianzen. And Peter Patriarch of Alexandria having done the same,
shortly after went about to set Maximus in his place. And Cyrillus Patriarch of
Alexandria condemned Nestorius; and Theophilus also Patriarch of Alexandria,
went to Constantinople to judge of the carriage of Chrysostom. And Maximus
Patriarch of Jerusalem, though he was the least of the Patriarchs, and subject
to the Metropolitan of Caesarea, yet assembled a Council, where he restored
Athanasius to his dignity, as we have seen. And the Bishops of the East, among
whom some were Patriarchs, sent back Liberius to Rome with letters to re-instal
him in the Bishopric of Rome.

Now then it is easy to apprehend how and in what sense Sozomenus says that
to Julius, by reason of the dignity of his See, it belonged to take care of all
things; And that the same might be said of all the other Patriarchs, over whom
the Bishop of Rome had indeed a right of precedence, because of the dignity of
the City, but had no jurisdiction over them.

As for that which Sozomenus adds, that Julius restored to every one, that is
to Athanasius, and Paul, and other Bishops their several Sees; It is true, that
Athanasius and Paul returned into their Churches, with letters from Julius; but
it is false that they were received by virtue of those letters, for they were
received by the love of the Churches that expected them with an impatient zeal.
But the Chapter next before this has showed that Athanasius could not subsist
in Alexandria; for a little after he came, he was forced to keep himself hidden
for many years, and never was made Possessour of his Bishopric, but by the
express order of the Emperor Constantius. For these depositions or
restitutions of Bishops made by other Bishops who had no power over them, were
but mere declarations of that they judged fit to be done. Thus Maximus of
Jerusalem deposed, and then restored Athanasius. And the Council of Sardica put
Athanasius again in his Office; that is, the Council judged that he had been
unjustly deposed, for Athanasius was not actually re-established by that Act.
And John Patriarch of Antioch, and Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria deposed and
degraded one another, in the time of the first Council of Ephesus, and kept
their places nothing the less for that. The following history will afford many
the like examples.

III. The third point which the Cardinal observes in the history of
Athanasius, is, that Theodoret hist. l. 2. c. 4. (...).
Theodoret witnesses that Julius following the Law of the Church, commanded
the Eusebians to come to Rome, and cited the divine Athanasius to judgment;
and the Cardinal puts that in the beginning of the 43. Chapter of his first
book, for the first example of appeals to the Pope; as though Athanasius had
appealed to Julius as to his Judge and Superior.

But in this Socrates and Sozomenus contradict Theodoret, for I have showed in
the precedent Chapter by testimonies of those two Authors, that Athanasius was
not cited to Rome to appear before Julius, but that he took ship secretly in
Egypt, and escaped into Italy from the persecution. Which is confirmed by Hierom
in the Epitaph of Marcella: Athanasius and Petrus persecutionem Arianae
haereseos declinantes; quasi ad tutissimum communionis suae portum confugerant.
Vide and Sozomenum l. 6. c. 15. Petrus Episcopus Alexandrinus clam carcere
elapsus, conscensa navi, ad Episcopum Romanum, utpote ejusdem fidei fautorem,
trajecit.
Athanasius (says he) and Peter flying from the persecution of the Arian
heresy, had their refuge to Rome, as to the safe harbor of their communion.
We have seen indeed that the Eusebians voluntarily, and of their own accord
deferred the knowledge of their business unto Julius; and that Julius abusing
the power which was deferred unto him as an Arbitrator, would act as an
absolute Judge, and commanded the Eusebians to appear before him; And that they
being exasperated by that arrogant dealing, writ to him taunting and threatening
letters. Since then the Eusebians declared unto him that they cared not for his
summons, what need was there to make any Summons or signification to Athanasius
residing at Rome to appear before Julius? for Julius knew that his adversaries
would not appear. And whereas Athanasius in his second Apology describes
exactly all that he has done, and all that happened unto him in this business;
why does he not make the least mention of his Appeal to Julius, nor of any
Summons made to him to appear before Julius? But if it were so; that such a
citation had been made to Athanasius, I would say that in that point Julius was
gone beyond his limits, and had done that which none of his Predecessors ever
took upon him to do.

We shall also see hereafter that the Appeals then made to the Bishop of Rome,
or to some other Prelat, were but supplications, that by his mediation and
request to the Emperors, a Council might be assembled, to revise the cause of
him that appealed from a condemnation.

In all the ancient history not one example shall be found, that upon an Appeal
made to the Bishop of Rome, he made the parties to appear before him, and gave
judgment in the cause; but that upon the Appeal the Bishop labored by
petitioning the Emperors to obtain a Council to revise the affair of the
complaining party. This will be seen in the example of Flavian, in its proper
place.

CHAP. 3. Of the Council of Sardica.
WE have seen in the first Chapter, by whom, how, and for what causes the
Council The Jesuit Peter Cotton in the second book of the militant Church chapter
23. shows his ignorance, calling this the Council of Sardinia instead of
Sardica.
of Sardica was convocated: How in the very entry it was divided into two
contrary Councils, and what matters were handled in both.

Whereupon a question arises, whether the Council being thus divided into two
parts or rather parties, the party that remained at Sardica, must be honored
with the title of Universal Council? Cardinal du Perron Chapter 53. of the third
Book.
maintains that it was an universal Council, and about that spends five and
thirty pages; thereunto moved, because in that Council Appeals to the Bishop of
Rome are commanded, and his dignity (as he takes it) is very much exalted in
the same.

For my part, I hold that dispute to be not only useless, but also absurd and
impertinent. For besides that it is indifferent to us, how that Council is
called, the dispute in effect is about a thing, which our adversaries and we
are agreed upon, the thing being so clear, that he must want common sense that
finds any doubt in it.

Two things then I say. The one, that if by an Universal Council we must
understand a Council assembled from the Churches of all the world, the Council
of Sardica cannot be called Universal, since there was no Deputy from so many
great Christian Churches, which were without the limits of the Roman Empire.
But if by an Universal Council, we mean a Council gathered from the whole Roman
Empire, in vain do our adversaries maintain that the Council of Sardica is
Universal, to exempt it from the possibility of erring, seeing that God has no
where promised to the Councils that they cannot err when they are assembled
from the whole Roman Empire.

The second thing is, that to know whether a Council be Universal, we must
consider first the convocation of it, and then the sitting of the same. For it
is very possible that a Council assembled from the Universal Empire will break
into pieces, and be divided into several dissenting conventicles: In which case
it would be a senseless part to call every piece by the name of the whole, and
to affirm that a party of Bishops keeping their meetings apart are an universal
Council: It is then manifest that a Council, the calling whereof was Universal,
may become particular in the sitting. It is manifest also, that to know whether
a Council be Universal, we must look more to the sitting then to the calling of
it; because when the Council is called, it is not yet a Council. Also that when
an Emperor has convocated a Council out of all the Churches of his Empire to
keep them in concord, and to reunite the dissenting parties; If such a Council
breaking into pieces becomes a match of discord instead of a bond of union,
that Council having changed his nature, must also change his name.

It happened then, that the Emperors Constantius and Constans having made an
Universal convocation of Bishops to meet at Sardica, the Bishops of the East
would not confer with those of the West, for the causes mentioned before; and
withdrew themselves to Philippolis in Thracia, where they held a Council by
themselves. Now the convocation had been made by the Emperors to rally the East
with the West; and therefore the convocation of that Council was called
Universal, because the East and the West were convocated to it. That uniting of
the East with the West being not made at Sardica; it were speaking against
common sense to call the Council of Sardica an Universal Council. Wherefore
also Epiphanius in the heresy of the Photinians, which is the 71. calls it
(...), an Occidental Synod: And Hilarious contra constantium. Damnas substantiae
nomen quo te Sardicensi Synodo and Syrmiensi pium esse Occidentalibus
mentiebaris.
Hilary the like in his book against Constantius.

Hinckmarus in the book of the 55. Chapters, chapter 20. The Council of Sardica, in
which above three hundred Bishops met from the Western parts; Yet they do not
put it among the Universal Councils. Nothing is more vulgar in Antiquity, then
to put the Council of Nice for the first Universal Council, the first of
Constantinople for the second, the first of Ephesus for the third, and the
Council of Chalcedon for the fourth; as it is to be seen in all the Editions of
the Councils, and in the book of Photius of the Councils. These are those four
Councils of which the Emperor Justinian in the 131. Novel, chapter 1. says
Praedictarum quatuor Synodorum dogmata sicut sanctas Scripturas accipimus.
that he receives them with obedience as the holy Scriptures. Pope Gregory the
first says the same. Epist. 24. l. 1. and l. 2. c. 10.
They put not the Council of Sardica in the same rank, for they speak not at
all of it, although it be far more ancient then the three last of those four.
M. du Perron himself, who in his book against his Majesty of great Britain
limits himself to the time of the four first Councils, by those four Councils
understands the above named, among whom the Council of Sardica does not make
one.

Unless perhaps we must say with the Cardinal, that the Council of Nice and
that of Sardica are but one Council: Which is a bold and prodigious conceit,
seeing that there is two and twenty years between the Council of Nice and that
of Sardica; for the Council of Nice was held in the year of the Lord 325. and
the Council of Sardica in the year 347. That was a pretty long pause. Besides
they were convocated by other Emperors, and in another place, and for diverse
causes: The one being assembled to decide the controversy of Arius; The other
to judge of the crimes imposed to Athanasius, and of the justice or injustice
of his deposition. And if the faith established in the Council of Nice has
been confirmed at Sardica, it is so far from reason, that thence it should
follow that it is the same Council, that on the contrary it follows that it
is another; For a Council is not assembled to confirm it self. And by the same
reason the first Council of Constantinople, and the first of Ephesus, and that
of Chalcedon, should be the same Council as that of Nice, because in them the
Symbol of Nice has been confirmed. The Council of Nice was composed of Bishops
out of the whole Empire, but that of Sardica had none but of the West. Then all
the Ancients testify that the Council of Nice made but twenty Canons. And M.
du Perron himself brings witnesses for it. But if the Council of Sardica were
the same as that of Nice, that of Nice should have 41. Canons. Even in the
Tomes of the Councils, published by our adversaries, the Council of Sardica is
not printed next to that of Nice, but many Councils are set between both. The
same is found in Balsamon, Zonaras, and the Greek exemplaries of du Tillet. Had
the Council of Sardica been held to be a part, or an appurtenance of Nice, it
would have so raised the dignity of it, and made it so famous, that it would
have been known and honored all over the whole Universal Church, and it would
have been impossible for the heretics to have suppressed the copies of them. Yet
we shall see hereafter that in the year 419. the Bishops of Africa had never
heard of the Canons of that Council, and knew not what it was. Among which
Bishops were those two great men, Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and Austin
Bishop of Bona; so little was that Council of Sardica esteemed, and so little
known.

In the Council of Chalcedon, in the cause of Bassianus and Stephanus, the Code
of the Canons of the Universal Church was brought forth, in which the Canons of
the Council of Sardica were not contained, as the Cardinal confesses. Which
Code he calls in contempt a Rapsody, and yet that Rapsody was in such esteem;
that it was read in the Universal Councils. And that which the Cardinal says
is false, that in the Council of Chalcedon another copy of those Canons was
produced where the Councils were distinct. For there was but one copy produced,
in which the Canons of the Councils are set down all along without distinction
of the Councils. Only the Canons of the Councils are set in order, according to
the time of the sitting of every Council. Thus in the fourth and sixth Action
of the Council of Chalcedon, the 3, 4, 6, and 17. Canons of the Council of
Antioch, are read under the simple quotation of the Canon 84, 85, 94, and 95.
without any mention of the Council of Antioch. That which the Cardinal says,
that in the Council of Chalcedon in the fourth and fifteenth Action, the fourth
and sixth Canons of Nice are alleged, may probably serve to show that there
were copies in the Council of Chalcedon of every Council by it self, but not
that a Code of the Universal Church was produced where the Councils were
distinct. And which is more. It shall not be found that such allegations were
made, as the Cardinal says. So there is falsehood in this.

Pope Nicolas the first in his Epistle to Photius says, that the Greek Church
had not that Council. The same is averred by the Canon Quod dicitis in the
sixteenth distinction. And Dionysius Parvus a Roman Abbot, contemporary to the
Emperor Justinian, who made the version of the Greek Canons, Du Perron c. 53.
p. 492.
says that he has added to them the Canons of Sardica, having taken them out
of the Latin exemplaries; For they were not in the Code of the Canons of the
Universal Church.

Many the like things show that this Council was little esteemed among the
Ancients: so far it was from being put among the Universal Councils. And it is
evident, that although the convocation of it was general, yet the sitting was
particular.

But we need not to insist any more upon that, since M. du Perron joins with
this truth; saying in the 41. chapter At the least the convocation of it was
Universal. Page 117.
Which we grant, and so must all those Authors be understood whom the Cardinal
brings forth, who give to this Council the title of Universal, unless we will
say that they spoke against common sense.

Now the cause why M. du Perron exalts with all his power the authority of
the Council of Sardica, is, that three Canons were made there, wherein Hosius
President of the Council beseeches the Assembly to consent, that hereafter the
condemned Bishops who think themselves aggrieved, may address themselves to
Julius Bishop of Rome, who will appoint other Judges to revise the business:
And that if a Bishop be deposed, another may not be put in his place before the
Bishop of Rome has taken it into his consideration.

These are the Canons which Bonifacius and Celestinus presented to the sixth
Council of Carthage, falsely affirming that they were the Canons of the Council
of Nice; Which was acknowlegded for an imposture by the Council.

To know of what weight these Canons may be, we must consider, that they were
made by the Occidental Bishops only, such as belonged to the Roman Patriarchat:
And by consequent that this Law cannot oblige the Churches of the whole Roman
Empire, as in effect we have seen, and shall see that this ordet was unknown in
Africa.

It is also to be considered that Julius had been deposed and reviled by the
Bishops of the East, which were at the same time assembled at Philippolis:
which made the Western Bishops to exalt Julius as much as they could to grieve
the Eastern Bishops. It is very remakable also that this order is set down in
words of the future, and that Hosius who makes the motion, desires that it may
be so hereafter, showing thereby that it was not so before. But that which is
most considerable, is, that this order is submitted to the will and pleasure of
the Bishops of the Council, in these words, (...), if it seems good unto you,
or if it be your pleasure; which is a manifest declaration that it was not so
before, and that this order is not grounded upon the word of God, which must
not be submitted unto the will of men, and has no need to be authorized by
Ecclesiastical Canons. Wherefore also it had no force, and was not practiced,
as the history of the following times will justify.

CHAP. 4. Of the Convocation of the Council of Sardica. How much the Cardinal
is mistaken in it.
CArdinal du Perron in chapter 42. of his first book, will persuade us that the
Council of Sardica was convocated by Julius Bishop of Rome. This is
contradicted by the Ancient writers. Socrates in book 2. chapter 16. A general
Council is published to meet at Sardica by the ordinance of both the Emperors.

And Sozomenus in book 2. chapter 10. By the ordinance of the two Emperors it was
decreed that the Bishops of both sides should meet at Sardica, a town of
Illyricum or Slavonia, upon an appointed day. The Bishops themselves being
assembled at Sardica, testify the same in the Epistle which they write to all
the Bishops of the Roman Empire, related by Theodoret in the second book of his
history, chapter 7. The most religious Emperors, hy the assistance of Gods grace
have convocated us from diverse Provinces and Towns, and have assembled this
most holy Synod in the town of Sardica. These (in my opinion) are credible
witnesses.

Here M. du Perron to prove that Julius had convocated the Council of Sardica,
alleges some places out of Athanasius, in which Julius is desired by Eusebius
of Nicomedia to convocate a Synod. But herein the Cardinal commits an evident
fraud; for the Council which Julius assembled at the request of the Eusebians,
was not the Council of Sardica, of which the convocation was universal, but a
Council of Bishops about Rome, which was no more then all Metropolitans could
do in their Diocese. Of that petty Council assembled by Julius, we spoke before
in chapter 1. of this book 5.

CHAP. 5. Of the Presidency in the Council of Sardica.
IN that Council the order of sitting was such, according to the testimony of
Athanasius Atha. Apol. 2. (...).
in the second Apology. Hosius Bishop of Cordova presided, and after him sat
the Deputies of Julius the Roman Bishop, Archidamus and Philoxenus. Their
subscriptions were thus set down.

Hosius ab Hispania,
Julius Romae, per Archidamum and Philoxenum
Presbyteros suos.
Hosius then in the quality of Bishop of Spain (for he takes no other quality)
presideth in that Council, and sits above the Legates of the Bishop of Rome.
That honor was deferred unto him in consideration of his age and his virtue.
It cannot be said that he was Legate of Julius, and that he presided in that
quality; for not only he takes not that quality, but also he is put in a place
by it self, and set before Julius himself: for after that subscription, Hosius
ab Hispania, it is added, Julius Romae per Archidamum and Philoxenum
Presbyteros suos.

If Hosius had presided as a Legate of the Roman Prelate, Julius ought to have
subscribed thus, Julius Romae, per Hosium Episcopum Hispaniae, and per
Archidamum and Philoxenum Presbyteros suos. They that affirm that Hosius was
the Popes Legate in this Council, speak it without proof, and bring no ancient
Author for it.

CHAP. 6. Of Liberius Bishop of Rome, and of the Schism after his death.
ABout the year of the Lord 352. Julius being dead, Liberius succeeded him in
the Bishopric of the City of Rome. That Liberius following the steps of his
predecessor, would at the first use command and authority over Athanasius, and
bear himself as judge of his businesses. But the Bishops of Egypt being eighty
in number, assembled in a Synod, defended their Patriarch. This stopped Liberius,
and moved him to seek peace with Athanasius his old friend: So he writ to him
letters full of respect and love, and sent to him his confession and sense
about the faith. If (says he) thou art of my opinion, I beseech thee before
God the Judge, and before Jesus Christ, that thou subscribe to it, that we may
be certified that thou art of the same opinion as we, and that thou hold the
same things concerning the true faith, (...) etc.
that I may be assured without doubting of the things that thou willt command
me. O how remote is that style from the pride of our time! And what Pope would
undergo the command of any other Bishop? or receive rules of his faith from
him? Or give reason of his faith to him by expess letters?

Who so will see the lowness and the subjection of the Roman Bishop under the
Emperor of Rome at that time, let him read chapter 16. of book 2. of the history of
Theodoret, Sozom. l. 4. c. 10-
where there is a Dialogue between Liberius and the Emperor Constantius, who
speaking with Liberius as a Monarch to his subject, banisheth him, and appoints
him 500 crowns to keep him in his exile. This Liberius after two years exile in
the end yielded to the persecution, and subscribed to the Confession of the
Arians made at Syrmium (as Athanasius (...).
testifies in his Epistle to the Solitaries: And Hierome in his Catalogue,
where he speaks of Fortunatian; And Hilary in his fragments, and many more) For
which cause the Emperor sent him back to Rome, to govern the Church with
Felix, so that they might be fellow-bishops of Rome. And these two did govern
jointly, till Felix being dead, Liberius remained alone. Certainly, if the
Bishop of Rome had been acknowledged at that time the Head of the Universal
Church, the Universal Church would never have suffered two men to hold that
place, and two Sovereign Prelates in one chair. We must not omit that which
Ammianus Marcellinus observes, that Constantius earnestly desired to draw
Liberius Bishop of the eternal City (that is of Rome) to his party, placing the
dignity of the Roman Bishops in the dignity of the City which was highly
respected.

In the year of Christ 367. Liberius being dead, two competitors of the
Bishopric, Damasus and Vrsicinus came to handy blows, in so much that in a
Church at Rome were found a hundred thirty and seven bodies of men slain in
that sedition, as Ammianus Marcellinus relates, in chapter 2. of book 27. where
that Pagan Author Neque ego abnuo hujus rei cupidos ad impetrandum quod
appe^^nt omni contentione laterum jurgari debere, quum id adepti futuri sint
adeo securi ut ditentur oblationibus matronarum, procedamque vehiculis
insidentes, circumspecte vestiti, epulas curantes profusas, adeo ut eorum
convivia regales superent mensas, etc.
describes the vices of the Bishops of Rome, their greediness to catch the
offerings of the Matrons, their sumptuous garments, their superfluous feasts,
their ambition to attain to that degree. His words are notable; I deny not,
considering the magnificence of the State of the City, that they that seek that
honor [to be Bishops of Rome] have reason to strive with all their strength to
obtain that end, seeing that when they have attained it they live secure,
enriching themselves with the oblations of Matrons, and riding abroad in
Coaches, magnificently clad, making lavish feasts, so that their feasts go
beyond the Royal tables. They might be happy, if without regarding the
greatness of the City, which they use as a covering of vices, they would
imitate the sobriety of some provincial Bishops.

CHAP. 7. Of the Fathers famous in that time, Hosius, Athanasius, Meletius,
Gregory Nazianzen.
IN that time Hosius Bishop of Cordova and Athanasius were famous and of great
credit. The first of these made the Nicen Creed; and the second, the Symbol
that bears his name, which for a long time have served for a mark, and a
livery to discern the Orthodox from the heretics. If a Bishop of Rome had done
so much, our Adversaries would triumph about it, and say that the Pope has
given laws to the Universal Church, as being the Head of the whole body. Of
this Athanasius, Basil speaks thus in the 52. Epistle. (...).
Thou have the care of all the Churches as much as of thine own. And Gregory
Nazianzen in the Oration upon Athanasius, They gave him in charge the
government of Alexandria, which is as much as if one said the government of the
whole world. And in the same place, (...).
Athanasius gives again laws to all the world.

In the same time also Meletius Bishop of Antioch, was famous in holiness, of
whom Basil says in the 50. Epistle, that (...).
he presided over the whole body of the Church. If any in our days gave those
titles to some other then the Pope of Rome, he should go for an heretic or a
madman: Thus among the works of Athanasius, there is an Epistle which Arsenius
writes to him, where he says, Page 610. Tom. 1. (...).
We embrace peace and union with the Universal Church, over which thou
presidest. For we have showed that all the Patriarchs took care of all the
Churches of the Roman Empire.

Then also Gregory Nazianzen was much esteemed, who was so far from
acknowledging any Head of the Universal Church by Divine right, that he wished
that there had been no superiority at all in the Church, and that all Pastors
had been equal. Greg. Naz. orat. de se ipso redeunte in agro, (...).
Would to God (says he) that there were no precedence, nor any degree of
prerogative of honor, nor any tyrannical primacy, that we might he discerned
by virtue only.

It is seen also in the works of Athanasius, that every time that he speaks of
Liberius Bishop of Rome, he calls him only Bishop of Rome, not Head of the
Universal Church.

CHAP. 8. Of Damasus Bishop of Rome, and of Basil Archbishop of Cesarea.
Ignorance of the Cardinal in the Greek tongue.
ABout the year 365. Arianism growing in the East by the countenance of the
Emperor Valens; Basilius Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, and the other
orthodox Bishops of the East, called upon the help of the Bishops of the West,
among whom that of Rome, Damasus was the most respected, and asked them counsel
and aid in their affliction. But Damasus would not stir for it; fearing (as it
is likely) to offend the Emperor Valens. Eusebius Bishop of Samosate was of
opinion that they should send Legates into the West to move the men of the West
to succor their brethren: But Basil was of contrary opinion, saying in his
tenth Epistle, Basil. Ep. 10. ad Eusebius. Samosat. (...).
If the wrath of God remain upon us, (...)? What succor can we receive from the
pride of the Western men? who neither know the truth, nor can abide to learn
it, and being forestalled with false opinions, do now the things which they did
before in the business of Marcellus; contending against them that announce the
truth unto them, and strengthening heresy by themselves. Of those Western the
most remarkable by reason of the dignity of the city was Damasus Bishop of
Rome, of whom he complains that he had countenanced the heresy of Marcellus;
and that still both he and his associates did the same, and by their connivence
advanced the heresy, and opposed the true doctrine.

M. du Perron translateth (...) the brow of the Occidental men, weakening
purposely that fine place by an obscure version. For althoug (...) signify
also an eye-brow, it is clear that in this place it signifies pride and
arrogance, as supercilium in Latin, signifies pride. He translates also (...),
to trust in their own advice: Which is very far from the Greek.

In the same Epistle Basil speaks of Damasus in these terms, Page 109. (...).
I would write to their head, but not of Ecclesiastical businesses, but to give
them silently to understand that they know not the truth of our businesses, and
will not receive the way to learn it. Note that he calls Damasus the Head of
the Occidental men, as being Patriarch in the West. But he does not acknowledge
him for his head, or the head of the Oriental or Meridional Churches. By saying
their head, he shows manifestly that he did not acknowledge him for his head.

The Cardinal alleges a testimony out of the 52. Epistle of the same
Basilius: where he makes Basil to speak so; It seemed good to us to write to
the Bishop of Rome, Chapter 15. p. 108.
that he watch for the things of this side, and give his judgment; that since
it is difficult to send men thither from a common and Synodical decree, he use
his authority in the business, and make choice of persons capable of the labor
of the journey. This place is translated with little fidelity, and is
maliciously clipped; For he translateth (...) to give judgment; whereas it
signifies only to give his advice. And as for the authority which he desires
Damasus to use, Basil declares for what he will have him to use it, namely for
sending men that be capable of the labor of the journey, and that may by their
meekness and assiduity make remonstrances to them that he have themselves
perversely. And yet he will have them to be sent secretly and without noise,
that one may not think that he desire Damasus to send Legates with public
authority to pronounce judgments in his name. For he desires only that he send
men by whom he may make them know his advice, and that be able to make
exhortations and remonstrances. For in that time they esteemed very much the
exhortations of brethren, and the mutual union among Bishops. But the Cardinal
has clipped the last lines of this place, which show how far the authority of
Damasus extended.

Basil adds (...).
Let these persens have with them all the things that have been done at Rimini,
that those things may be dissolved that were done there by constraint. He
desires not Damasus that he abolish by his authority the acts of Rimini, but
that the men whom Damasus shall send may have the Acts of Rimini, that the
Oriental men being informed of the things that past there, may proceed to the
disanulling of that Council.

All that can be drawn from that Epistle to exalt the dignity of Damasus, is
but small in comparison of that which is said in the same Epistle of Athanasius
Patriarch of Alexandria; Thou take care (says he) of all the Churches as
much as of thine own. Then he took care of Rome also. Again, we have recourse
unto thy perfection, as to him that is head over all things. And he says often
that he receives his commandments, although Cesarea of which Basil was Bishop,
was not under the Patriarchate of Alexandria. But in those days Bishops would
give titles of honor to one another, and were liberal in titles of respect,
especially to the Patriarchs. Upon which custom who so will ground either the
pre-eminence or the Empire of a Bishop over his colleagues (as Cardinal du
Perron uses to do when he meets with letters wriitten to the Bishop of Rome
with some ordinary complemental deferences) shows himself little skilled in
the style of the Ancients.

Chap. 25. p. 109.
A little after the Cardinal brings another place of the 77. Epistle of Basil,
which by an extreme ignorance he says to be written to the Occidental men. The
title of the Epistle is (...), that is, to the Bishops that live by the
seaside, so he calls Islanders as the Cyprians, and those of Rhodus, and Chio,
and other Isles of Archipelago, as Basil declares in the same Epistle, calling
them (...) insulares, living in Islands. And he calls upon their succor, (...).
because God has joined the Islanders with the inhabitants of the Continent by
charity, although it seem (says he) that they are divided in habitation. But
the Cardinal having but small knowledge of the Greektongue, as he shows in
his whole book, translateth (...) transmarinos: So he does in the margent of
the 233. page, and will have those transmarini to be the Bishops of the West,
and Damasus Bishop of Rome one of them. And that, because in that Epistle there
are some words hf submission, whereby Basil and his colleagues say that they
are ready to undergo the judgment of those Islanders, and speak to them as if
they were heads of the Church. These are Basils words according to the
Cardinals translation; We are ready to undergo Judgment under you, so that
they that calumniate us can abide to appear in person with us in the presence
of your veneration. The greater the submission of these words is, the more
contrary are they to the Cardinal, since that honor is deferred to others then
the Bishop of Rome, namely to Islanders. Yet the Cardinal does not translate it
right, and has not understood the Greek. It is so word by word (...).
Being ready to enter into lists under you, only if they that wrong us agree to
appear face to face before your piety: (...) is to put off ones clothes, as the
wrestlers did when they would enter the lists; and (...) is not calumniating,
but wronging with outrage; and (...) signifies here piety, not veneration.
Thus in page 126 of the same 25. chapter, he renders (...) reverencing, where
as it signifies regarding; With the like learning as in page 126. he turns
(...), discretion, whereas it signifies trial or examination.

In the same Epistle there is another place which the Cardinal alleges for
the Popes primacy, Chapter 33. page 233.
in the 233. page where he makes Basil and his colleagues to speak thus to the
Bishop of Rome, (...).
Whether you account your selves to be Head of the Universal Church, the head
cannot say to the feet, You are not necessary to me, etc. But we have proved
this to be altogether false, and that this is said, not to the Bishop of Rome,
but to the Bishops of Islands. Wherefore he speaks to them in the plural, (...)
and not (...): Which the Cardinal would not perceive, and chose rather to run
into a manifest falsification.

Of the same Basil we have an Epistle to the Bishops of Gauls and Italy, which
is the seventy, where he puts the Bishops of Gauls before those of Italy: that
is, the Bishop of Lions before that of Rome, and calls them (...).
his brethren and fellows in holy service. There also he calls those Bishops in
general (...), head, and exhorts them to succor the Bishops of the East,
because the head cannot say to the members, I have no need of you. That only
manner of writing to the Ep. 74. Basil. (...).
Occidental Bishops in common, shows in what esteem the Bishop of Rome was,
since he is written to in the crowd, without naming: should not that man be
thought to be out of his senses that would in our days write to the Pope, yet
not name him, but comprehend him in the general title of a letter to all the
Bishops of Italy?

CHAP. 9. Of Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and of his retreat to Rome, and of
Gregory Nazianzen Patriarch of Constantinople.
IN the year of the Lord 372. Athanasius dies, and Peter succeeds him in the
Patriarchate of Alexandria. But being taken by the Officers of Valens, an Arian
Emperor, and committed prisoner, he found a way to slip out, and escaped to Rome
by sea, addressing himself to Damasus Bishop of Rome, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 19.
(...).
because (says Sozomenus,) he was of the same belief as himself. Hierom in the
Epitaph of Marcella says the same.

Hieron. Epitaph. Marcell. Athanasius and postea Petrus persecutionem Arianae
haereseos declinantes, quasi ad tutissimum communionis suae portum Romam
confugerant.
Athanasius and Peter after him flying from the persecution of the Arian
heresy, were retired to Rome as to a most fafe haven of their communion. It
was not then by Appeal, or to appear before the Pope as before his judge that
Peter came to Rome; as the Cardinal would make us believe. In Peter's absence,
one Ruffin. l. 2. c. 13. Socrat. l. 4. c. 3. In Graeco. 36.
Lucius an Arian invaded the Bishopric of Alexandria by violence, and cruelly
persecuted the flock.

While Peter was at Rome, Damasus used him kindly, but took no knowledge of his
cause, and undertook not the defense of it, and cited not the contending
parties, for that past his power: Only six years after, Valens having given
leave to Peter to return to Alexandria, Damasus accompanied him with letters of
recommendation to his Church: And the people of Alexandria received Peter
joyfully, expelling Lucius the usurper from the Sea.

About the same time Vita Greg. Naz. praefixa ejus operib.
Gregory Nazianzen was sent to Constantinople by the Bishops of Asia to govern
that Church: He was installed in that place, by Peter of Alexandria, who soon
after sent his Legates to remove him, and to put in his place one Maximus, a
Cynick: but the Church of Constantinople did oppose it. All that was done
without taking advice of Damasus Bishop of Rome; The Bishop of Alexandria in
those days taking upon him the authority of making and unmaking Patriarchs.

CHAP. 10. Of the Convocating of the first Council of Constantinople, which is
the second Universal Council. How the Cardinal has falsified the Epistle of
the Oriental Bishops to Damasus Bishop of Rome.
IN the year of the Lord 381. the Emperor Theodosius, to appease the troubles
stirred by the Arians, and the Macedonians that denied the Godhead of the
Holy Ghost, called a General Synod to Constantinople. That convocation was made
without the counsel and communication of Damasus, who then was Bishop of Rome;
who also was not present at that Synod, and sent no Legates to it; so that all
was done without him. Socrates in book 5. chapter 8. speaking of that Council of
Constantinople says, The Emperor without delay assembled a Council of Bishops
that embraced his belief. And Sozomenus in book 7. chap. 7. The Emperor
Theodosius presently assembled a Council of Bishops consenting with him.

Here I cannot but lay open the Cardinals foul dealing in chapter 42. of book 1. He
would persuade us that this Council was called by Damasus Bishop of Rome: To
that end he alleges a testimony of Theodoret, book 5. chapter 9. where the
Bishops assembled at Constantinople write to Damasus, Ambrose, Brito, and other
Bishops of the West, and say to them, (...).
While you celebrated (by the will of God) the Synod of Rome, you have
convocated us by a brotherly charity as your own limbs, by the letters of the
most religious Emperor. There he commits four notable faults. First in that he
brings this Epistle as written by the Universal Council sitting at
Constantinople: For it was written by another Assembly of Bishops sitting in
the same place the year following. Secondly in that he would have us to
believe, upon that testimony, that the Bishops assembled at Constantinople were
convocated by Damasus. For the Council of which that Epistle speaks, is the
Council of Rome, to which Damasus had invited the said Bishops, but they would
not come, as we shall see in the next chapter. Thirdly, that he corrupts that
place by a false interpretation, translating (...) to convocate, whereas it
signifies to call, and invite, and desire to come. For these Bishops mean that
Damasus had invited them, and desired them to come to the Synod of Rome: not
that he had convocated them to Constantinople. Fourthly, he intends to prove by
that text, that the Emperor Theodosius had called that Council, being moved to
it by the letters of Damasus: But A notable ignorance of the Cardinal,
mistaking one Emperor for another.
he is deceived thinking that the Emperor here mentioned is he that assembled
the Council of Constantinople, which was Theodosius; But the Emperor of whom
these Bishops speak, is Gratian, who at the request of Damasus had written
Letters of exhortation to these Bishops assembed at Constantinople, to desire
them to transport themselves to Rome, where Damasus kept a particular Synod:
For Damasus hoped to obtain that of them easily. That is the sense of these
words, You have invited us by the letters of the most religious Emperor. But
who so will by that Emperor understand Theodosius, shall find that these words
have no sense.

CHAP. 11. Of the invitation and request of Damasus Bishop of Rome, whereby he
desired the Bishops assembled in Council at Constantinople to transport
themselves to Rome, and come to the Council which Damasus held there; and of
the small authority which the Council of Rome had in comparison of that of
Constantinople. The Cardinals faults.
THere is nothing in all Antiquity that makes the state of the Ancient Church
better known, and what was the power of the Bishop of Rome, then the sitting of
the first Council of Constantinople. For that Council is one of the four first
Universal Councils, which is not inferior to any Council in authority. Yet so
far it is that it was convocated by Damasus Bishop of Rome, or that he did
preside in it, that he was not so much as present there, and sent no Legates to
it, nor any that represented his person. And both he and his colleagues
assembled at Rome in Council, of whom Ambrose Bishop of Milan was one, writ to
the Bishops assembled again in Council at Constantinople, beseeching them to
transport themselves to Rome, and to join the two Councils in one: which the
said Bishops refused to do, saying that they were not sent by their Provinces
but to Constantinople; and writ letters of excuses to Damasus, Ambrose, Brito,
and others assembled at Rome, representing the reasons, why they could not go
to Rome, nor hold the Council anywhere but at Constantinople.

In the Ecumenical Council of Constantinople, Meletius Patriarch of Antioch
presided. That History is exactly described by Theodoret in the fifth book of
his History, c. 8. and 9. etc. Many things in it are worth observing. For here
is an Universal Council, acknowledged for such by the Roman Church, and by all
that have written of Councils, which has not only been convocated without the
consent of the Bishop of Rome, but was also kept without him, and to which he
never delegated any person. An evident proof that an Universal Council may be
assembled without the Pope, yea against his advice.

That which is most considerable, is, that after that Universal Council, the
same Bishops being assembled again in Council, at the same time a Council sat
at Rome, where Damasus Bishop of Rome presided, and where the Bishops of the
West were assembled. Is there any of our adversaries that will not presume that
a Council where the Pope was present and president, is of greater authority
then a Council assembled without, yea against, the Popes advice? and where the
Pope had no Legate? and where a Bishop of Antioch presided? Yet here is the
clean contrary: For that Roman Council is of no esteem, in comparison of that
of Constantinople. Hardly do we know what past in it, and the name only
remains. Yea our adversaries themselves put it among the particular Councils.
But this Council of Constantinople is the second Universal Council, which has
made Canons that have set rules unto the following ages, and were read at the
entry of Councils. The cause of that difference of esteem, is, that the Council
of Constantinople was called by the Emperor, but that of Rome by the Roman
Bishop.

Here I cannot wonder enough at the Cardinals want of conscience, when he says
in the 34. chapter of the 1. book, that the Council of Constantinople is called
Ecumenical or Universal, only by adjunction to the Roman Council. If that were
so, the Roman Council should rather be called Ecumenical; and the second
Universal Council ought, by that reason, be rather called the Council of Rome
then of Constantinople. And how can these two Councils be taken for one, and
the one be taken for a dependence of the other, seeing that the one was kept
against the advice of the other, and has not imparted its resolutions to the
other? Indeed the Cardinal is the first that ever bethought himself of such an
untrue and unreasonable imagination. He could not bring one Author that ever
put that Council of Rome among the Universals. But how could the Universal
Council of Constantinople, and that of Rome where Damasus presided, be taken
for the same Council, seeing that not only they sat in several places, but
also in several times; that of Rome being posteriour by a year to that of
Constantinople? which difference of time the Cardinal not observing, he mistook
the second convocation of Bishops made at Constantinople for the first: For it
was the second convocation that writ to Damasus.

Observe also that the Bishops of the East did not think themselves bound to
obey Damasus, and would not come to the Council to which he invited them.

Observe also that in the Epistle which they writ to the Roman Council, they
call the Church of Jerusalem the Mother of all the Churches; a title which the
Roman Church attributes to her self in these days. So speaks the Emperor
Justinus Council Tom. 11.
in an Epistle to Hormisdas Bishop of Rome, where he calls the Church of
Jerusalem matrem Christiani nominis, the Mother of the Christian name, that is,
of the Christian Religion or Profession.

CHAP. 12. Remarkable passages in the Council of Constantinople.
IN that Council many things past which grieve our adversaries. Nectarius was
created Bishop of Constantinople, without any communication about it with the
Bishop of Rome, and without expecting his approbation: Of which the Bishop of
Rome did not complain; For he pretended no right in that election. There also
that Canon was made (...).
Let the Bishop of Constantinople have his prerogatives after the Bishop of
Rome, because it is the new Rome. This Canon displeases our adversaries two
ways; The one, because Baron. An. 325.. 128.
the order of the Patriarchs is altered, without the consent of Damasus Bishop
of Rome; For before that Council, the Patriarch of Alexandria was the second,
and that of Antioch the third. The other because the dignity of the Bishop of
Rome in this Canon is founded upon the dignity of the City of Rome, not upon
the Word of God; as in effect the order of places among the Prelates of the
Empire, was according to the civil Order which was among the Cities: For which
cause the Bishop of Jerusalem, the City in which Christ dyed, and where the
Apostles resided, and where Christianity begun, was subject to the Bishop of
Cesarea, because Cesarea was the Metropolis of Palestina.

Our adversaries dissemble not that this Council displeases them. The Jesuit
Cotton in the Preface of his Catholic institution speaks thus of it; Greece
begins about the year 380. to make approaches of rebellion against the Holy
See, and to traverse the authority of the Bishop of Rome, giving him the Bishop
of Constantinople for second. The Jesuit Costerus in his Manual, in the
Chapter de Summo Pontifice, says that Hi namque in Constantinopolitana
generali Synodo, insciis Legatis Damasi Papae, secundu^ sibi locum usurparunt
in sedibus Patriarchalibus contra omne fas.
the Bishops of Constantinople, in the second Universal Council of
Constantinople, without the knowledge of the Legates of Pope Damasus, did usurp
the second place among the Patriarchal Sees, against all reason; Which is a
great ignorance in that Jesuit; For Damasus had no Legates in that Council.

Bellarmin in his Preface upon the books de Pontifice, speaks thus of that
Council; Primi qui serio Primatum Romani Pontificis impugnarunt, videntur
fuisse Graeci; ipsi enim jam inde ab Anno Domini 381. Episcopum
Constantinopolitanum, qui antea ne Patriarcha quidem erat, tribus Patriarchis
Orientis anteponere, and secundum a Romano Pontifice facere voluerunt.
The first that opposed the primacy of the Roman Pope in good earnest, seem to
have been the Grecians. For already in the year 381. they would prefer the
Bishop of Constantinople, who before was not so much as a Patriarch, before the
three Patriarchs of the East, and make him second after the Roman Prelat. But
it is certain, that in that the Council did not oppose the Bishop of Rome: For
Damasus, who then was Bishop of Rome, did not oppose himself to that
constitution, and approved it by his silence. And the following Councils
confirmed that Canon, in which the Bishop of Constantinople is put in the
second place, even the Councils of Chalcedon and Trull. The Popes themselves
have approved it in the end, as Pope Innocent the third in the Council of
Latran, chapter 5.

Also the Reader is desired to take notice, that M. du Perron having made many
Chapters about the order of sitting in every Universal Council, especially the
35, and 36. Chapters, and the following, has skipt over this Council, and
speaks not one word of the order of the places, and of the presidency in this
Council, because the Bishop of Rome had no part, neither in the convocation,
nor in the sitting; and that things were done there (as our adversaries hold)
with much contempt of his See. He could find no way to disguise the truth,
which appears here very plain.

CHAP. 13. Of Hierom, And of the title of Pontifex left by the Emperor Gratian.
IN the same time a Priest called Hierom flourished, whose works we have; A man
that went beyond all the Fathers for Latin eloquence, and for learning in Greek
and Hebrew. Having been a household servant of Damasus, he was a good friend to
the Sea of Rome. Nevertheless in that point, as in many others, he is very
unequal; for sometimes he exalts the Roman See, sometimes he vilifieth it,
according as his choler prompts him, and according as he is used by the Roman
Clergy, with whom he did not very well agree. Being a Priest, he was offended,
that at Rome they esteemed Deacons more then Priests. Upon that, in the Epistle
to Evagrius, he opposes the consent of all the other Churches to the authority
of the Church of Rome, saying that Orbis maejor est urbe. Vbicunque fuerit
Episcopus, sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive
Alexandriae, sive Tanis, ejusdem meriti, ejusdem est sacerdotii. Potentia
divitiarum and paupertatis humilitas vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopu^
non facit. Caeterum omnes Apostoloru^ successores sunt.
the world is greater then a town. Wheresoever a Bishop be, whether at Rome or
at Agobio; at Constantinople, or at Rhegio; at Alexandria, or at Tanis, they
are of the same merit, and have but one Priesthood. The power of wealth and the
low estate of poverty, make not a Bishop higher or lower. After all, they are
all successors of the Apostles. And rejecting the custom of the Roman Church;
Why (says he) do thou bring me the custom of one town? Why do thou defend,
against the laws of the Church, the lesser number from which pride is sprung?
All that Hierom writ purposely to equal all the other Bishops with the Bishop
of Rome, because the authority of the Church of Rome was used to prefer the
Deacons before the Priests.

The same Hierom in his Preface upon the book of Didymus, of the Holy Ghost,
speaks thus of Rome, and of the Roman Clergy, which had spoken ill of his
labor; Cum in Babylone versarer, and purpuratae meretricis essem colonus, and
jure Quiritium viverem, volui garrire aliquid de Spiritu Sancto, and coeptum
opus ejusdem urbis Pontifici dedicare. Et ecce olla illa quae in Jeremia post
baculum cernitur, a facie Aquilonis coepit ardere, and Pharisaeorum conclamavit
Senatus.
When I lived in Babylon, and was inhabitant of the harlot clad in purple, and
lived according to the Laws of the Citizens of Rome, I would prattle somewhat
about the Holy Ghost, and dedicate my work begun to the Bishop of that town.
But behold that pot which in Jeremiah is seen after the staff, on the North
side begins to boil, and the Senate of the Pharisees begins to cry out.

How often does Hierom, to make Christians dislike living at Rome, call it
Babylon, and the harlot mentioned in the Revelation? In the Epistle to
Marcella, under the name of Paula and Eustochium, he speaks thus Et hic puto
locus sanctior est Tarpeia rupe, quae de coelo saepius fulminata, ostendit quod
Domino displiceret. Lege Apocalypsin Johannis, and quid de muliere purpurata
and scripta in ejus front blasphemia, septem montibus, aquis multis, and
Babylonis canitur exitu. Exite, inquit Dominus, ex illa, etc.
I think that this place [of Bethlehem] is holier then the Tarpeian rock
(meaning the Roman Capitol) which having been often fulminated from heaven,
shows that it is displeasing unto God. Read St. John's Revelation, and see
what is foretold of the harlot clad in purple, and of the blasphemy written in
her forehead, and of the seven hills, and of many waters, and of the
destruction of Babylon. Go out from her my people, be not partaker of her sins,
lest that you receive of her plagues. She is fallen, she is fallen, Babylon,
etc.

Thus spoke Hierom before his anger was over. But being retired from Rome into
Syria, and having disgested his choler, another subject of anger was offered to
him in Syria. For he fell out with the Clergy of Syria about the word
hypostasis: And seeing himself baffled and contradicted in the East, he had his
refuge to the West, and began to exalt the Sea of Damasus, and of the Roman
Church. He writ then letters unto Damasus, where he says that he has his
recourse unto St. Peter's chair, as being joined with the same in communion.
That he that gathers not with Damasus, scatters abroad. That the Sun did
rise in the West; but that in the East Lucifer had his throne over the stars.
But with all these fair words he attributes no power to Damasus over the
Universal Church. For all that may be said of every faithful Bishop, that
communion must be had with him; that out of his communion one cannot be saved;
and that who so gathers not with him, scatters away. And the Bishops of
Alexandria and Antioch, boasted also that they had St. Peter's chair. Note that
in the same place Hierom says, Nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, that he
followed and acknowledged none first but Christ. A place which in some copies
is wickedly corrupted; for instead of primum, they have put praemium.

It is notable also that by that Babylon, the ruin whereof is foretold in the
Revelation, he understands always the City of Rome; As toward the end of the
second book against Jovinian, he speaks thus to the City of Rome, M^ledictionem
quam tibi Salvator in Apocalypsi comminatus est, ^ffugere potes poenitentia.
Thou may escape by repentance the curse which the Savior threateneth thee
with in the Revelation. And in the 11. Quest. to Algazia; Secundu^ Apocalypsin
Joh^nnis in front purpuratae meretricis scriptum est nomen blasphemiae, id
est, Roma aeterna.
According to John's Revelation in the forehead of the Harlot clad in purple,
there is a name of blasphemy written, which is the eternal Rome.

The same Father in many places affirms Ep. ad Pammach. adv. errores Johannis
Jerosolymitani. Nihil interest inter Presbyterum and Episcopum; eadem dignitas
mittentis and missi.
that the charge of Priest, and that of a Bishop, are the same Office, as for
the Divine institution: But that since, to avoid Schisms and dissensions, they
thought fit to choose one that had pre-eminence over the other Priests, to whom
they gave the name of Bishop: As in the Epistle to Oceanus; Et Ep. ad Occanum.
Apud veteres iidem Episcopi and Presbyteri fuerant, quia illud nomen dignitatis
est, hoc aetatis.
Among the Ancients, Bishops and Priests were all one; for the one is a name of
dignity, the other a name of age. He says the same in the Epistle to
Pammachius; There is no difference between the Priest and the Bishop; He that
sends and he that is sent, have the same dignity.

It is also ordinary with Hierom to call all Bishops Popes. In the Epistle to
Ruffinus, he calls Chromatius Bishop of Aquilea Pope. In the Epistle to
Pammachius, he calls John of Jerusalem Papam beatissimum. And Epiphanius Bishop
of Constance in Cyprus, he calls also Pope. One of his Epistles to Austin
Bishop of Bona, ends thus, Memento mei sancte and venerabilis Papa; Holy and
venerable Pope, remember me.

The same Doctor commends the poverty and simplicity of ancient Bishops, and
tacitly compares it with the luxury of the Bishops of his time: As in the
Epistle to Demetrius he gives these titles to Anastasius a Bishop of Rome dead
long before, Vir ditissimae paupertatis, and Apostolicae sollicitudinis; A man
of a most rich poverty, and of an Apostolical carefulness.

It is to be noted also, that this Father never gives to the Roman Prelates any
higher title then that of Bishops of the City of Rome, and never calls them
heads of the Universal Church; As in his Catalogue, Cornelius Romanae urbis
Episcopus. And in the same place, Gaius sub Zepherino Romanae urbis Episcopo;
And in the same Catalogue, speaking of Fortunatianus, In hoc habetur
detestabilis, quod Liberiu^ Romanae urbis Episcopum, pro fide ad exilium
pergentem, primus sollicitavit and fregit, and ad subscriptionem haereseos
compulit.
In Fortunatianus this is detestable, that he is the first that solicited and
overthrew Liberius Bishop of the City of Rome, going into exile for the faith,
and persuaded him to subscribe to heresy. For Hierom did not believe that the
Bishop of Rome could not err in the faith. Now that language is altered; for
now to call the Pope the Bishop of Rome only, without adding another quality,
is as if one called the King of France, Lord of Paris only.

This Father has that defect, which is none of the least, that often he will
speak ill of the Apostle St. Paul, and speaks of marriage with reproach and
great contempt, as we shall show hereafter in the 7. book, in the controversy
of the invocation of Saints.

In the year of our Lord 386. According to the Chronicle of Marcellinus in the
year 383.
Gratian, a meek and religious Emperor, was slain by the men of Maximus the
Tyrant. This Gratian is the first of the Christian Emperors that refused to be
called Pontifex Maximus, holding that title which his Predecessors (though
Christians) had born, to be unsuitable with a Christian Prince, as derived from
the Pagans, and relishing of Paganism. Yet soon after, the Bishops of Rome
suffered themselves to be called so, and took up that which an Emperor had
rejected.

CHAP. 14. Of the abolition of the Penitentiary Priest by Nectarius.
IN that time there was in every town a Penitentiary Priest, to whom sinners
confessed their sins in secret: And that Priest judged whether the sin was of
such a nature as to require a public penance. But at Constantinople a Lady
having confessed to the Penitentiary Priest her cohabitation with a Deacon in the
Church; and that sin being laid open by the Penitentiary, the scandal was so
great, that Nectarius Patriarch of Constantinople, to avoid the like scandals,
abolished that Penetentiary Priest over all the East, and would have every one,
without that obligation of secret confession, to present himself to be partaker
of the holy mysteries: Not to the total abolishing of public pennances, but
only of the Penitentiary Priests, and of the secret Confession to any but the
Bishop, that he might judge whether the case deserved public penance. That
alteration was made without the advice of the Bishop of Rome, and without any
regard to the custom of the Roman Church, which was contrary. It would be taken
for a rebellion against the Pope, if the Archbishop of Lions or Bourges would
expel auricular confession out of their Dioceses without the Popes permission.
That history is to be seen in Socrates, in the 5. book. chapter 19. and in
Sozomenus, book. 7. chapter 16.

CHAP. 15. Of Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, and of John Chrysostom.
IN the same time lived holy Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, who often calls Peter
the Prince of the Apostles; but as for the perpetual succession of the ragin of
David and of Christ, promised in the Old Testament, he holds that it remained
with the Bishops of Jerusalem successors of James brother of Christ, not to the
Bishop of Rome. That is found in the (...), etc.
Heresy of the Nazarens, which is the twenty ninth Heresy in Epiphanius; And
in that of the Antidicomarianites, being the seventy eighth Heresy. (...).
James (says he) has received the first of all the Episcopal chair, as he to
whom first the Lord committed his throne upon earth. It is that Epiphanius, who
passing through a borough of Palestina named Anablata, and having seen in a
Church a vail hanging where the Image of Christ was, or of some Saint, tore it
in a zealous anger, saying that it was against the authority of the Scriptures,
and advised that they should rather make of it a winding sheet for a corpse, or
some poor man. Cum vidissem in Ecclesia Christi contra authoritatem
Scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud, and magis dedi consilium
custodibus ejus loci ut pauperem mortuu^ eo obvolverent.
The Epistle of Epiphanius that makes this relation, is translated by Hierom,
and inserted among his Epistles.

In the year of the Lord 395. Socrat. l. 6. c. 5.
Nectarius died, to whom John Chrysostom succeeded, established in that Office
by Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, not by the Bishop of Rome, to whom it
rather belonged to create the first Patriarch of the East, if it had been the
belief of that time that the Bishop of Rome was head of the Universal Church.
At least his consent should have been expected; but it was not; For it was not
the custom.

CHAP. 16. Of Ambrose Bishop of Milan; and that in his time the Church of Milan
was not subject unto the Church of Rome. The Cardinals foul dealing in
alleging the Fathers.
IN the year of Christ 397. died Ambrose Bishop of Milan, a man of holy life,
and of great authority; who being Prefect of the City of Milan, and the
Emperors Lieutenant in Lombardy, was by the zeal of the people, and the
Emperors approbation, made a Bishop, though he was then but a Catechumen, and
not baptized. This was done without the advice and consent of the Roman Bishop,
and Ambrose took no Letters of investiture from him, for it was not the custom.

It was he that excommunicated the Emperor Theodosius for the Massacre of the
people of Thessalonica, committed by his guards by his permission. And he kept
him eight whole months out of the communion of the Church, not so much as
suffering him to enter into the Temple, till he had submitted himself to do
public penance, as Theodoret relates at large in book 5. of his History, 18.
chapter Or 16.
This was done by Ambrose without either the advice or leave of Syricius Bishop
of Rome his neighbor, and without imparting the business unto him. Neither did
Syricius complain of it, for he pretended no superiority over Ambrose. Such an
action in our days would be accounted a rash deed, and rebellion, and treason
against the Papal Sea. For it is now one of the Maxims of State, and a
fundamental Law set down by the Jesuit Emanuel Sa, In voce Excommunicatio,
Reges a solo Papa excommunicantur and censuris ligantur.
Kings cannot be excommunicated and bound with censures but by the Pope alone.
It is evident by many other proofs, that then the Church of Milan was not
subject unto that of Rome; for we learn by Austin, Matter mea Mediolanum me
consecuta, invenit Ecclesiam Sabbato non jejunantem, etc. Et Paulo post, Cum
Romam venio, jejuno Sabbato; cum hic sum, non jejuno.
Epist, 118. to Januarius, that the Church of Rome fasted upon Saturday, but
that of Milan did not fast upon that day. Of which the Bishop of Rome did not
complain, and did not labor to bring the Church of Milan to the same
observation as that of the Roman Church. And Austin in the fore-alledged
Epistle says, that he indifferently observed both customs, according to the
place where he happened to be.

Ambrose in the 1. chapter of the 3. book of the Sacraments (if these books be his)
observes another difference in the washing of feet, which was practiced at
Milan, not at Rome. These are the words of Ambrose. Non ignoramus quod Ecclesia
Romana hanc consuetudinem non habeat, cujus typum in omnibus sequimur and
formam. Hanc tamen consuetudinem non habet ut pedes lavet. Vide ergo ne propter
multitudinem declinaverit.
We are not ignorant that the Roman Church has not that custom of which we
follow the example and the form in all things: yet she has not that custom of
washing the feet. See then whether she has not declined because of the great
multitude. And a little after. In omnibus cupio sequi Ecclesiam Romanam. Sed
tamen and nos homines habemus sensum: Ideo quod ibi melius servatur, and nos
recte custodimus.
I desire to follow the Roman Church in all things. Yet we also are men that
have sense. Wherefore we do well to keep that which is better practiced in
other places. And a little after, opposing to the Roman Church St. Peter's
authority, he says, What does the Roman Church answer to that? The Reader may
observe that Ambrose held not himself to be of the Roman Church. He says also
that he desires to follow the Roman Church in all things; but he says not that
he was bound to it; and that he says, there is sense and reason in departing
from the Roman Church, when that which is practiced in other Churches appears
to be better. This place is like that of Hierome in the Epistle to Evagrius,
where he condemns the custom of the Roman Church, which preferred Deacons
before Priests, and says that he preferred the custom of all the world before
the custom of the City of Rome, which had brought pride into the Laws of the
Church.

In one thing chiefly it is evident that the Church of Milan was not then
subject to the Church of Rome; that they had another Liturgy at Milan then at
Rome For the Church of Milan has for many ages retained the Ambrosian service
which was different from the Roman.

Durandus Bishop of Mende in the 5. book of his Rational, chapter 2. relates that,
before Pope Adrian (who was made Pope in the year of Christ 771) the Ambrosian
service was in far greater credit, and more used then the Gregorian Office or
Roman Mass: But that Adrian assembled a Council, in which he commanded that the
Roman Office should be established everywhere, and the Ambrosian abolisht. For
which Charlemagne helped him with strong hand, constraining the Clergy in Italy
and France by several punishments to follow the form of the Roman service, and
to burn the Ambrosian Office. President Fauchet in the 7th book of the French
Antiquities, says, that the year of that change was the year 798.

Durandus adds that the same Council being assembled the second time, the
same business was propounded again; and it was concluded that both the
Ambrosian and the Gregorian Missal should be put upon St. Peter's Altar, sealed
with the seals of many Bishops, and that the Temple doors should be shut; and
that solemn Prayers should be made that God would make them know which of these
two Offices pleased him best, to be observed in the Church. And that this being
done accordingly, the next day they found the Ambrosian Missal open, and in the
same place where they had laid it; but the Gregorian torn and scattered all
about the Church. Out of this the Pope and his Bishops might have apparently
gathered that the Gregorian service ought to be quasht and cast away, but the
Ambrosian kept. Yet they turned that to a contrary sense, saying that this
signified that the Gregorian Office must be spread and published all about. For
also (says Durandus) Ambrose had instituted many things according to the
custom of the Grecians. So Ambrose lost his cause four hundred years after his
death. And this was done against the counsel of Gregory himself, the Author of
that Roman Office, who was Bishop of Rome in the year 596. For among These
interrogations are found toward the end of Gregory's works; Cur cum una sit
fides, sunt Ecclesiarum consuetudin^s tam diversae? and altera consuetudo
Missarum in Romana Ecclesia, altera in Gallia tenetur? Resp. Mihi placet ut
sive in Romana, sive in Gallicanorum, sive in qualibet Ecclesia aliquid
invenisti quod plus Omnipotenti Deo placere possit, solicit eligas.
the interrogations of Austine the Monk to him, this is the third; Why is the
custom of Masses another in the Roman Church, and another in Gauls? To which
Gregory answers, I like it well that thou seek carefully that which thou
shall find most like to please Almighty God, whether it be in the Roman or in
the Gallican Church. He does not bind him to follow the Roman Office. That
which most displeased the Pope in the Ambrosian Office, was this Prayer that
was pronounced upon the Bread of the Lords Supper, Which Prayer is to be seen
in Ambrose's 4. book of the Sacraments, chapter 5. Fac nobis hanc oblationem
ascriptam rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est Figura corporis and sanguinis
Domini nostri Jesu Christi.
Grant that this offering may be accounted unto us, reasonable and acceptable,
which is the Figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. For
although the Dispute was not yet moved about Transubstantiation, yet Satan
began in the eight age to lick that bear, and secretly was contriving that
piece of the mystery of iniquity. Wherefore he labored to abolish the
Ambrosian Office in which that word Figure crossed his design. Besides it grieved
the Pope to see that the credit and authority of Ambrose should so prevail over
the authority of the Roman Church.

Thus the Popes winding themselves into the favor of Kings, made use of them
to enlarge their limits and establish their authority. Of which we have the
like example in Spain, happened in the time of King Alphonsus, and Pope Gregory
the VII, and his successor Urban, who was made Pope in the year 1088. For then
they had in Spain the ancient Liturgy called the Mozarabick Office, or the
Toledo Office, differing from the Roman Service. But Gregory the VII. having
obtained of the King that the ancient Service should be abolisht in his
Dominions, and the Roman Service established; The execution was found very
difficult, by reason of the murmurings and the resistance of the States of the
Land. In the end they agreed to decide the difference by a Duel between two
Knights. The King chose a Knight that should fight for the Roman Office, and
the States of the Land another to fight for the Mozarabick. It happened that
the Roman Champion was unhorsed and beaten down, to the Kings great discontent:
Who yet required that another trial should be made; That both the Offices
should be cast into a great fire, and that the Office which should not burn
should overcome. Upon that all parties betook themselves to their prayers, and
the trial being made, the Roman Office was consumed, but the Mozarabick
remained whole. Notwithstanding all this, the King being engaged with promise
unto the Pope, would have his will; And upon pain of loss, not only of goods,
but of life also, it was commanded that the Roman Service, which otherwise was
called Gallican, should be established in Spain. This History is related by
Roderick Archbishop of Toledo in the 6. book, 25 and 26. chapter

To return to the Church of Milan; They would not obey the Emperor Charlemagne,
and despising Pope Adrian and his Council, retained the Office of their ancient
Bishop Ambrose, and kept it long after. Paulus Aemilius in the life of Philip
the I. praises Pope Steven Quod Ecclesiam Mediolanensem ad officium revocasset
ducentessimo anno ex quo a Romana defecisset.
for bringing to the obedience of the Roman Church the Church of Milan, which
for two hundred years together had stood out disobedient. Platina says the
same in the life of Steven the IX. who with Baronius is the X.

In the year of the Lord 1058. Guy Archbishop of Milan assembled a Council at
Fontanet near Navarre in Lombardy, where he condemned the Celibat of the Roman
Church. For in that time the Clarks of Milan and Lombardy were married, as
Mediolanensis Ecclesia jampridem Romanae Ecclesiae authoritate relicta,
praeceptis ejus haud quaqua^ obtemperabat.
Sigonius affirms in the beginning of the 9. book of the Kingdom of Italy:
Where also he says, that of a long time the Church of Milan despised the
authority of the Roman Church.

In the year of our Lord 1059. Pope Nicolas the II. to reduce to his obedience
the Church of Milan, which till then had not been subject unto the Roman See,
sent Petrus Damianus Bishop of Oetia to Milan to manage that work with
dexterity. Then the Clarks of Milan were married, and in many things differed
from the Roman Church. Petrus Damianus having won Guy Archbishop of Milan, and
some of the Clergy, began to put his hand to the reformation. But the Clergy
and the people of Milan resisted, saying, That Non debere Ambrosianam Ecclesiam
Romany legibus subjacere; Nullamque judicandi vel disponendi vim Romano
Pontifici in illa sede competere. Nimis indignum (inquiunt) ut quae sub
progenitoribus nostris semper exstitit libera, ad nostrae confusionis
opprobriumnunc alteri (quod absit) Ecclesiae sit subjecta. Damian. Ep. ad
Hildebrand. Sigonius de regno Italiae. lib. 9.
the Ambrosian Church must not be subjected unto the Roman Laws, and that the
Roman Prelate had no right to judge, or to dispose of any thing in that See. It
is a thing too unworthy (said they) that the Church of Milan, which in time of
our progenitors has been always free, now (which God forbid) become subject to
another Church, to our disgrace and confusion. But Cardinal Damian an
industrious and persuasive man, appeased the mutiny, which seemed to tend to
sedition: and in an Oration represented to the people that God had given to the
Blessed bearers of the keys of eternal life (that is, to Peter and to the
Popes) the Empire both of earth and heaven. And so prevailed with his
practices, that by the help of the Archbishop Guy he took from the Clergy their
wives, and subjected the Church of Milan unto the Roman. This relation is to be
seen in an Epistle of that Cardinal Damian to the Archdeacon Hilderbrand, who
since was Gregory the VII. And in the Annals of Baronius, an. 1059. In that
Epistle Damianus says that he laid upon Archbishop Guy a penance of an
hundred years, redeemable with money; as Sigonius says in the forealledged
place. But as soon as Damian was gone from Milan, presently the people and the
Clergy shook off the yoke, and the Archbishop himself gave leave to the Priests
and other Clarks to take their wives again. At which Pope Nicolas being sore
angry excommunicated the Bishops and Priests of Lombardy. And Damian writ
Letters to them, wherein among other things he tells them, Ibid. Quod in
Ecclesia Mediolanensi non est novum, quae semper diversi dogmatis homines
habuit initio ab Auxentio and Ambrosio inchoato.
That this was no new thing in the Church of Milan, where there had been always
men of different Doctrines, beginning at Auxentius and Ambrose. So poor Ambrose
was condemned many Ages after his death.

The Popes would oppose it, but in vain, till by seditious and violent ways in
the time of Alexander the second, and Gregory the seventh, the people of Milan
were oppressed, and brought under the subjection o^ the Roman Church.

This digression serves to prove that which I said, that Ambrose and the
Church of Milan were not subject unto the Church of Rome. Which considerations,
with many more, make it doubtful, whether the books of the Sacraments be of
Ambrose; For how could he have said, I desire to follow the Roman Church in all
things, seeing he differed from her in so many Articles?

Here I cannot wink at the Cardinals foul dealing, who in the 25. chapter of the 1.
book, alleges that testimony of Ambrose in these words, We follow in all
things the example and the form of the Roman Church. But he kept himself from
adding that which follows; Yet we also are men not destitute of sense,
wherefore we do well to keep that which is better observed in other places.

The same usage he offers to the same Father in the 56. chapter of the first
book, Page 326.
where he alleges these words of Ambrose, chapter 4. of the book of Incarnation,
Petrus loci non immemor primatum egit; primatum utique confessionis, non
honoris; primatu^ fidei, non ordinis.
Peter not forgetful of his place did [or maintained] the primacy. A discourse
maliciously clipped: For Ambrose adds, The primacy indeed of confession, not of
honor; the primacy of faith, not of order.

In another place, Chapter 25. book 1.
alleging Ambrose, he commits a fault, which I am content to impute to his
want of memory. He brings a text out of Ambrose's Comment upon 1 Timothy 3. which
he says to be either of Ambrose, or of a contemporary Author; Although all the
world belong unto God, yet the Church is called the house of God, of which
Damasus is now the Governor. But himself in the 20. chapter of the last Page 1025.
and 1026.
book disputes against these Comments, as false and supposititious, and marks
the absurdities that he finds in them; saying that the true Comments of Ambrose
upon Paul's Epistles were already lost in the time of Cassiodorus; and that
these Comments are Apocrypha and spurious, having nothing of the sense and
style of Ambrose.

In the same place he alleges this place of Optatus Milevitanus in the second
book against Parmenian; Thou can not deny that unto Peter the Episcopal chair
was assigned at Rome, in which Peter the head of all the Apostles sat;
wherefore also he was called Cephas, etc. Optatus believed that Cephas
signifies a head, whereas it signifies a stone. But what does that testimony
against us, the question between us being not whether St. Peter had some
superiority or honor among the Apostles? the question is about the power of
jurisdiction. Neither is the question whether Peter has been at Rome, nor
whether the Bishop of Rome has been his successor in the Roman Episcopacy; but
whether that Apostle has constituted the Bishop of Rome his successor in the
Apostleship, and in the quality of Head of the Church of all the world? Optatus
is so far from that, that in the same book he calls the Bishop of Rome his
companion. Liberio Damasus, Damaso Syricius, hodie, qui noster est socius, cum
quo nobis totus orbis commercio formatarum in una communionis societate
Epistolarum concordat.
Damasus and Syricius who at this day is our companion, with whom all the world
agrees with us, by the commerce of Epistles formed in one communion of society.

In the year of Christ 398. Syricius Bishop of Rome, the capital enemy of
marriage, being dead, Anastasius succeeded him, who to please Hierom, was
adversary to Ruffinus, pretending that he had translated some books of Origin
into Latin.

CHAP. 17. Contention of Paulinus and Flavianus, Competitors of the Patriarchat
of Antioch.
Toward the end of the fourth age See Sozo. in the 7. book 11. chapter and 15. chapter
And Socrat. in the 5. book chapter 15
Paulinus and Flavianus were Competitors of the Patriarchat of Antioch. Both
took that quality, born by contrary factions.

The Bishops of the West, one of them being the Bishop of Rome, maintained
Paulinus, and disapproved the election of Flavianus as unlawful. Upon that
Gratian commanded both the parties to come to Rome, and convocated a great
number of Bishops to end that difference.

That the citation of Paulinus and Flavianus, and that convocation of Bishops
was by the only command of the Roman Emperor, Hierom shows it in his Epistle to
Eustochium upon the death of Paula. Cum Orientis and Occidentis Episcopos ob
quasdam Ecclesiarum dissensiones imperiales litterae contraxissent, vidit
admirabiles viros Christique Pontifices, Paulinum Antiochenae urbis Episcopum,
and Epiphanium Salaminae Cypri quae nunc Constantia dicitur.
When the Imperial letters had drawn to Rome the Bishops, both of the East and
the West, upon some Ecclesiastical dissensions, Paula saw there the admirable
men and Prelates of Christ, Paulinus Bishop of Antioch, and Epiphanius Bishop of
Salamina in Cyprus, which is now called Constantia. Of a command from the Pope
he says nothing. Wherefore M. du Perron in the 25. chapter of the 1. book, made
use of his ordinary licentiousness in faigning that which is not, saying that
Falsification of the Ca^dinal.
the Pope did evocate the cause unto Rome, and that the Popes letters were
accompanied with those of the Emperor Gratian; As if the Emperors letters had
been but a dependence and addition to the Popes letters. All that is false,
neither could he bring any witness of it.

In obedience to the Emperors command Paulinus came to Rome, and many other
Bishops. But Flavianus knowing that the Bishops of the West, that of Rome
especially, were contrary to him, and Ambrose Bishop of Milan (as it may be
seen by his It is the first Epistle of book 10.
78. Epistle) would not appear, and used many shifts.

Paulinus being dead, his faction chose Evagrius in his place. In the mean
while a Council sat at Capua by the authority of the Bishop of Rome; In that
Council Flavianus was condemned, and declared unjust possessor of the
Bishopric of Antioch. But that Council was not received in the East: And the
authority of the Emperor Theodosius, Gratians successor, intervened, who
maintained Flavianus in his place, having approved of his reasons, and
preferred them to the decision of the Council of Capua, and the Bishop of Rome.
So Anastasius Bishop of Rome, and his successor, Innocent the first, were
forced to consent to it, and to acknowledge Flavian the lawful Bishop of
Antioch, after they had persecuted him with all their power (as he also for his
part had highly scorned them, and refused to acknowledge them for his Judges.)
For the Bishops of Rome were very meek and gracious to them whom they could not
hurt.

CHAP. 18. Observations upon the History of the four first Ages. And how the
Cardinal has found nothing in it for his purpose.
SO we are now come to the year of our Lord 400. In all that time we have found
no Appeal from other Churches to the Roman See, no Law given by the Bishop of
Rome to the Universal Church. No Universal Council convocated by him. No
Universal Council where he presided. No care taken by him of the Churches
without the Roman Empire. No obedience or subjection of the Bishops of Asia or
Africa to the Roman Prelat, but all disobedience when he offered to exceed his
limits. No heretic condemned for disobedience to the Roman See. No execution
of the judgments pronounced by the Bishop of Rome out of his Patriarchat. Very
far was he from deposing Kings or Emperors, or publishing indulgences, or
giving pardons of two or three hundred thousand years, or fetching souls out of
Purgatory, or boasting of infallibility in the faith, or giving his feet unto
Emperors to kiss, or keeping reserved cases to himself, which none but himself
could dispense with. In those days the Pope wore no triple Crown, had no
Court, no guards, and no temporal principality.

Only so much is found in the Fathers of the four first Ages; That Peter was
called the first and the Prince of the Apostles, yet without power of
jurisdiction over his colleagues. That the Bishop of Rome was held successor of
St. Peter in the Office of Bishop of the City of Rome, not in the Apostleship,
or in the principality over the Universal Church. That the Bishop of Rome was
the first of the Patriarchs of the Empire; not by Divine right, but by the
Ecclesiastical Canons, and because of the dignity of the City. That this
dignity did not exceed the limits of the Empire. That it was a primacy without
power of jurisdiction over the other Patriarchs, and a precedence without
domination. That all the Patriarchs took care of all the Churches of the
Empire. That the Bishops of Rome of the three first Ages till the year 340.
were very low, of small authority, and scarce known.

And that Julius the first, was he that begun to offer to raise himself, but
gave over presently, having met with resistance. Satan has been long beating
that anvil. One may see in the following ages, how the Roman Prelat has
ascended from degree to degree, but with small progress, as long as he was
subject to the Roman Empire.

And this is of perpetual observation, that all the examples alleged by
Cardinal du Perron to show what the power of the Bishop of Rome was in ancient
time, are included within the limits of the Roman Empire, and that he could not
bring so much as one example, that the Bishop of Rome ever meddled with the
businesses of the Churches of Persia, or Media, or Ethiopia, or the East
Indies, or Assyria, or Chaldea, or Armenia, or Arabia: because these Churches
were without the Roman Empire, and sent no Deputies to the Councils, and
acknowledged not the Patriarchs of the Churches of the Empire of Rome. Some
small portion of Arabia has been sometimes subject to the Roman Emperors, as
also Armenia, by certain intervals. Of which Nations nevertheless M. du Perron
brings not any ^xample. This only observation serves to answer thirty Chapters
of the Cardinals first book, from the 25. chapter to the 55. which hold above 500.
pages. For all the things which he brings in all these Chapters, although they
were as true and faithfully alleged, as they are fraudulently and maliciously
disguised, yet they are things happened only within the precincts of the Roman
Empire.

Suppose that the Bishop of Rome had an absolute Empire over all the Churches
of the Empire of Rome, what does that to show that he is by Divine right the
Head of the Universal Church? Nay, does not that show that his power has begun
by humane constitutions, since it is limited by the limits of a certain worldly
Kingdom, and extends not unto other Kingdoms? How comes it to pass, that of a
thousand allegations of the Cardinal out of the ancient History, he brings not
one testimony of the Popes power over the Churches of Arabia, India, Persia,
Ethiopia, etc? At least he ought to have brought some passage, or some action,
whereby it might appear that the Bishop of Rome challenged domination, or power
of jurisdiction over those Churches; or some expostulation that those Churches
yielded him no obedience. But of that there is no trace in all Antiquity: No
wonder that the Cardinal could bring no president for it.

But we have showed that even the Churches of the Roman Empire did not
acknowledge him for their Head; and we will show it again, with Gods
assistance, following the thread of the History unto the last of the first four
Universal Councils: Which is the term that the Cardinal has set to himself,
and the time within which he limits himself in the dispute with his Majesty of
Great Britain.

The Reader also may remember, that the Cardinal with all his diligence could
find no ground for the Popes primacy in three hundred and forty years after
Christ's birth, when Julius began to put out his horns, but was forced to pull
them in again.

Toward the end of this fourth Age, the Monastical profession past from Egypt
and Syria into Europe. To which Martin in Gauls, and Hierom at Rome did very
much contribute. That profession began by some noble women, to whom Hierom
writes many Epistles; who living at home, not in a Monastery, wore a course
black-garment, instead of the white which the Roman people wore: and they used
much abstinence and austerity in their diet; and would work with their own
hands. It is to be observed, that those Monks of Egypt and Syria were most of
them Heretics Anthropomorphites, and had no communication with the Church of
Rome, as Sozomenus in the 2. book. c. 21. relates that the Monks of the desert
came to Alexandria to kill the Patriarch Theophilus, because he was contrary to
the Anthropomorphites.
Sozomenus affirms in the 11. chapter of the 8. book, and the Author of the life
of Fulgentius: For he relates that Eulatius Bishop of Saragossa, dissuaded
Fulgentius from joining with the Monks of Egypt: Omnes illi Monachi quorum
praedicatur mirabilis abstinentia, non habebunt tecum Sacramenta altaris
communia.
Those Monks (says he) whose admirable abstinence is celebrated, shall not
have the Sacraments of the Church common with thee. Cassian in the 10.
Collation, 2. and 3. chapter says that all the Monks of Egypt and Syria were given
to that opinion, and by consequent despised the Communion of the Roman Church,
as well as that of the Greek; Against which nevertheless the Bishop of Rome
used no censure, because they were not subject unto him.

BOOK VI. PROVING BY THE PAPAL HISTORY From the year of our Lord 400. unto the
Council of Chalcedon, which is the IV. Universal Council, held in the year 451.
That in all that time the Bishop of ROME was not acknowledged the Head of the
Universal Church.
CHAP. 1. A Narration of that which happened to John Chrysostom Patriarch of
Constantinople.
IN the year 395. the Emperor Theodosius being dead, his Son Arcadius
succeeded him in the Empire of the East, and Honorius in the Empire of the
West. Then John Chrysostom, whose works we have, was Patriarch of
Constantinople: A man full of zeal and eloquence, and of a holy austere life,
but somewhat too free in his words.

The Empress Eudoxia not able to bear with his bold speech in his Sermons,
Socrates l. 7. c. 14. and seq.
and knowing that Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, a Prelate of great
authority was his enemy, sent for him to Constantinople; And he being come,
assembled a Council, in which Chrysostom was condemned, and put from his
place. But the fervent love of the people to him, caused him to return soon
after, and to do his Office as before. In which, as he continued to use his
former freedom, it happened that the Empress caused her silver Statue to be set
up in the public place, near the Church, upon a Pillar of Porphyry, and that
some threatenings of her were reported to John Chrysostom; who upon that made a
violent Sermon, where he said, Nicep. l. 15. c. 18. Sozom. l. 8. c. 21. (...).
Herodias now rages again, again she is dancing, again she asks that John's
head be brought unto her in a charger, etc. Which moved the Emperor and the
Empress to assemble another Council, where Chrysostom was again condemned and
deposed from his Episcopacy, for intruding and re-entring into his charge
against the forms, after his deposition in the precedent Council. To that
deposition the Emperor joined banishment, where that golden mouth died a few
years after.

Then was Innocent the first Bishop at Rome, who if he had been Head of the
Universal Church, ought to have hindered that evil, and sent presently Legates
to restore Chrysostom to his place, and cite Theophilus before the Papal See to
give account of his Actions; and in case of disobedence, depose and
excommunicate him. But nothing of all that was done. Sozomenus in book 8. of
his History, 26. chapter says that Innocent writ consolatory Letters to
Chrysostom, and other Letters to the Clergy of Constantinople, wherein he
bemoaned the condition of that holy man so unworthily used. He said not in
those Letters that Theophilus had despised his authority. He used no
threatenings, he took no knowledge of the cause. But this he said, Sozom. l. 8.
c. 26. (...).
It is necessary that a Synod take knowledge of this, as we said long ago that
a Synod ought to be assembled: for a Synod only can still the motions of such
storms. Which that we may obtain, it is expedient to commit the remedy of it to
the will of the great God and of Jesus Christ.

Then to obtain that Council of the Emperor, he sends both to the Emperor
Arcadius, and to his brother Honorius some Bishops and Priests, to beseech them
that a Council might assemble by their leave, to judge again of that business.
So did the Roman Bishops behave themselves in those days.

But Sozomenus in the same place relates that the enemies of John Chrysostom
that were at Constantinople, gave to that proceeding a calumnious
interpretation, saying that it was done to affront his Imperial Majesty, and
caused these Deputies to be sent back as disturbers of the Eastern Empire, and
Chrysostom to be sent into a remoter exile at Pityunta. George Bishop of
Alexandria (as Photius in his Library affirms) says, That (...).
Innocent sustained many combats for that holy man, although his labor was
without effect; and that he sent Deputies, but they were sent back ill used.
And that he writ Letters, but that he could not atchieve any thing of that he
labored for. So weak and ineffectual was the intercession of the Bishop of
Rome at that time.

Upon that 25. chapter of the 1. book, p. 116. and seq.
Cardinal du Perron heaps up many untruths and forgeries. He says that
Chrysostom had recourse by Appeal to Pope Innocent the I. If that be true, It
is a wonder that all the Historians of that time are silent about it, and that
Chrysostom himself says nothing of it in any of the Epistles which he has
written upon that matter. It is a wonder also that he did not appeal to
Innocent in that very Council where he was condemned. For although he was not
present, he might have made his Appeal by another, and signified his Appeal
unto the Council. True it is, that two Letters of Chrysostom are found with
this superscription, (...).
To my Lord Innocent, Most reverend and most beloved of God. But that
superscription is altogether false and spurious. For the reading of those
Epistles will evidently justify that they are written either to the Bishops of
the West, or to all the Bishops of the Roman Empire, whom he calls (...), My
most honored and most religious Lords. As also the whole Epistle speaks in the
plural. Of Innocent or the Sea of the Bishop of Rome, not a word in these two
Epistles; And no more of any Appeal to the Pope. Nay, Chrysostom in the first
Epistle says, that when he was condemned by Theophilus, he appealed from his
judgment, not to the Bishop of Rome. (for he speaks never a word of him) but
to another Council, and that he besought the Emperor to convocate a lawful
Council, where his cause might be judged. By the same Epistle he craveth his
Brethren's help, and represents unto them the wrong done unto him, beseeching
them that by their means, things so unjustly done may have no force, and that
the doers may be punished: To which end he desires that a Council may be
assembled. If these be words of Appeal, it is the same Appeal which he made in
the Council where he had been condemned. Wherefore also Innocent received not
that Appeal, and reserved not to himself the knowledge of this cause: Only he
mediated with the Emperor for a Council, which he could never obtain. There is
yet less color in saying that by the second Epistle Chrysostom appealed to
Innocent: For it was written three years after his condemnation, when he had
lived almost three years in exile. And that Epistle like the precedent speaks
to Bishops in the plural, and speaks neither of, nor to Innocent, nor of his
See. So it is against all truth that the Cardinal affirms that Chrysostom
appealed unto Innocent.

A long fragment of an Epistle of Chrysostom unto Innocent is extant, in the
13. book of Nicephorus, chapter 19. where he speaks of no Appeals to Innocent, but
only of the excesses and insolences of his enemies. In vain also the Cardinal
heaps up some examples of Authors speaking in the plural to one man, as if they
spoke to many. These examples ought to have been taken out of the writings of
Chrysostom himself, to show that it was his ordinary style. Certainly in all
languages it would be an absurdity and a trespass against common sense, to say,
My Lords, or my Brethren, speaking to one man.

In the same place our Cardinal will show himself an Hebrician, Page 137.
saying that Rabbi signifies many. It is true that Rabbi comes out of Rab
which signifies multus and potens, and Rabbim signifies multi. But Rabbi does
not therefore signify many, and is not a plural word: But it is a singular
word, which in the Jewish tongue signifies Master and Doctor.

To that Fable he adds another of the like stuff; He says that Innocent
after the death of Chrysostom excommunicated the Emperor Arcadius and his Wife
Eudoxia; And his Author for it is George of Alexandria, who above 200. years
after compiled the life of Chrysostom out of several Authors, where he has
gathered many Fables contrary to the truth of the History. It is the testimony
which Photius gives him in his Library: (...), etc.
It is plain that this Writer relates many things contrary to the truth of the
History: But nothing hinders the Readers to choose what is good, and leave the
rest. And that which the Cardinal says is most false, that herein Cedrenus
followed George of Alexandria. For Cedrenus says not that Eudoxia was
excommunicated by Innocent or by any other, but only, (...), that she drew upon
her self a curse, and a just hatred. This affirmation that Cedrenus says, that
Innocent excommunicated Arcadius or Eudoxia, is a notorious forgery of the
Cardinal: That Fable being contradicted by all the Historians next unto
Chrysostoms time. For besides that Theodoret, Socrates, and Sozomenus, who have
exactly written all the passages of this History of Chrysostom, say nothing of
it; This is more, that Prosper and Marcellinus in their Chronicles, and
Socrates in the 6. book, 16. chapter expressly observes, that Eudoxia dyed in the
Consulat of Honorius and Aristenetus, which falls upon the year of our Lord
404. three years before Chrysostom's death, who dyed in the year 407. By this
account Innocent excommunicated Eudoxia three years after her death. To oppose
to ancient Historians new Authors, as Nicephorus, and Zonaras, or Simeon
Metaphrastes, a Fabulous Writer, as the Cardinal does, is no sincere dealing.
To invalid the testimony of Socrates, the Cardinal charge him to be a
Novatian, and an enemy to the memory of Chrysostom. But I cannot comprehend
that Socrates does wrong to the memory of Chrysostom, by setting the death of
Eudoxia before that of Chrysostom; especially seeing that Socrates does highly
praise and exalt Chrysostom, and justifies him with all his strength. It is
false also that Socrates was a Novatian; For he blames the Novatians as
Schismatics, in book 5. chapter 19. where he taxes them of separation from the
Church: (...).
Since the time (says he) that the Novatians separated themselves from the
Church: and in the following chapter he puts them among the Heretics: It is
expedient (says he) to pass in silence over that which happened among the
others, that is among the Arians, the Novatians, the Macedonians, the
Eunomians. This is enough to show that the Cardinal lays a false imputation
upon that faithful Historian Socrates.

In the same place the Cardinal affirms many things against the truth: Page
119. and 320.
As that Prosper Aquitanius, and Marcellinus Comes, put the death of the
Empress Eudoxia many years before the death of Chrysostom. For Prosper speaks
not at all of the death of Chrysostom, and puts the death of Eudoxia one year
after she had set up her silver Statue upon a Pillar of Porphyry, against which
Chrysostom preached. As for Marcellinus, he puts Chrysostoms death a year
before the death of Eudoxia. So I do not believe that the Cardinal had seen
these Authors, but trusted others that have abused him. With the like untruth
he says in the same place, that the revolt of the Isauri happened since the
exile of Chrysostom: For Chrysostom himself Chrysostom. Epist. 14. (...).
Epist. 14. affirms the contrary, saying that as he was going into exile, he
was sick in his journey with a burning fever, and that the incursions of the
Isauri frighted him. And if Arzabacius who was sent against them with an Army
obtained victories over them since the death of Chrysostom, the Empress that
favored that Arzabacius (as Zozimus relates) cannot be Eudoxia, as the
Cardinal will persuade us.

We have the life of Chrysostom written by Palladius, who speaks not of the
excommunication of Arcadius, and no more of Chrysostoms appeal to Innocent. It
is true, he says that Innocent judged that judgment of Theophilus should be
reversed and nulled. Not that Innocent had pronounced a sentence as a judge;
But he judged that it ought to be reversed by a Council. Wherefore also
Palladius adds how Innocent said, (...). Versio Bri^iani emendata a Frontone
Ducaeo Jesuita. Cogita urbis magnitudine^, etc. sed de millibus infinitis and
totius orbis capite.
that another irreprehensible Synod of the Prelates of East and West ought to
be kept. It is plain then that Innocent referred the judgment unto the Council.

It is then an evident lie of Pope Gelasius, who writ a hundred years after,
that Innocent absolved John of Constantinople. Popes are not credible witnesses
in such matters. And the Cardinal ought not to allege their testimony in their
own cause, as he does a thousand times, having filled all his book with such
testimonies. For the Bishops of Rome to exalt their own dignity, will lie very
liberally. Especially this Gelasius, who has overgone all his predecessors in
pride.

It was the custom in those days, that the Churches of the Roman Empire would
maintain their union by communicatory letters, and send the one to the other
the sacred bread, and Forms of blessing.
Eulogies as they spoke then, in sign of concord. During that discord about the
business of John Chrysostom, Innocent and the Bishops of the West would not
receive the communion from the Churches of Constantinople, and Alexandria, and
separated themselves from their communion, as Theodoret witnesses in the fifth
book of his history, chap. 34. John being dead, the Occidental men would never
admit the communion of the Egyptians, nor of the Oriental men, nor of the
Bishops of Bosphorus and Thracia, etc. But after they had heard what honor the
City of Constantinople had done to Chrysostom after his death, they were
reconciled, as Innocent. Ep. 17. ad Alexand^um.
Innocent himself witnesses; Having learned (says he) by those you sent, that
all things had been accomplished according to our desire, I have, with thanks to
God, received the communion of your Church. These testimonies show that the
Popes in those days did not excommunicate men and Churches out of their
Patriarchat, by thundering anathema's as they have done since, but only declared
that they would not receive their communion, and separated themselves from
their union, for fear of partaking with their sin.

But before I leave that holy man, I will allege some places, wherein he
speaks of the City and Church of Antioch, where he preached many years. In the
third Homily to the people of Antioch, he speaks thus of them, Consider the
greatness of the City, and that it is not here question of one, or two, or
three, or ten souls, but of infinite thousands, and of the Head of the whole
world. This City is that where Christians were first so called. That holy man
believed that the honor which God had done to Antioch, that in it the
faithful were first named Christians, was a sufficient consideration to make
it the first of all, and the head of all the world; and that by consequent it
ought to be preferred before the Church of Rome. The same Father, in the
seventeenth Homily to the same people: (...).
In Antioch the Disciples were first called Christians. No City in the whole
habitable world has that, no not the City of Romulus. Wherefore this City may
lift up her sight against the whole earth. And in the 25. Homily upon the Acts,
The Disciples have been first called Christians in Antioch. (...).
This is not a small praise of this Town, whereby She is made able to stand
against all. And in the Sermon upon Ignatius, he exalts the dignity of the
City of Antioch, because St. Peter to whom Christ gave the keys, and the
government of his Church, made a long abode in it. Whence he infers that
Antioch is not inferior to any City of the world. His words are, (...), that
is, our City is equal in worth, or may be put in the balance with all the
habitable earth. That good Doctor would never have spoken so, if he had thought
that the Church of Antioch was subject unto the Church of Rome. Wherefore when
from a Priest of Antioch, he was raised to the Patriarchat of Constantinople,
it was done without consulting the Bishop of Rome, and asking his approbation.
To John Chrysostom, Arsacius succeeded in the Patriarchat of Constantinople,
and after Arsacius Atticus Chrysostoms enemy.

Nicephorus in book 13. chap. 33. says that Innocentius Bishop of Rome
excommunicated that Atticus, who for all that remained peaceable possessor of
his place, being much honored and respected; and there continued the space of
four and twenty years. For the judgments of the Bishops of Rome out of their
Patriarchat were of no effect. Besides, such excommunications were but
declarations that one would not communicate with another.

CHAP. 2. Of the power of the Patriarcks of this fifth Age.
THE great authority which Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria used in the
deposition of Chysostome without receiving any censure or Ecclesiastical
punishment for it, remaining in a peaceable possession of his Patriarchat
until death, gives us occasion of speaking of the power which that Prelate
then had, who aspired unto higher things, and would have raised that See very
high, if the events of the following ages had concurred with the grounds which
he had laid.

Among the Epistles of Synesius Bishop of Ptolemais in Cyrene, there is one to
this Theophilus. In the sixty sixth Epistle propounding a question to him, he
says, (...).
It is the interrogation to which the authority of the Apostolical succession
must simply and clearly answer. And in the following Epistle, (...).
I will, and it is unto me a divine necessity to hold for a Law that which that
throne decrees. He speaks of the Sea of Alexandria: Had he written in these
terms to the Bishop of Rome, our Adversaries would be sure to make a show of
these texts to the Popes primacy.

That Theophilus being dead in the year 412. Cyrillus succeeded, whose power
was so great, that he durst with his own authority drive the Jews out of
Alexandria, whose multitude was incredible, and that without the consent of
Orestes the Emperors Lieutenant in the Province, whom he bearded, raising
seditions against him: in one of which Orestes being hurt with a stone by a
Monk called Ammonius, caused the Monk to be apprehended and put to death.
Cyrillus interred the Monks corpse honorably, and made a funeral Homily in his
praise, as for a Martyr. In a short time the power of the Patriarch of
Alexandria grew so much, that it was objected to Dioscorus Bishop of that See,
in the Council of Cbalcedon, that he had boasted himself to be as much Master
of Egypt, as the Emperor. Of that time after the death of Theophilus,
Socrates speaks in chap. 7. of book 7. of his history in these words; From that
time the Bishop of Alexandria besides the domination over the Clergy, got to
himself the principality in the temporal.

On the other side the Bishop of Rome was no less active to raise his
greatness. Of these two Prelates Socrates in book 7. chap. 11. of his history
speaks thus, that (...).
The Roman Episcopacy as well as that of Alexandria had past the bounds of
Priesthood, and had exalted its self to a secular principality. The Cardinals
ordinary answer when any thing is objected out of that Author, is to say, that
Socrates was a Novatian Heretic, and therefore enemy to the Roman Church; But
we have showed out of the 5. book and 19. chapter of his History, that he speaks of
the Novatians as of Schismatics and Heretics.

That the Church of Alexandria was not subject to the Bishop of Rome in that
time, it is clear by the 104. Canon of the Juxta editionem Tilii, (...).
collection of the Councils of Africa. It was decreed that they should write to
the most holy Pope Innocent about the discord which is between the Roman
Church, and the Church of Alexandria, that these Churches might keep that peace
among themselves which the Lord commands. That Canon commands not that the
Church of Alexandria become subject to the Roman, but mediating between both,
labors to make them agree, that they may live in concord. In that time the
Church of Rome received every year the order about Easter Day from the Church
of Alexandria, as we observed before. In that point the Roman Church was
subject unto that of Alexandria.

CHAP. 3. Of the Milevitan Council, and of the prohibition there made to Appeal
unto Rome. The Cardinals answers are examined.
IN the year of our Lord 402. a Council sat at Milevis in Numidia; and another
in the same town in the year 415. Of which two Councils since the Canons are
confounded, we will speak here as if the two Councils were but one.

Two evils did vex the Churches of Africa. First, the heresy of Pelagius and
Celestius. And in consequence of that first evil, the rebellion of some Clarks,
who being condemned by the Church of Africa, would cross the Seas and come to
Rome, to find support in the Bishop of Rome, who did greedily receive those
Appeals, laboring thereby to raise his authority. Thus after that Celestius
had been condemned in Africa, he had his recourse to Pope Zozimus, and that
Pope received and defended him for a time against the Churches of Africa. But
being better informed since, or despairing of his power to restore him, he
forsook him.

That being then a new thing not practiced before, the Bishops of Africa would
prevent that evil, and make in the Milevitan Council, either in the first or in
the second, this excellent Canon which is the 22. It is decreed that the
Priests, Deacons, and other inferior Clarks (if in their causes they complain
of the judgment of their Bishops) be heard by the Bishops of the
neighborhood, who being adjoined by the consent of their Bishops shall decide
their businesses. Quod si and ab Episcopis provocandum putaverint, non nisi ad
Africana provocent Concilia, vel ad Primates Provinciaru^ suarum. Ad
transmarina autem qui putaverit appellandum, a nullo intra Africam in
communione suscipiatur.
And if they think that they ought to Appeal also from their Bishops, let them
not Appeal but to the Councils of Africa, or to the Primats of their Province,
as it was often decreed about Bishops. But whosoever will Appeal beyond the
Sea, let him not be received to the Communion by any in Africa. This Canon is
found set down in these terms in the Greek copies, and in Apud Balsamonem in
collectione Canonum Carthaginensium Can. 31. (...), etc. Hincmar. in Ep. 55.
cap. 17. Qui provocandum putaverint ad Primates suarum Provinciarum, sicut and
de Episcopis saepe dictum est, provocent.
Balsamon the most learned of all the Grecians in Ecclesiastical Law, and in
Zonaras, and in many Latin copies, and is so alleged in the Council of Rhemes
under Hugh Capet, and by Hinckmarus.

That by the Appeals beyond the Seas, the Appeals to Rome are forbidden, it is
out of question; And Balsamons words are notable to that purpose, (...), etc.
Since these present Canons were framed in Carthage, that is in Africa, by the
judgments beyond the Seas, by all means those of Rome are understood; And
hence it appears, that those of the Church of Rome glory in vain, saying that
the differences of all the Churches must be judged by them upon Appeal: For if
Rome be not allowed to receive the Appeals of Africa, how much less shall she
have that right over all other Provinces?

The Reader must not find strange, that Balsamon says that this Canon has
been framed at Carthage. For in the sixth Council of Carthage, this Canon has
been again confirmed, upon occasion of one Apiarius a Priest in Africa, who
having been condemned by his Bishop Urban, had Appealed to Rome; at which the
African Bishops were much offended, as we shall see hereafter.

This Canon being made by a multitude of good and holy Bishops, among whom were
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and Austin Bishop of Bona, Bellarm: l. 1. de
Matrimonio c. 17. Respondeo Canones. Canones Milevitani ab Augustino praecipue
compositi.
who framed the Canons of this Council, whereby it is forbidden upon pain of
excommunication to Appeal unto Rome, it is no wonder that the Advocates of
Papacy have done all their endeavor to falsify it, and to corrupt both the
sense and the words. The Roman Decree compiled by Gratian, Causa 2. Qu. 6. Can.
Placuit, has added an exception in the end which corrupts the whole Canon.
For after those words, If any will Appeal beyond the Sea, let him not be
received by any in Africa to the Communion, they have sewed up this tail, nisi
forte Romanam sedem appellaverit, unless perhaps he has Appealed to the Roman
See. How should the Roman See be excepted, seeing that the Canon is expressly
ma^^ against those that Appealed to the Roman See?

But let us see what M. du Perron answers to this; Page 376.
for he extends himself upon this subject in the 47. chapter of the 1. book. He
says two things; The one, that this Canon must be understood only of the
lesser causes, not of the great, such as are the questions about the faith and
the Sacraments. The other, that this Canon means only the causes of Clarks of
an inferior degree, as Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons. He confesses then
that the Bishops of Africa, of whom St. Austin is one, prohibit upon pain of
excommunication to Appeal to the Bishop of Rome in the causes of Priests and
Deacons; And that in such points they did not like that the Pope should meddle
with their businesses: But that for the great causes, and for the causes of
Bishops, this Council intended not to hinder the Appeals to him. Wherefore he
maintains that this clause [as it was often decreed about the Bishops] must be
razed, as added since. And yet the Greek copies published by our adversaries,
and Balsamon, and Zonaras, and many Latin copies, have that clause, and put the
causes of Bishops in the same rank, as the causes of Priests and Deacons. And
which is more, we shall see hereafter, that the same Bishops assembled again
set down that clause so plain, that the Cardinal himself does acknowledge it.

To prove that clause to be false, he says that it is not found in the
Originals of the Milevitan Council, that is in the Copies written in the
Council it self, which no man of this age has seen. So this Prelat abuses the
Reader. He adds, that Gratian has not that clause, nor the German
Centuriators. But I have lately showed how wickedly Gratian has falsified that
excellent Canon: And the Centuriators of Magdenburg have followed the Latin
copies (that first came to their hand) corrupted by our adversaries, and
wanting that clause. All his other reasons, this among others, that Austin in
the 162. Epistle affirms, that by the ancient Discipline of Africa, the
Bishops had that right to Appeal beyond the Sea, are likewise false or vain.
Whosoever will read that Epistle, shall find no such thing. Austins words are;
Neque enim de Presbyteris aut Diaconis aut inferioris ordinis clericis, sed de
collegis agebatur qui possent aliorum collegarum judicio, praesertim
Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum, causam suam integram reservare.
The question was not of Priests, Deacons, or other Clarks of the inferior
order, but of the colleagues, who might reserve their whole cause to the
judgment of the other Bishops, to the Apostolical Churches especially. There
Austin speaks not of Appealing to the Bishop of Rome, but to the Apostolic
Sees in general assembled in Council; such as were the Churches of Alexandria,
Antioch, and Jerusalem, and Ephesus. And wheresoever in that 162. Epistle,
mention is made of the Churches beyond the Sea, thereby not only the Churches
of Italy are understood, but also those of Greece, of Gauls, and of all the
East and West assembled in a Council; as Austin declares it in the same Epistle
saying, Suppose that the Bishops that judged at Rome were not good Judges, the
universal Council of the whole Church remained yet. And in the same place;
There remained yet unto them thousands of colleagues beyond the Sea, where it
was known that they might be judged, since they suspected their African and
Numidian colleagues. Where it is plain, that by the Bishops beyond the Sea the
Bishop of Rome is not only understood. Thus in the book of the unity of the
Church, chapter 2. It remained that the Bishops beyond the sea that make the great
part of the extent of the Catholic Church, should judge of the dissentions of
the Africans. But to what end should we dispute, whether by that Canon the
Bishops of Africa be forbidden to Appeal beyond the Sea, since we shall see
hereafter that a few years after this Council of Milevis, the same Bishops
being assembled in the sixth Council of Carthage, renew the same constitution?
and write to Celestine Bishop of Rome very express letters upon that subject;
where they say, that if the Appeals of Priests and Deacons to the Bishop of
Rome are not receivable, much less ought he to receive the Appeals of Bishops,
which belongs to the jurisdiction of their Metropolitans. The Cardinal
acknowledges this, and so confutes himself.

Then to come to the Card^^als two answers unto this Canon; We are not ignorant
that there are some greater, some lesser causes: All causes are not of the same
importance, and there was no need for him to trouble himself to prove that;
less yet to employ the testimony of Pope Innocent writing to Victricius Bishop
of Roven, whom he makes to say, that the greatest causes must be referred to
the Apostolic See, to prove that the greatest causes of Africa were referred
to Rome: For besides that the Decretal Epistles of the ancient Popes are
suspected of forgery, the testimony of Popes is not receivable in their own
cause.

To no purpose he alleges in the same place Pope Gregory the first, and Pope
Leo, who are come since, and very often attribute unto themselves a power that
belongs not to them. And no witness (say I again) is receivable in his own
cause. To allege Charlemagne, and Hinckmarus, and Gerson, P. 776.
as the Cardinal does in the same place, is descending too low, even 1400.
years after Christ. That which was done in the late ages in France, over which
the Pope has exercised a tyranny these six or seven hundred years, is very
different from the condition of the Churches of Africa in St. Austins time. But
the Cardinal not being able to find any ancient African witness that reserveth
the Appeals in great causes to the Bishop of Rome, nor any example in antiquity
but such as he forgeth, has been forced to rake in the dregs of the last ages,
and authors of the late Gallican Church, to prove the Appeals of the ancient
Bishops of the African Church unto Rome: Whereas we bring ancient and famous
examples out of Africa it self; for it was a principal cause which was handled
in the Council of Africa, assembled by Of Agrippin. and Cyprian, and the
Councils by them assembled, see before book 3. chapter 3. of this work.
Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage, even the doctrine of the Sacrament of baptism.
Yet Agrippinus made no difficulty to decide such an important point of doctrine
without, yea against the Roman Church. And yet the Bishop of Rome at that time
showed not himself offended at it, and called not the cause before himself. For
the Bishops of Rome in those days behaved themselves with more humility.

Cyprian Bishop of the same Church did the same, having purposely assembled a
Council against the doctrine maintained by Steven Bishop of Rome, and did not
for that incur any censure of the Roman Pope, but was followed by the most
famous Bishops of the East, Dionysius of Alexandria, and Firmilianus of Cesarea
in Cappadocia. Who knows not that the Bishops of Africa in St. Austins time
took great offense when Celestius condemned by them, went to Rome to Zozimus
Bishop of the place, who favorably received him, and for a time defended him
with his authority? It was about an important point, the Pelagian heresy. We
shall see more examples hereafter, even out of Africa.

Yet suppose that this clause of the Milevitan-Canon, speaks only of the lesser
causes, yet it is contrary to the Bishop of Rome, and debaseth his authority.
For although the inferior Courts cannot judge definitively, and without
Appeal, but of certain lower causes, and to a certain sum of money: yet it
belongs not to them to make those limitations, but it belongs to a Sovereign
Judge to set those limits. An inferior Court cannot prohibit, upon pain of
death or fine, Appeals unto higher Courts in certain cases. Likewise if the
African Councils had been inferior Judges, subject to the Bishop of Rome, it
belonged not to them to prohibit Appeals unto the Bishop of Rome, in certain
cases, upon pain of Excommunication, nor to write to him, that he should
thereafter take heed of receiving such Appeals, or taking notice of them. But
it had belonged to the Pope to set limits to them, and to grant them to judge
definitively and without Appeal of some Causes of less moment, reserving to
himself the knowledge of the Causes of a higher nature.

The Cardinals second answer was, that this Milevitan-Canon speaks not of the
Causes of Bishops, and that these Fathers meant not to forbid the Episcopal
Appeals; and that this clause was falsely added. But we shall presently hear the
same Bishops expounding themselves upon that point, so plainly, that all matter
of doubt shall be removed. But though that clause quarrelled at were put out,
yet it is plain that this Canon forbids that no Appeals from Bishops be made
beyond the Sea, that is, to the Bishop of Rome. For that Canon prohibits
Appealing from the judgment of Bishops, to any but the Primates of Africa, or
before the Synod of the Province. Now in case of Appeal from the judgment of a
Bishop, the said Bishop is accused to have ill Judged, and he that was Judge
becomes a party. The Bishop then is forbidden by this Canon to maintain the
justice of his own Judgment before any, but the Judges of Africa, or before
the Primates of his Province.

For these causes Baronius, who deals more roundly then our Cardinal, Baron.
An. 419.. 70.
does freely confess that this Canon displeased the Bishop of Rome, as being
offensive to his authority. Yet this hindered not the Bishops of that same
Council from writing Letters full of respect and love to Innocent Bishop of
Rome, which are inserted among Austins Epistles. To these Letters we will give
a Chapter purposely, because Cardinal du Perron triumphs about them, and
alleges them upon every occasion.

CHAP. 4. Of the Schism happened at Rome, between Bonifacius and Eulalius.
IN the year of Christ, 417. Innocent dyed; Zozimus succeeds him, a favourer
for a time of the Heretics Pelagius and Celestius. Baron. An. 415.
Baronius relates the Epistle which he writ in their defense. But Zozimus soon
after changed opinion, being better informed.

The year following, he sent three Legates, Faustinus a Bishop, Philippus and
Asellus Priests, to the Council of Africa assembled at Carthage. The same year
Zozimus being dead, two Bishops, Bonifacius and Eulalius were elected, by two
contrary factions of the Roman People and Clergy: For in those days there was
no Cardinals in the Roman Church, and the election of Popes was made by the
Votes of the Clergy and the people. The Prefect of the City, named Symmachus,
would appease the sedition; but not being able to master the people, he writ
speedily to the Emperor Honorius about it; who with his sister Placidia, and
his nephew Valentinian, made his ordinary residence, now at Ravenna, now at
Milan. Symmachus favored Eulalius, and persuaded the Emperor, who turning
both these competitors out of the City, appointed guards to Bonifacius, to keep
him from raising troubles. So small was then the Popes power, that a few
Sergeants served to keep him prisoner. But Eulalius having made bold to return
into Rome without the Emperors leave, and the Roman Clergy having sent to the
Emperor, and petitioned for Bonifacius, the face of businesses changed, and
both were summoned to appear before the Emperor at Ravenna, upon the seventh
of February, to be heard in their Reasons, and to receive Judgment from his
Imperial Majesty; which summon they obeyed. And that the Church of Rome might
not be without conduct in their absence, Honorius appointed Achilles Bishop of
Spoleto to discharge the Office of Bishop of Rome as a Delegate. The parties
being heard, Baron. An. 419.. 34. and 36.
the Emperor gave sentence for Bonifacius, and expelled Eulalius. For in that
time the Bishops of Rome were subject to the Emperor, as much as the least of
the people; and no man entered into that Office without his approbation.

This trouble gave occasion to the Emperor Honorius to make a Law, which is
inserted into the 79. Distinction of the Roman Decree, in these terms:
Distinct. 79. Can. Si duo. Si duo forte contra fas temeritate concertantium
fuerint ordinati, nullum ex eis futurum Sacerdotem permittimus, sed illum in
sede Apostolica permansurum censemus quem ex numero Clericorum nova ordinatione
divinum judicium and universitatis consensus elegerit.
If perhaps two be established against reason, by the rashness of the
contenders, we shall suffer neither of them to be Bishop. But we decree, that
he who by the judgment of God, and by the consent of the generality, shall be
elected among the Clarks by a new Ordination, shall remain in the Apostolic
See.

CHAP. 5. Of the Council of Carthage, called the sixth. Of the Appeals from
Africa to Rome. The remonstrances of the Bishops of Africa to the Bishop of
Rome upon that subject. Confutation of the XL. Chapter of the first Book of the
Cardinal.
LEt us follow the thread of the History. In the year 419. happened a passage as
memorable, as any thing related in the Ecclesiastical History. The Bishops of
Rome offended with the express order of the Milevitan Council, forbidding all
Appeals from Africa to Rome, labored to heal that sore, and not being able to
do it by violence, or censures, (for they should have been laughed at) they
would go about it by subtilty.

There was then a Council sitting at Carthage, where two hundred and seven
Bishops met. To that Council the three abovenamed Legates of the Bishop of
Rome were sent, Faustinus, Philippus, and Asellus. That Council being but a
particular Council, without any Patriarch present, it was then or never, that
the Legates that represented the person of the Bishop of Rome, should have had
the precedence, and been placed in an honorable rank; which yet was not
deferred unto them: For Aurelius Bishop of Carthage presided at the Council.
And that which grieveth most our Adversaries, is, that after Aurelius, they
placed Valentinus Bishop of the first See of Numidia, and after Valentinus,
Faustinus the first Legate of the Bishop of Rome. This is found written in the
Tomes of the Councils, in the beginning of the Council, and in the Code of the
Canons of the Church of Africa, in these words, Cum Aurelius Papa una cum
Valentino primae sedis Numidiae, and Faustino Ecclesiae Potentianae, primae
sedis Provinciae Italiae Piceni, Legato Ecclesiae Romanae, etc.
After the Pope Aurelius with Valentinus of the first See of Numidia, and
Faustinus Legate of the Church of Rome, were set, etc. And that which is most
remarkable, is, that Philippus and Asellus, because they were but Priests, were
set at the very lowest end, under all the Bishops of Africa, although they were
Legates of the Roman Pope, at which they were not offended, for they found that
just and reasonable. Upon this our Cardinal is storming, in the 40. Chap. of
his first Book, and gives three answers; saying, that either the Copies of the
Councils are corrupted, of which he brings no proofs; or that these Legates
represented the negotiating person of the Pope, not his judiciary person. A
distinction forged in his brains, which makes the Pope to have two persons: but
it is confuted by the Council, where Faustinus, Philippus and Asellus are
termed Legates, not Negotiatours. Also he suspecteth that their Commission was
expired: Which also is confuted, in that they act in the Council as Legates;
which they would not have done, had they not been avouched by the Bishop of
Rome. Of Philippus and Asellus, put after all the Bishops of Africa, he says
nothing, finding no shift to excuse it.

These three Legates were charged in their instructions, to labor that
thereafter it might be lawful to appeal from Africa to Rome, and to the Roman
Bishops See, notwithstanding the Canon of the Milevitan Council, which had
forbidden those Appeals, upon pain of Excommunication. But the contrary came to
pass. For in that Council, the same Canon was renewed, and these Appeals
prohibited upon the same penalties. And because one Apiarius, a Priest of Sicia
in Africa, being excommunicated by his Bishop, was gone to Rome to Pope
Zozimus, who had favorably received him, and admitted him to his communion,
this displeased the Bishops of Africa, of whom Saint Austin was one.

Upon this the Legates of the Bishop of Rome arose, and labored to defend the
Authority of the Roman Bishop, who had sent them. Baron. An. 419.. 60. and seq.
For that they alleged no Text of Scripture, and spoke not of the Popes
Primacy, by virtue of Saint Peter's succession; for in those days they disputed
not so: neither had they that in their memories: But they produced a forged
Canon, which they falsely pretended to be of the Council of Nice, whereby it is
permitted to Bishops to Appeal unto the Roman See: By a notorious falsehood they
propounded a Canon of the Council of Sardica, where there was none but
Occidental Bishops belonging to the Roman Patriarchat, who to spite the
Oriental that had deposed Julius Bishop of Rome, conferred as much honor as
they could upon Julius, but an arbitrary honor depending upon their will, as
we proved before.

How little was the authority of that Canon, it was seen by that which
followed: For all the Bishops of the Council hearing that pretended Canon of
Nice, were much amazed, and said that the Canon was unknown unto them, and that
they had never heard of such an Order. Among others, Alypius Legate of the
Churches of Numidia, spoke thus in the name of the Synod: Having consulted the
Greek Copies, I know not how it came to pass that we have not found all these
things in it. Wherefore Holy Pope Aurelius, we beseech your reverence, that
since the authentical Copies of that Council are held to be in the City of
Constantinople, you be pleased to send some [Legates] with Letters from your
Holiness [to the Patriarch of that See], and not only to him, but also to the
Venerable Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, that they may send us that
Council, with stipulation [or attestation] by their Letters, that hereafter all
ambiguity may be removed: For we have not found it to be as our brother
Faustinus says. Yet to appease that Faustinus, Alypius voted that this
pretended Canon might be received promissionally, till the Deputies that were
to be sent, should be returned. The Reader may observe by the way, that
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, is called Pope by Alypius, and his Holiness:
Titles which in our days are given only to the Bishop of Rome.

That advice was followed; only that provisional reception of the Canon was not
admitted. And the twenty Canons of the Council of Nice were inserted into the
Acts of the present Council according to the truth, without that Canon inserted
by Faustinus: Who upon that desired the Council that they would not send to
Constantinople, nor to Alexandria, or Antioch, for fear of sowing discord
between the Churches, but that they should refer themselves about it to the
testimony of the Bishop of Rome. But his Remonstrances were not received. In
those days Popes and their Legates used Supplications and Remonstrances, of
which the Assembly judged, but they used no commands.

According to the Councils order, Deputies were sent to the Bishops of the
East, to bring the original Copies of the Council of Nice. While they were in
their journey, Bonifacius Bishop of Rome died, and Celestinus succeeded. These
Deputies brought the Originals to the Council of Carthage, which assembled
again upon that subject; and in them nothing was found of all that Faustinus
had said, and the imposture was discovered. Whereupon these Letters of
Remonstrance were sent to Celestinus Bishop of Rome. Praefato debitae
salutationis officio, impendio deprecamur ut deinceps ad aures vestras hinc
venientes non facilius admi^tatis: nec a nobis excommunicatos in communionem
ultra velitis recipere; quia hoc etiam Niceno Concilio definitum facile
advertet venerabilitas tua. Nam si de inferioribus Clericis vel Laicis videtur
id praecaveri, quanto magis hoc de Episcopis voluit observari? etc.
After our bounden duty of salutation, We instantly beseech you, that hereafter
you admit not so easily to your ears those that will come from hence; and that
you receive no more to the Communion those whom we have excommunicated. For
your Reverence shall also easily acknowledge that this is forbidden by the
Council of Nice. For if it appear that this is forbidden to the inferior
Clarks and Laymen, how much more would [that Council] have it practiced in
Note, in Bishops.
Bishops? that they being suspended from the Communion, be not readmitted to
the Communion hastily or unduly by your Holiness. Let your Holiness also reject
the wicked refuge of Priests and inferior Clarks. For no constitution of the
Fathers has taken that from the Church of Africa. And the Decrees of Nice have
subjected both the Clarks of inferior Orders, and the Bishops to their
Metropolitans. For they have most wisely and justly provided that every
business be determined in the place where it begun. Being confident that the
grace of the Holy Ghost shall not be wanting to every Province, whereby the
equity be prudently perceived and constantly kept by Christ's Priests.
Especially seeing that it is lawful to every one, if he be offended by the
judgment of his judges, to appeal to the Council of his Province, or even to
an Universal Council. Unless perhaps some body believe that God can inspire to
every one of us the justice of the examination of a cause, and refuse it to a
multitude of Bishops assembled in a Council. Or how can a judgment made beyond
the Sea be valid, to which the persons of necessary witnesses cannot be brought
by reason of the infirmity of their sex or age, or of many other intervening
businesses? For this sending of men [to us] from your Holiness we do not find
commanded by any Synod of the Fathers. And as for that which you did long since
send to us by Faustinus our fellow-bishop, as belonging to the Council of Nice,
we could not find it in the truest copies of the Councils, sent by holy
Cyrillus, our Colleague, Bishop of the Church of Alexandria, and by the
venerable Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, which also we sent to Bonifacius
your predecessor of venerable memory, by Innocent Priest, and Marcel
Subdeacon. Take heed also of sending to us any of your Clarks for executors in
favor of the first that asks it, lest it seem that we will bring the Fumosum
typhum.
fumous pride of the world into the Church of Christ, which bears the light
of simplicity, and the brightness of humility before them that desire to see
God. That Epistle is excellent, and a precious jewel of Antiquity, which is
found in the Tomes of the Councils, in the end of the VI. Council of Carthage:
and in the Greek Canons published by Du Tillet; and in the Code of the Canons of
the African Church, and in Balsamon: and is acknowledged as true by Baronius,
Bellarmin, and generally by all our adversaries that have written of this
controversy. Even in the Council of Rhemes held in the time of Hugh Capet,
Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans makes use of this piece against the Popes
authority. Note by the way that our Cardinal in the beginning of chapter 51.
alleges this Council of Rhemes, and says that it was held to oppress
Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans: which is false; for this Council was not held
against this Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans, but against another Arnulphus
Archbishop of Rhemes. An. 419.. 78.
Baronius makes no difficulty to say that the things contained in that Epistle
are somewhat hard; but especially that which the Fathers say in that Council,
that the Popes should send no more Legates a latere, from his side, to Africa.
But there are other clauses in it as hard; as that they like not his receiving
of those that appeal to him from Africa, though they should be Bishops; nor
that he send Commissioners or Executors from him, nor that he bring worldly
pride into the Church. And their saying that the Canons produced by the Legates
are false, and not to be found, is likewise very hard.

M. du Perron, though he use a thousand tricks to weaken the strength of that
Epistle, yet cannot dissemble that it displeases him; and endeavors to show
that these Fathers are in the wrong. He says they have taken that license, and
that the heat of choler fetched these words from them, and that their ignorance
is excusable. But that which he brings against that excellent Epistle, where
above two hundred Fathers speak with one accord, deserves a Chapter by it self.

CHAP. 6. Examination of the LII. Chapter of the first Book of Cardinal du
Perron, about the above mentioned Epistle of the VI. Council of Africa, written
by the Fathers of the Council to Celestinus Bishop of Rome, concerning the
Appeals from Africa to Rome.
IN that excellent Epistle of the VI. Council of Carthage to Celestinus, which
we have inserted in the precedent chapter that which most displeases M. du Perron,
is, that the Appeals of the Bishops of Africa to Rome, are put in the same rank
as the Appeals of the least Clarks; yea that these Fathers say that it ought to
be less permitted to Bishops to appeal to a Judge beyond the Sea, then to other
inferior Clarks. Nam [and] si de inferioribus Clericis vel Laicis videtur hoc
praecaveri, quanto magis hoc de Episcopis voluit observari? etc.
If (say they) it appears that this (meaning the Appeals beyond the Sea) be
forbidden to inferior Clarks, how much more did [the Council of Nice] intend
that it should be practiced in the Bishops, that they being suspended from the
Communion, be not hastily and unduly received to the Communion by your
Holiness? In vain then did the Cardinal labor so much to prove that this
clause was added to the Milevitan Council, since it is found so plainly and
expressly approved by the same Bishops assembled at Carthage a few years after.

To weaken the authority of that Epistle, he makes eight observations in his
LII. Chapter. In the first he says that after that Council the Appeals from
Africa to Rome did continue. Which he proves by an Epistle of the Emperor
Valentinian, of which we shall show hereafter how it was extorted by the
flattering arts of the Bishop of Rome; for it is much posteriour to this
Council of Carthage. He will prove it also by a Law of Marcianus made in the
time of the Council of Chalcedon; which is nothing to this purpose; for it
speaks not at all of Appeals of Bishops to the Roman Bishop. The Synod of
Chalcedon (says Marcianus) by the authority of the most blessed Bishop of the
City of Rome eternal in glory, deferreth to Flavianus the reward of his life
past and the palm of a glorious death. There no mention is made of Appeals.
Besides, he takes this from the Tomes of the Greek Councils, newly published by
our adversaries, brought forth out of the Popes Library, and framed according
to the Popes pleasure: So these Greek Tomes are but a collection of forgeries
and absurdities. Wherefore also between the Greek and the Latin Copies there is
a perpetual disagreement; although both are alike absurd and forged,
ill-agreeing with the Canons made in those Councils, which are of undoubted
truth, and which were read in the entry of Councils. But in these new Tomes you
shall find in the same Council Canons that tie short and bring low the
authority of the Bishop of Rome; and together Preambles, Orations and Epistles
of some private men which exalt and raise it, being forged long after to
invalid the strength of the said Canons that are so troublesome to our
adversaries: That will be seen especially in the Council of Chalcedon, out of
whose Preambles that Law of Marcianus is taken, of which we shall speak when we
come to the time of the Council of Chalcedon.

Of the like nature is the Epistle of Theodoret to Leon, and the Appeal of
Flavian, of which Page 126 and 437.
M. du Perron speaks in the 25, and 52. chapter Of them we will speak also when the
order of the History brings us to it.

His second Observation, is, that the Appeal of Apiarius, which was the thing
in question, was none of the great causes. To this I have answered in the chapter
before. If the cause of Apiarius, was of small moment, yet it drew another
cause of the greatest importance; whether the Bishop of Rome ought to send
Legates into Africa, and receive the Appeals of Bishops. Here M. du Perron
returns to his ordinary faults, alleging Innocents testimony in his own cause.
If the Popes must be believed, and received for Judges in their own cause, they
cannot but win their cause. A little after, he says, Page 452:
that the Milevitan Council sent back unto the Pope the final judgment of
Celestius; which is altogether false, and no trace of that in Austins Epistles,
106. and 92. which the Cardinal quoteth in the margin. Indeed the Fathers of
that Council desire Innocent to join with them, and to help them with his
authority; but they acknowledge him not for their Judge, and suspend not the
conclusions of their Council, till the Pope has approved of them. All that he
adds out of Zozimus is of the like nature: it is true that Zozimus condemned
Celestius, but herein he did not bear himself as a superior Judge above the
African Councils; and the long allegations which the Cardinal brings to that
end, speak not of Appeals. This Prelat fills the Paper and tireth the Reader
with useless authorities which concern not the question at all. Only he brings
a place of Paulinus which he never saw, but alleges it upon the faith of
Baronius, who is very liberal of his lies in these matters.

His third Observation, is that the Africans disputed not with the Pope about
the evocations which came from his own motion. This is confuted by the same
Epistle of the Council to Celestinus, wherein they warn him that he send no
more Legates or executing Commissioners into Africa; for such delegacies were
done by the proper motion of the Bishop of Rome. The evocation of the cause of
Athanasius made by Julius, which M. du Perron brings for example, is false, as
we have showed. And we have seen how Julius being chosen for an Arbitrator,
would make himself a Judge, and that having cited the adversaries of
Athanasius, they derided him with taunting Letters, and refused to appear.

And Valentinians constitution, of which he speaks next, is a fraud and a trick
of the Roman Bishop, as we hope to show. The example which he adds of Gregory
the I. is of the end of the VI. age; and Hinckmarus whom he alleges, is near
three hundred years after Gregory. The Cardinal who had limited himself within
the time of the first four Councils, goes lower when proofs fail him in
antiquity. Besides, there is no doubt but that the Bishop of Rome did his
utmost to evocate to himself the causes of the remote Provinces. But all that
he desired was not done, and that which he commanded was not executed. And that
which was done in France under Charles the Bald, is very different from that
which was done in Africa four or five hundredth years before.

52. chapter page 461.
We must not here omit a notorious falsification of the Cardinal, who alleges
thus the words of Innocents Epistle, which is the 96. among those of St.
Austin, Pelagius must not expect to be called by us, but he must come to us
that he may be absolved. The Original runs thus: Non a nobis accersi, sed ipse
debet potius festinare ut possit absolvi: He must not be called by us, but he
ought rather to make haste that he may be absolved. Innocent is so far from
willing or hoping that Pelagius would appear before him, that he adds that
Pelagius will never submit himself to his judgment, and that it is better that
others call him that are nearer the place where Pelagius was. And when all is
said, it is unjust to allege the Popes in their own cause.

Page: 462.
His fourth Observation, is that it was not out of set purpose and first
intention, that the African Fathers stirred the controversy of the Transmarine
Appeals of Bishops, but by accident. Suppose that this is true, though it be
false; Is it material upon what occasion they have stirred that Question? all
is to know how they decided it.

The Reader also shall observe the Cardinals confession, that this Council has
opposed the Appeals of Bishops, which he made a show to doubt of in the 47. chapter

In the same place he returns to his ordinary and fifty times repeated
falsification, that Austin in the 162. Epistle, says that Cecilianus might
have reserved the Definition of his cause to transmarine judgments, that is
(as M. du Perron understands it) to the Bishop of Rome. Truly in the Canon of
the Milevitan Council confirmed in the VI. Council of Carthage, where the
transmarine Appeals are forbidden upon pain of excommunication, the Appeals to
Rome are forbidden. For the African Bishops did complain only that some Clarks
condemned by the Bishops of Africa, were fled to Rome there to find refuge. But
Austin in the 162. Epistle, by the transmarine judgments understands the
judgment of the Churches out of Africa, which are beyond the Mediterranean Sea
in respect of Africa, such as are the Churches of Gauls, Italy, Greece, Asia,
etc. These are Austin's words in the said Epistle, Millia collegarum
transmarina restabant, ubi apparebat eos judicari ^posse qui videbantur
Africanos vel Numidas habere suspectos.
Thousands of transmarine Colleagues remained, where it was evident that they
might be judged that seemed to suspect the Africans and the Numidians. It is a
great want of brains to think that by thousands of colleagues, that is Bishops,
the Bishop of Rome alone must be understood. The same appears by this other
passage of the same Epistle, Qui possent aliorum collegarum judicio, praesertim
Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum, causam suam integram reservare.
They might reserve their whole cause to the judgment of other Colleagues,
especially of the Apostolic Churches.

The Cardinal adds that the Bishops of that Council besought the Pope to send
into the East, to see whether that order should be found among the Copies of
the Council of Nice. But he should have added that Faustinus Legate to the
Bishop of Rome, desired the Council to desire the Bishop of Rome alone to do
that without sending to the other Churches, saying, Council. Carthage. VI. c. 5.
Sufficit ut and ipse Beatissimus Episcopus urbis Romae, sicuti vestra sanctitas
apud se tractat, ita and ipse inquirat, ne contentio inter Ecclesias nata
videatur.
It is sufficient that the most blessed Bishop of the City of Rome, as your
Holiness now deals with him, make himself the inquiry, lest that it seem that
contention is moved among the Churches; but that rather you may deliberate with
brotherly kindness, he writing back to you that which is most expedient for you
to observe. But that was not granted to him: and the Council judged that it was
not reasonable that the Bishop of Rome alone be trusted about that matter: but
they writ to the Bishops of Constantinople and Alexandria. Note by the way that
the Legates of the Bishop of Rome, give him no higher title then that of Bishop
of the City of Rome, which in these days would be a word of contempt and a mark
of heresy. And that in that Council Aurelius is called Pope, and his Holiness.
That Aurelius presiding in the Council, having heard the Proposition of
Faustinus, decreed only that Bonifacius Bishop of Rome, whom he calls Fratri
and consacerdoti nostro.
his Brother and Companion, should be made to understand by Letters all that
was done. And against the will of Faustinus and his fellows, The Council sent
to the East for the said Copies, which soon after were sent to the Africans.

Fifthly, M. du Perron goes about to excuse Pope Zozimus, saying that it was
not out of fraud, nor for his own advantage that he supposed the Canons of the
Council of Sardica, as if they had been of Nice; For the Popes use to walk in
great humility and simplicity: and the African Fathers were much to blame to
accuse him that he would bring worldly pride into the Church. But none will
believe, but he that will study to deceive himself, that the Council of Sardica
was held an appendix of the Council of Nice, or that the Canons of Sardica were
held in the Roman Church of those days to be the Canons of the Council of Nice.
That is not only false, but also ridiculous, as was proved before. Book 5. chapter
1. of this work.
For that Hosius did preside in both, does not make both one. In many Councils
of Carthage, Aurelius is President: Which Councils nevertheless are counted for
diverse Councils. Athanasius also was present in both, but in that of Nice he
was but a Deacon; and it is doubted with good reason, whether he had a
deliberative voice in it. M. du Perron, to prove that it was the same Council,
says that the Council of Sardica was assembled to confirm the doctrine of the
Council of Nice. But that very instance shows that they are diverse Councils.
For a Council is not convocated to confirm it self. Besides, other matters were
treated at Sardica: For the business of the Council, was the restitution of
Athanasius and some other Bishops into their Bishoprics. But the principal
consideration is, that the Council of Sardica though convocated out of the
Universal Empire, yet consisted only of Occidental Bishops, the Oriental having
withdrawn themselves from the beginning of the Council. So that of a Council
which in its convocation was Universal, were made two particular Councils,
which condemned and excommunicated one another. Certainly an Universal Council
cannot be the same thing as a particular. And if these Canons of Sardica had
been held the same as those of Nice, so many learned African Bishops had heard
of it, and had not been ignorant of such a noted thing. It is to no purpose to
say that the Canons of the Council of Trull, are called the Canons of the VI.
Council: But that may be said with good reason, because the VI. Council had
made no Canons; and to supply that defect, the Bishops were by little and
little gathered in the same Town; and most of those Bishops were the same that
had been in the precedent Council.

The Cardinal ought to have forborne, for shame, to justfie Zozimus by the
example of Gregory of Tours, who by oversight or ignorance mistakes the Canons
of Gangra for those of Nice. That good man did it out of simplicity, in a cause
where he had no interest. But here the Bishop of Rome was interested, who
knowing that the Council of Sardica was of small authority, would make the
Canons of Sardica to pass for those of Nice to make them of greater weight.
Which if Zozimus did without fraud, his Legates cannot be excused of a notorious
malice and perverseness, that they would suffer the Council of Carthage to send
Deputies such a great way to clear themselves of a doubt, about which they
could have satisfied the Council, declaring that those Canons had been made
indeed at Sardica, not at Nice, but that the Roman Church received them as if
they had been made at Nice.

The same is confirmed by the sixth Observation which the Cardinal adds,
though without proof, That the Copies of the Council of Sardica were lost in
Africa, being suppressed by the Donatists. For if the Council of Sardica had ever
been esteemed to be part of that of Nice, that would have raised it to such a
credit that the Donatists could never have suppressed it. But this is but a
conjecture of the Cardinal, forged by him without any witness. There is no more
truth in that he says in the 466. page That it was the custom of the Roman
Church to cite the Canons of the Council of Sardica under the title of the
Council of Nice. Whereas in the 8. book of Sozomenus chapter 26. there is an
Epistle of Innocent Bishop of Rome to the Clergy of Constantinople, where he
alleges the Council of Nice, and the Council of Sardica as two different
Councils. And the testimonies of Zonaras, and Balsamon, and Glycas, which the
Cardinal alleges in the 467. page say only that in the Council of Sardica the
doctrine of the Council of Nice was confirmed, but say not that the Council of
Sardica was a part, or an Appendix of the Council of Nice. And most false it is
that Justinian confounds the Council of Sardica with that of Nice, in the 131.
Novel related by Leunclavius; For Justinian neither there nor any where else
does confound these Councils: The Cardinal ought to have added Justinians words.

His seventh Observation, is, that these African Fathers made no decision about
the Episcopal Appeals. Suppose that it be so; It is enough that they suppose
that it was done already, saying, As it was oftentimes decreed concerning
Bishops. And in their Epistle to Celestinus, saying, that the Council of Nice
has decreed it so; not only for inferior Clarks, but also for Bishops.

That which he adds for the eighth Observation, that after the VI. Council of
Carthage, the Pope did nevertheless remain in possession of the Episcopal
Appeals, shall not be found true, neither could he bring any example of it. We
find the clean contrary in the II. Tome of the Councils, by an Epistle of
Bonifacius Bishop of Rome, written about 187. years after that Council, to
Eulalius Bishop of Thessalonica, which shows that Aurelius and his
successors long after would not bear the yoke of the Bishop of Rome. Aurelius
praefatae Carthaginensis Ecclesiae olim Episcopus, cum collegis suis instigante
Diabolo, superbire temporibus praedecessorum nostrorum Bonifacii atque
Celestini contra Romanam Ecclesiam coepit.
These are the words of the Epistle, Aurelius sometimes Bishop of the foresaid
Church of Carthage, by the Devils instigation, in the time of our predecessors
Bonifacius and Celestinus, began with his colleagues to grow proud against the
Roman Church. But now Eulalius [ Bishop of Carthage] seeing himself separated
from the Communion of the Roman Church, humbling himself, made his
acknowledgement. Note by the way that in the title of the Epistle there is a
fault crept in: for that Eulalius to whom it written, was Bishop of
Thessalonica, not of Alexandria. Harding the Buckler of Popery in England,
Sect. 28. de primatu Papae. Anathematizamus omnes qui contra sanctam Romanam
and Apostolicam Ecclesiam superbiendo suas erigunt cervices.
observes that in some copies there is Bishop of Thessalonica; For the name of
the Bishop of Alexandria of that time was not Eulalius. That which confirms the
truth of this Epistle, is, that a form of Anathema is added to it again all
those that are risen against the Church of Rome. Which form without question
had been prescribed by the Bishop of Rome to Eulalius Bishop of Carthage and to
his Clergy, when they were reconciled with the Roman Church. These writings we
have only from our Adversaries, who to make them more authentical, have
inserted them in the Tomes of the Councils, and among the Decretals of the
Popes, of which it is said in the 19. Distinction in the Canon, In Canonicis
Inter Canonicas Scripturas Decretales Epistolae connumerantur; The Decretal
Epistles are reckoned among the Canonical Scriptures. Especially a fragment of
that Epistle of Bonifacius the second, is inserted in the Roman Decree, in the
89. Distinction in the Canon Ad hoc.

Another passage happened in Africa since the sitting of that Council at
Carthage, shows evidently that the African Church was not subject to the
Roman Bishop. For Victor Tonensis in his Chronicle relates, that in the year
549. ten years after the Post consulatum Basilii V.C. an. X. Africani
Antistites Vigilium R^manum Episcopu^ damnatorem trium capitulorum synodaliter
a Catholica communione, reservato ei poenitentiae loco, excludunt.
Consulat of Basilius, the Bishops of Africa assembled in Council, pronounced a
sentence of Anathema and excommunication against Vigilius Bishop of Rome, yet
reserving unto him place of repentance, having learned that the said Vigilius
had condemned three heads or points which had been approved by the Council of
Chalcedon. At that time Reparatus was Bishop of Carthage.

After these eight observations, M. du Perron spends many pages to relate the
history of Apiarius, and to speak of the presenting of the Canons of Sardica,
as if they had been of Nice; and he labors to make the Council of Sardica
(though unknown to the Africans, and consisting only of Occidental Bishops)
more authentical than that of Nice. All that more then needs: For after all
his bustling, he grants us what we ask, which is that in that Epistle the
Fathers of that Council of Carthage writ to the Bishop of Rome Celestinus, such
things as displease him, and such as he finds fault with, almost in every
clause, and which oppose the authority of the Bishop of Rome. He says that
they took upon them to write to Celestinus, as taxing them to have written too
boldly. He says that the heat of the contention fetched those words from their
mouth. Whereby he confesses that these Fathers were contending with the Bishop
of Rome. He says also that they are excusable, and labors to excuse their
ignorance. As also An. 419.. 78.
Baronius says that the things contained in those Epistles are somewhat hard.
See then these men, who boast to have the consent of the Fathers on their side;
and yet when they examine the actions of the Fathers, they make bold to condemn
them. Now which shall I rather believe, either above two hundred African
Bishops, in whose number those two holy and famous men were, Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage, and St. Austin Bishop of Bona, who made this Canon against the
Appeals at Rome, which Canon was confirmed in the sixth Council of Carthage; or
two Cardinals of this age, as Baronius and du Perron, whom the Pope kept tied
by the belly, and who were slaves of the Roman See?

Among all this discourse many things escape our Cardinal, which must be
pardoned him. In the 474. page, he falls again into that falsification which is
so ordinary with him, saying that the ground of the Africans in their dispute
against the Donatists, was, that Cecilianus after he had been deposed by the
Bishops of Africa, could reserve the judgment of his cause to the transmarine
Churches: Where he will have those words of transmarine Churches to be taken in
the 162. Epistle of St. Austin in the same sense as in the Melevitan Council,
that is, for the Roman Church. But there Austin by the transmarine Churches,
understands the Churches both of East and West, and the Apostolic Sees; and
says, that Cecilian after the judgment of the Africans could yet Appeal to
the transmarine Churches, and to the Apostolic Sees assembled in an Universal
Council: Over which Apostolic Sees Austin ascribes no superiority to the
Bishop of Rome.

In the 478. page, to prove that the Pope sometimes sent his delegats into
Africa, who with soldiers and force of arms executed his orders, he alleges
the 261. Epistle of Austin, saying that Antony Bishop of Fussal in Numidia,
being condemned by the inhabitants of Fussal, having Appealed to the Pope,
threatened them to bring troops of soldiers from the Pope to execute the
judgments of the Apostolic See; so that these poor inhabitants feared to
suffer worse things from a Christian Bishop, than from the Emperors Laws. But
that Epistle is basely forged; for in the ancient copies of Austin there is but
206. Epistles; To which they have added of late 21. Epistles, and since 22.
more; so that they are in all 249. Epistles. But Baronius speaks of other
Epistles newly forged; so it is from Baronius that our Cardinal has taken this
false piece of coin as many others. And yet he often studies to confute them,
and bestows whole Chapters upon that business, as the 48. chapter which fills
forty pages. But how could the Pope have that power in those days, to send
bands of soldiers into Africa, whereas we have seen, that at the same time
Pope Bonifacius was kept prisoner by a few Sergeants, by the command of the
Emperor Honorius. None but a raw novice in the history of those days, will
believe that then the Bishop of Rome had the command of bands of soldiers, and
could send them into far Countries, in the Emperors sight and without his
leave. Should those Africans, who in the Epistle to Celestinus Bishop of Rome
forbid him to send Legates into Africa to judge of their businesses, have been
afraid that he should send bands of soldiers upon them?

In the same page he expounds fumosum typhum, a fumous whirlwind, whereas it
signifies the fumous pride. He takes (...) and (...) for the same thing,
according to his ordinary ignorance in the Greek tongue; for (...) signifies
not a whirlwind. That in that Epistle typhus must be expounded pride, it
appears, because typhus is opposed to humility; Executores clericos vestros
quihusque petentibus nolite mittere; nolite concedere, ne fumosum typhum
saeculi in Ecclesiam Christi quae lucem simplicitatis and humilitatis diem Deum
videre cupientibus praesert, videamur inducere.
for fear (say these Fathers) that it seem that we will bring in fumosum
typhum, the fumous pride of this world, into the Church of Christ, which
bears the light of simplicity and the brightness of humility, before them
that desire to see God. This word is Austins style: as chapter 3. of the 2. book of
baptism against the Donatists, sine ullo typho sacrilegae superbiae, without
any swelling of sacrilegious pride. Which shows that this excellent Epistle of
the Council was made by Austin.

In the same 52. chapter toward the end, he alleges some testimonies according
to his ordinary faith. We spoke before of an Epistle of Pope Bonifacius to
Eulalius, whereby he says, that Aurelius and his fellows at the Devils
instigation did rise against the Roman Church; of which fellows of Aurelius St.
Austin was one. Whence it follows, that Austin dyed out of the communion of
the Roman Church. This seems to be contradicted by an Epistle of Pope
Celestinus alleged Chapter 52. p. 480.
by M. du Perron, where Celestinus says, We had always Austin in our
communion. But there is an Annotation in the margin of that That Epistle is
found in the 1. Tom. of the Councils.
Epistle, which accuses that Epistle of falsehood from the 3. chapter to the 13.
and last. Now there is no likelihood that five parts of the Epistle be false,
and the sixth true. For my part, I choose rather to acknowledge that Epistle
for true, seeing that Vincentius Lirinensis and Prosper against the Collator
have copied passages out of it. And I easily believe that Celestinus might
speak so. For the Popes not able to oppose themselves to Austins authority,
have been sometimes constrained to speak of him with honor. And it is
possible, that this Epistle was falsified with some additions.

A little after he alleges these words of Fulgentius in the book of
incarnation, 11. chapter The Roman Church is the head of all the world. That
traduction is false. Fulgentius says, Romana (quae mundi cacumen est) tenet
and docet Ecclesia. He calls the Roman Church not the head, but the top and
most eminent of all the world. If I say that Paris is the capital and the most
eminent City of all the Kingdom of France, I do not thereby ascribe to it an
Empire over Toulouze or Bordeaux. Thus in the 142. page he translateth summam
Ecclesiam the Sovereign Church, instead of the most honorable and eminent.

It is usual with this Cardinal, to wrest the places of Fathers to his
advantage by a false interpretation Page 145.
As in the 26. chapter he corrupts Optatus, whom he makes to say, Syricius hodie
qui noster est socius: cum quo nobis totus orbis commercio formatarum in una
communionis societare Epistolarum concordat.
by whom [Pope Syricius] all the world has communion with us, as if the union
of Christians was only by the Popes means; but there is in Optatus cum quo, not
per quem. Wherefore also in the same place he calls Syricius his fellow;
Syricius (says he) who is our fellow.

Thus in the 34. chapter he translates these words (...). Page: 247.
We beseech thee to honor our decree with thy judgment: But (...) signifies
not judgment, but only suffrage or vote. He will persuade that the ^ouncil of
Chalcedon submit their decrees to the Popes judgment. In the 25. chapter page 117.
he alleges an Epistle which Chrysostom writes generally to Bishops, and will
persuade us that it is written to Pope Innocent. In that Epistle Chrysostom
says to them (...), be ye entreated to write letters. But the Cardinal to draw
this to the Popes advantage, translateth, Be pleased to send word, or to
command, as if Chrysostom desired the Pope to send his Mandates or
Commandments. For although (...) signify sometimes, but very seldom, I
command, yet it cannot be so translated here, because these Bishops to whom
Chrysostom writes, had not the power to command. All his book swarms with such
faults.

Toward the end of the Chapter he adds the words of Eugenius Bishop of
Carthage to Cubadus Lieutenant to Hunerick King of Africa, Chapter 52. p. 480.
which says that the Roman Church is the head of all the Churches. I answer,
that these words import no superiority nor power over the other Churches. So we
say that Virgil is the head and Prince of Latin Poets, and that London is the
head and capital City of England, that is, the most noble and illustrious.

Note also that Eugenius speaks of none but of the Churches of the Roman
Empire, and that this pre-eminence of the Church of Rome over the other
Churches of the Roman Empire, was by reason of the towns dignity, it being
decreed by many Councils, that Bishops should keep their ranks according to the
civil order of the dignity of their towns; and that this is related by Victor
of Vtica, as happened the seventh year of Hunerick, which falls upon the year
of the Lord 484. thirty three years after the fourth Council, which M. du
Perron had set for his limits, having undertaken to prove his cause by the
ancient Church in the time of the first four Universal Councils.

CHAP. 7. Notes upon the forty eighth and forty ninth Chapters of the first
Book of Cardinal du Perron. His ignorance in Greek.
THe forty eighth Chapter of M. du Perron treats of the order and distinction
of the Councils of Carthage. All that Chapter is employed to dispute against
Cardinal Baronius, and to show that Baronius misreckoned himself in the
supputation of times, and in the distinction and order of the Councils of
Carthage, and to muster up his exact knowledge in Ecclesiastical History: which
he does with such a tedious diligence, that I have much ado to persuade my
self, that any Reader can obtain of his Patience to read that Chapter to the
end. As for our part, it is nothing to us which of these two Cardinals ought to
be believed; for that Dispute concerns not our Controversies.

The same I say of the XLIX. Chapter, where he contends with the Grecians, and
with some Authors of the Roman Church, which hold that the Council of Africa is
a Council by it self; as also in the Tomes of the Councils, that Council is put
in its order, having a hundred Canons in the Latin Tomes, and a hundred thirty
five in the collection made by the Grecians. But the Cardinal maintains that
it is a Rapsody compiled out of many Councils by some African Canonist, and
perhaps he is in the right for that. But that is nothing to our controversy.
Wherefore we leave those two Chapters unanswered, and let him alone disputing
with men of his own Church.

Only we will observe that in that African Council the sixth Canon is such; Vt
primae s^dis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps sacerdotum aut summus sacerdos,
aut aliqu^d ejusmod^, sed tantum p^imae sedis Episcopus.
Let not the Bishop of the first See be called Prince of Bishops, or Sovereign
Bishop, or some such name, but only the Bishop of the first See; Which order,
purposely made to keep in modesty the Primates of Africa which took proud
titles, yet reflects upon the Bishop of Rome, whose ambition these Fathers
labored to restrain.

The same Council in the 4. Canon decrees that in the Sacrament of the body
and blood of the Lord, nothing be offered but bread and wine mingled with
water. Which Canon is set down in more express terms; in the Page 418. (...).
37. Canon of the Code of the African Church in these words; That nothing be
offered in the Sacraments but the body and blood of the Lord, as tho Lord
himself has delivered unto us, that is, bread and wine mingled with water.
Where these Fathers declare that by these words, the body and the blood of the
Lord in the Eucharist, bread and wine must be understood. And the same Canon
repeated in the same words in the Council of Trull, Can. 32. But in the Latin
copies these last words, That is bread and wine, have been maliciously pared
away, because they overthrow transubstantiation.

I will also observe by the way, that the Cardinal in the same 49 chapter
translates (...) studious, taking (...) for (...). For (...) signifies not
studiosus, but expetitus and quod studiose appetitur; whence comes (...) and
(...), desired by every one, and worthy to be desired.

CHAP. 8. Of St. Austin Bishop of Bona in Africa. Whither he did acknowledge
the Bishop of Rome Head of the Universal Church. And what was in his time the
order and dignity of Patriarks, and Apostolic Sees.
IN that time St. Austin lived, a man of holy life, and of great learning. In
whose writings a great humility and meekness is shining; who in his
Controversy with Hierom shows as much charity and patience, as Hierom does
choler and impatience, although Austin had the right on his side. Whosoever
has carefully perused this Author, will acknowledge that he was not subject to
the Bishop of Rome; and that in those days the Pope had no rule over the Church
of Africa, nor over the Universal Church.

This is that St. Austin, who being in the Milevitan Council, made the Canon
wherein the transmarine Appeals, that is, to the Bishop of Rome, are forbidden
upon pain of excommunication; These are the words, Whosoever shall appeal
beyond the Sea, let him not be received by any in Africa to the Communion.

This is that same Austin, who has assisted in all or most Councils of Africa
held under Aurelius Bishop of Carthage. In the sixth of which the prohibition
of the Appeals to Rome was reiterated, and the Bishops of Africa writ Letters
to Celestinus Bishop of Rome, See these Letters in the 6. ^h. of this present
book.
warning him that thereafter he should not receive the Appeals of Priests,
Bishops and other Clarks of Africa; and that he should send no more Legates, nor
executing Commissioners into Africa, and that he should not bring the pride of
the world into the Church: And that the Canons which he produced by his Legates
as Canons of Nice, that by virtue of them he might draw to himself the Appeals
of Africa, were false and supposititious. It is true, that the name of Austin
is not among the subscriptions to that Epistle; but that hinders not but that
he was present at that Council; for seldom would all the Bishops put all their
names to the Epistles of a Council. And though he had been absent from that
sixth Council, yet the Council was purposely assembled to confirm the Canon of
the Milevitan Council made by Austin about those Appeals. And seeing this fi^^t
Council represented all the African Churches, it is without all doubt that
(...) subject to the orders made in the same, and did approve them.

(...) ^^at Austin, who by the judgment of Pope Bonifacius the II. dyed out of
the communion of the Roman Church, for rising against the Church of Rome by the
Devils instigation: For these are the words of Bonifacius in the forealledged
Epistle; Aurelius with his fellows began in the time of our predecessors
Bonifacius and Celestinus, to grow proud against the Church of Rome by the
Devils instigation. Now Austin was one of the fellows of Aurelius, and he that
made the Canon against the Appeals to Rome. That which made that Epistle of
Bonifacius dubious, is, that in the title Eulalius is called Bishop of
Alexandria, whereas he was Bishop of Thessalonica, as we showed before. It is
true, that between Austins time and this Bonifacius, many godly men lived in
Africa, who suffered Martyrdom, and spoke honorably of the Church of Rome: For
the Bishops of Rome that lived in that interval, bore with patience the censure
of the Africans, and did not take it so hainously as this Bonifacius.
Howsoever, we had that Epistle from our adversaries, who have inserted it in
the Decretal Epistles of the Popes. And it is alleged in the Roman Decree, in
the 89. Distinction Did. 89. Can. Ad hoc.
.

It is the same Austin, who in the first book against Julian, chapter 2. says that
Julian being condemned by Non est ergo cur provoces ad Orientis An^istites, cum
and ipsi utique Christiani sint, and utriusque partis terrarum fides una sit.
Innocent Bishop of Rome, appealed to the Oriental Churches. Then or never the
Bishop of Rome should have condemned Julian for appealing from the Sovereign
Head of the Universal Church to inferior judges subject to the Roman Pope. But
Austin says no such thing, but says only that in vain he had appealed to the
Oriental Churches, seeing that they agreed with the Occidental, and held the
same faith.

It is the same Austin who in so many places, as in the 162. and 166. Epistles,
in the book of the unity of the Church, chapter 16. and in the first book against
Julian, chapter 2. relates how the Donatists condemned by Melchiades Bishop of
Rome, and by his associates, had their recourse to the Emperor Constantin, who
would have the cause to be revised by other Judges; and commanded that a Synod
should meet at Arles, where the judgment of Melchiades was examined: who
complained not that the dignity of his See was wronged by subjecting his
judgment to the judgment of a particular Council, convocated by another then
himself. That action of Constantin is very sharply condemned by Cardinal du
Perron, so far as to say that it was done against all order, and to tax the
Emperors Decree of irregularity and nullity; whereas Austin relates that action
of Constantin with praise and approbation. For in that 162. Epistle, he says,
that Ac non Imperator ita quaeri jusserit, ad cujus curam, de qua rationem Deo
redditurus esset, res illa maxima pertinebat? etc. Si autem criminis non est
provocare ad Imperatorem, non est criminis audiri ab Imperatore.
the business belonged chiefly to the Emperors care, of which he was to give an
account unto God. And that if it be not a crime to appeal to the Emperor, it
was not a crime to be heard by the Emperor.

It is the same Austin, who in the Epistle 162. says that Cecilianus and the
Donatists after the judgment of the Africans, Restabat utique ut Episcopi
transmarini, quae pars maxima diffundebatur Ecclesiae Catholicae, de
Africanorum collegarum dissensionibus judicarent.
might reserve the whole judgment of their cause to the Apostolical Churches:
And Millia quippe collegarum transmarina restabant, ubi apparebat eos judicari
posse qui videbantur Africanos vel Numidas habere suspectos. And a little
before, De collegis agebatur, qui possent aliorum collegarum judicio,
praesertim Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum, causam suam integram reservare.
that there were yet thousands of transmarine Bishops where they might be
judged. The same he says in the book of the unity of the Church, chapter 2. He
believed then that Cecilianus and the Donatists might appeal to others then the
Bishop of Rome.

It is the same Austin, who in the 118. Epistle to Januarius, teaches that in
his time Cum Romam venio, jejuno sabbatho; cum hic sum, non jejuno.
the Church of Rome fasted upon Saturday; but that the Church of Milan did not
fast on that day; a certain proof that the Church of Milan was not subject unto
the Roman. In which custom the Church of Milan followed the judgment of St.
Ignatius, who in his Epistle to the Philippians, says that whosoever fasteth on
the Lords day, or upon Saturday, one only excepted, is a murderer of Jesus
Christ. And in the (...).
64. Canon of the Apostles, which expressly forbids to fast upon those two
days: And the Greek Churches that since that time assembled in the Palace of
Trull at Constantinople, in Council, condemned the Roman Church by name for
fasting upon Saturday, as Cassianus witnesses; who in the 10. chapter of the 3.
book, blames the Roman Church for fasting upon Saturday. The same Cassian in
the 10. Collation, chapter 2. says that the Egyptians and Lybians celebrated the
Theophania, or Christ's birth upon the sixth of January. An evident proof that
the Church of Egypt was not subject unto the Roman. And that one may not say
that the Roman Church suffered that diversity of observations about fasting as
a thing indifferent, Innocent the I. who lived in Austins time, in his Epistle
to Decennius, chapter 4. does expressly enjoin fasting upon Saturday; Sabbatho esse
jejunandum ratio evidentissima demonstrat. Et ibidem, Dementis est bidui agere
consuetudinem Sabbatho praetermisso.
says it is madness to have another opinion. But the Church of Milan did not
change her custom for that, and would not submit to the constitution of the
Roman Bishops. See Socrates in the 5. book of his History, chapter 21. and
Zozomenus book 7. chapter 19. about the several customs then observed in the
Churches of the Roman Empire.

Whosoever has read Austins life written by Possidonius, and whosoever is
acquainted with Austins writings, knows that this holy man did not come to
Episcopacy by the means without which none in these times can be made a Bishop
in the Roman Church; For he was not promoted to that degree by the approbation
of the Bishop of Rome; He took no Letters of investiture from the Pope; He paid
no Annates for his reception; He took no Oath of Allegiance to the Pope in his
Ordination, as all Bishops of this age do in the Roman Church, who in their
reception take that abominable Oath which is inserted in the Roman Pontifical,
whereby they promise not to preach the word of God faithfully according to the
holy Scriptures, and speak neither good nor evil of God; but swear only to be
faithful and obedient to the Pope, to maintain his rights, and defend his
authority with all their power; and to dispose of no Ecclesiastical goods
without his leave. That tyranny was not known in Austins time, as also none
spoke in his days of kissing the Popes feet, or of bestowing adoration upon
him, or of going to Rome to gain pardons, or of reserved cases to the Papal
See, or of the Popes authority to depose Kings, and draw souls out of
Purgatory, or of the Popes privilege to be unerring in the faith, or of the
triple Crown of his Holiness. Neither did Austin ever beg of the Pope any Bulls
of indulgence for his Town of Hippona, that he might thereby draw the peoples
contributions. He was not afraid of a lapse to be thundered out from Rome upon
his livings; and after his death he was not Canonized by the College of the
Roman Cardinals; for then the world had not heard either of Cardinals or of
Canonization.

Indeed Austin according to his wonted meekness and humility, speaks of the
Bishop of Rome with respect. For both the Church and the Bishop of Rome (though
he styled himself Bishop of Rome only, not the Head of the Universal Church)
were very much respected by reason of the dignity of the City, which was the
Capital of that great Empire, and the most eminent and flourishing of the
world; to which therefore there was a resort from all parts. Besides it was the
common belief that St. Peter had founded the Church of Rome, and that the
Bishop of Rome was his successor, though not in the Apostleship, yet in the
Episcopacy over that City. In the same manner the Patriarch of Antioch and that
of Alexandria said themselves to be successors to the same Apostle; and the
Patriarch of Jerusalem called himself successor of St. James. Wherefore all
these Churches were called Apostolical Churches, and the Sees of the Bishops of
those Churches, Apostolic Sees. Among which the Bishop of Rome was the first
in order, by reason of the dignity of the City, yet without any power of
jurisdiction over his fellows. All that only within the precincts of the Roman
Empire; For the Churches without that verge did not acknowledge those Patriarks
at all, and sent no Deputies to the Councils within the Empire of Rome; and had
no communication with the Bishop of Rome, so far were they from being subject
unto him.

Now that order among the Patriarks was established by an Ordinance from the
Emperors, and by the constitution of Councils, but was not held to be of Divine
right, or grounded in the word of God. Wherefore also the order was sometimes
altered; and the Patriark of Constantinople, who was the last, was made the
second by the Council of Chalcedon, and by the Imperial Laws, without the
consent of the Bishop of Rome: And sometimes those Imperial Laws would prefer
the Bishop of Constantinople before that of Rome, as we shall see hereafter.

That the precedence of the Bishop of Rome was without power of jurisdiction
over the other Patriarks, besides the experience and so many examples which we
have brought, and will bring again, we have a Law of Justinian, in the 31.
Novell. chapter 2. which speaks thus, We decree according to the definitions of the
four Councils, that the most holy Pope of the old Rome be the first of Bishops;
and that the most high Archbishop of Constantinople, which is the new Rome,
have the second place: But mark the title of that Law, De ordine sedendi
Patriarcharum, Of the order of sitting of Patriarchs. Precedence and power of
jurisdiction are several things: The one is (...), the other (...). Thus
Christian Kings have or ought to have some order, how they must go or sit when
they or their Ambassadors meet, although none of them have power over the
others.

Still the Emperors reserved to themselves the power of convocating Councils;
and would not suffer any to be chosen Patriarch without their leave and
consent, and set limits unto Patriarchs, and defined what Provinces must belong
to every Patriarchat. Thus in Austins time, in the year of our Lord 421.
Theodosius the second made a Law, whereby he decreed that Illyricum which is
now Slavonia, should belong to the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, notwithstanding the pretenses of the Bishop of Rome. Lege 6.
Cod. de Sacros. Ecclesiis. Et Lege 45. de Epis. and Clericis Cod. Theodos. Omni
innovatione cessante, vetustate, etc.
All innovation ceasing, we command that the antiquity and the ancient
Ecclesiastical Canons which hitherto have been observed, be observed over all
the Provinces of Illyricum. And if some difference arise, it shall not be
reserved to the sacred judgment of the sacerdotal Assembly, without the
knowledge of the most Reverend Prelat of the Church of Constantinople, which
enjoys the same prerogative as the ancient Rome. That Emperor conformably to
the constitution of the Council of Chalcedon, (of which anon) would have the
Bishop of Constantinople to be equal in all things to the Bishop of Rome. But
of those Imperial Laws, and how the Emperors have sometimes raised the Bishop
of Rome above that of Constantinople, sometimes that of Constantinople above
that of Rome, we shall speak hereafter.

CHAP. 9. Of the Epistles of the Bishops of Africa (of whom St. Austin was one)
to Innocent the first Bishop of Rome. And that our Cardinal labors without
ground to draw them to his advantage.
ALL that was said before, is not contradicted by the Epistles of the African
Bishops of St. Austins time to Innocent the first Bishop of Rome, which the
Cardinal mustereth up so often, making a great flourish with them, alleging
the same testimonies above fifty times. For either he hoped not that the Reader
would read his whole book, or he believed that they wanted memory. But these
Epistles are rather against then for the Popes primacy.

Among Austins Epistles, the 90. is an Epistle of the Bishops of the Province
of Carthage to Innocent: Whereby they represent to him, what they have done
against the Heretics, Pelagius and Celestius: And fearing lest that the Bishop
of Rome should support them, and receive them to his communion Zozimus
Innocents successor, maintained for a time Pelagius and Celestius. His Epistles
to that subject are to be seen in Baronius. Anno 417.
(as it happened soon after) they desire him to join with them, and approving
what they had done to help them with his authority. The humblest words which
they use, and of which our Adversaries labor to take advantage, are these, Hoc
itaque gestum, Domine frater sancte, charitati tuae intimandum duximus, ut
statutis nostrae mediocritatis etiam Apostolicae sedis adhibeatur authoritas.
Sir and holy brother, We thought fit to make known to your charity that which
was done, that to the ordinances made by our mediocrity the authority of the
Apostolic See may be joined. This place says nothing that can serve the
Cardinals turn. These Fathers, indeed, speak of the authority of the Bishop of
Rome. But whosoever has some authority, is not therefore Head of the Universal
Church. In that time the authority of Austin was great, yea greater then that
of Innocent; yet he did not for that challenge any superiority over his
brethren and colleagues. As for the title of Apostolic See, it was common to
many other Bishops. Thus Sozom. book 1. cap. 16. (...), etc.
In that Council [of Nice] among the Bishops that held the Apostolic Sees,
Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem, Eustathius Bishop of Antioch upon the river
Orontes, and Alexander near Maeotides paludes, did meet. Ruffinus book 2. chapter
21. Apud Alexandriam Timotheus, in Hie^osolymis Johannes, Apostolicas reparant
seeds.
In Alexandria Timothy, in Jerusalem John, repair the Apostolic Sees. (...).
Cyrillus also is called Prelat of the Apostolic See, that is of Jerusalem, in
the 4. book, chapter 24. of Sozomenus. Theodoret in the 5. book, chapter 9. calls the
Church of Antioch (...).
the most ancient and wholly Apostolical Church. And Basil in the 55. Epistle,
says that (...).
Ambrose Bishop of Milan was called to the Apostolical precedence. And Austin
himself in the 162. Epistle, speaks of the Apostolic Sees in the plural,
saying that Cecilian might reserve his cause to the judgment of Apostolic
Sees, Hierom goes further, saying that Hieron. Epist. ad Evagrium. Omnes sunt
successores Apostolorum.
all Bishops wheresoever they be, are successors of the Apostles. And
Tertullian in his book of Prescriptions, chapter 20. Sic omnes primae, omnes
Apostolicae, dum unam omnium probant unitatem communicatio pacis, and
appellatio fraternitatis, and contesseratio hospitalitatis, quae jura non alia
ratio regit quam ejusdem Sacramenti una traditio.
says that all Churches pure in doctrine, and joined together by the bond of
peace and of the same doctrine, are all first Apostolical. And chapter 21. he calls
all the Churches founded by the Apostles immediately originales and matrices.

Wherefore Gregorius Turonensis in the 4. book of his History, chapter 26. makes no
difficulty to call the Sea of the Bishop of Tours the Apostolic See: For there
the Legates sent from Tours to King Heribert speak thus, Salve rex gloriose;
seeds enim Apostolica eminentiae tuae salutem mittit uberrimam.
God save the glorious King; the Apostolic See sends most ample greeting to
thine excellency. And Sidonius Apollinarii in the 4. Epistle of the 6. book,
writes thus to Lupus Bishop of Troyes, whom he calls Sir Pope, Praeter officium
quod incomparabiliter eminenti tuo Apostolatui sine fine debetur.
Besides the duty which is perpetually due unto thine Apostleship, which is
incomparably eminent. And in the 1. Epistle he says, Lupus In Apostolica sede
novem cum decursa quinquennia.
had past already nine times five years in the Apostolic See, that is, he had
been Bishop 45. years. The same title he gives to the Bishop of Vaison Ad
Apostolatus tui pleniorem notitiam accedo.
in the 6. book Epist. 7. and in the 7. book Epist 4.

To return to the Epistle of the African Bishops, one cannot see that the
Bishops of the Province of Carthage by that address to Innocent subject their
judgment unto his, or that they suspend their judgment till Innocent has
pronounced his, or that they acknowledge him Head of the universal Church.

That which moved them to write to Innocent, was, their fear that Innocent
should undertake the defense of Pelagius and Celestius against them; and their
fear was justified by the event, his successor Zozimus having for a time
labored to excuse Celestius who was fled to him. The words of the Epistle show
their fear; for they speak as having understood that Innocent held Pelagius to
have been justly absolved by the Synod of Palestina. Si ergo Pelagius
Episcopalibus gestis quae in Orient confecta dicuntur, etiam tuae venerationi
just visus fuerit absolutus, error tamen ipse, and impietas quae tam multos
habet assertores per diversa dispersos, etiam authoritate Apostolicae sedis
anathematizanda est.
If then (say they) your reverence esteems that Pelagius was justly absolved
by the Episcopal acts, which are said to have been made in the East; yet the
erroneous doctrine and the impiety which has so many assertors scattered in
many places, ought to be anathematized by the authority of the Apostolic See.
As if they said, If thou will favor the person of Pelagius, at the least thou
must condemn the heresy which is put to his charge. And in the 95. Epistle
Austin and his colleagues say, that some that favored Pelagius, affirmed that
they did it by the persuasion of Innocent.

To that Epistle the answer of Innocent is added, which has this clause put in
the title in many editions; Audivimus esse in urbe Romae ubi ille diu vixit,
nonnullos qui diversis causis ei faveant, quidam scilicet, quia vos ^alia
persuasisse perhibent.
Innocent the Roman Pope answers this Epistle. This clause is put out in the
Edition of Nivelle at Paris 1571.
In this Epistle we find wanting the style, the spirit and the learning
convenient to so great a Prelat. And that Epistle is justly thus branded on the
forehead, for the style of it, ridiculous, barbarous, and vainly puffed up.

In that Epistle Innocent speaks like a Master, and receives the honor which
the African Bishops had done him, to impart unto him what they had done against
Pelagius, as a submission of subjects and inferior Judges, submitting their
judgment to the authority of the Roman See, to which (if he may be believed)
the knowledge of all things belonged. Which power nevertheless he groundeth not
upon the Word of God, but upon Patrum instituta.
the institution of the Fathers. Already the Bishops of Rome as well as those
of Alexandria and Antioch, wanted no pride, and would spread their Feathers
like Peacocks, aspiring to raise themselves, although their power was very
little out of their Patriarchate: And I wonder how M. du Perron made no
conscience to fill his book with a thousand of the like allegations, taken from
the Epistles and Decretals of Popes, where they ascribe to themselves far more
power then they had really.

The next Epistle, which is the 92. among St. Austins Epistles, is an Epistle
of the Milevitan Council in Numidia to Innocent Bishop of Rome: Where there is
not one word sounding the language of subjects to their Superior. And whereas
that Milevitan Council is the same that makes that excellent Canon, whereby it
is prohibited upon pain of excommunication to appeal from Africa to Rome, yet
these Fathers make no mention of that, writing to the Bishop of Rome. They make
no excuse about it, as not bound to give him account of that or any of their
actions: But fearing that he should favor Pelagius, whom they had condemned,
they desire him to join with them, and to assist them with his authority. In
that Epistle is found that text which our Cardinal inculcates and repeats so
often: Sed arbitramur, adjuvante misericordia Domini qui te and regere
consulentem, and orantem exaudire dignatur, authoritati sanctitatis tuae de
sanctarum Scripturarum authoritate depromptae facilius eos qui tam perversa
sentiunt, esse cessuros.
We believe with the mercy of the Lord, who is pleased to govern you when you
consult him, and to hear you when you pray to him, that they that hold such
perverse and pernicious tenets, will more easily yield to the authority of your
Holiness drawn out of the holy Scriptures. But in that there is nothing that
can serve to establish the Popes primacy over the Church of the whole World;
and there is nothing there but may be said to any faithful Pastor. For the
authority of the least Pastors it founded in the Scriptures. Observe that the
word depromptae, drawn, which this Epistle chooses rather to use then fundatae,
grounded, shows the meaning of these Fathers to be, that if Innocent will
take the pains to write against the Pelagians, they shall more easily yield to
the authority of the texts, which he shall draw out of the holy Scriptures.

To these Letters Innocent answers in an arrogant and barbarous way:
Wherefore also that Epistle is stigmatized in the forehead like the other. For
there is in the title, Ejusdem genii epistola est, This Epistle is endited by
the same Spirit as the former. There he commends the Fathers of the Milevitan
Council for submitting themselves unto him, for acknowledging his authority,
and for coming to draw an Answer from the Apostolical spring. And truly the
Fathers of the Milevitan Council foresaw that he would make a wrong use of the
honor which they deferred unto him, knowing the presumptuous humor of that
Prelat; for in their Letters these words, are found, Ut nobis potius ad culpam
negligentiae valeat, si apud tuam venerationem quae pro Ecclesia suggerenda
sunt tacuerimus, quam ea tu possis vel fastidiose, vel negligenter accipere.
It would serve rather to make us guilty of negligence, if we were silent to
your reverence of those things which ought to be represented to you for the
good of the Church [by representing them to you] to make you receive them
disdainfully or negligently. For by making a show that they fear not that he
receive their Letters with pride, they make him a tacit Remonstrance and
exhortation to humility. And in the end of their Letters they say that by
writing to him, they would follow the example of the Bishops of the Province of
Carthage, intimating that they had writ to him what had been done in their
Council, not by duty or obligation, but to imitate the example of their
neighbors. But Innocent followed rather his humor then their exhortations. And
that in the same Epistle it might appear that the Bishop of Rome can err in
the Doctrine, Innocent has, by the way, put in a false doctrine; teaching that
the Eucharist [or Lords Supper] is necessary unto little children, that they
may be saved: And there is in the margin, Etiam Romana Ecclesia credidit
Eucharistiam pueris necessariam, The Roman Church also believed that the
Eucharist is necessary to children. Austin also bears him this testimony, in
the first book against Julian, chapter 2. Innocent (says he) has defined that
little children, unless they eat the flesh of the Son of man, cannot have life.
The successors of Innocent would not follow his doctrine; Synod. Trid. Sess.
Can. 5. Si quis dixerit, parvulis antequam ad annos discretionis pervenerint,
necessariam esse Eucharistiae communione, an^thema sit.
And the Council of Trent does condemn and anathematize it by an express Canon,
in the 21. Session. Thus the Roman Church has anathematized that Pope, above
eleven hundred years after his death.

There is yet one Epistle of five Bishops of Africa, Austin being one of them,
to the same Innocent, upon the same subject, that is, about the heresy of the
Pelagians: It is the 95. Epistle among those of Austin. That Epistle is an
excellent one, and filled with good doctrine, and relisheth Austin's style
altogether. In that letter there is not one word of submission, nor any mention
of the Popes authority. But these Fathers endeavor only to represent unto
Innocent the true doctrine concerning free will, and concerning grace and
nature: declaring the cause why they write to him about it, even because they
had heard that at Rome many favored Pelagius, Audivimus enim esse in urbe
Romae ubi ille diu vixit, nonnullos qui diversis causis ei faveant; quidam
scilicet quia vos talia persuasisse perhibent: Plures vero qui eum talia
credere non sentiunt.
being persuaded to it by Innocent. We have heard (say they) that in the City
of Rome, where he lived long, some favor him for diverse causes, some give for
their reason that you have persuaded them so; but most believe not that
Pelagius holds such tenets. The truth is that they that taxed Innocent of
savouring Pelagius, did calumniate him; Yet that report being come to Austins
ears and to his colleagues, moved them to write these Letters to Innocent: That
was the true reason, not to give him an account of their actions. For excepting
only the case of Pelagius, we do not find that the Bishops of Africa ever writ
to the Bishop of Rome about the controversies in the doctrine agitated in
Africa, but only to contradict him, as Cyprian did, and the VI. Council of
Carthage.

To these last Letters Innocent answers by an Epistle, which is the 96. among
those of Austin, in which he speaks more kindly, and sets his pride a pin
lower: There he says, that he never received any Letter from the Council of
Palestina, where Pelagius had purged himself; and that he had no communication
about that. Yet because that Epistle is rude and dry, and very far below the
worth of the Epistle of the African Bishops; either Austin or some other that
first published Austins works, have set this title in scorn over that Epistle of
Innocent, Innocentius superiori respondit suo more, saevns potius quam
eruditus, and ad damnandum quam docendum instructior.
Innocent answers the precedent Epistle after his manner, being more violent
and peremptory then learned, and more ready to condemn then to teach.

CHAP. 10. A place examined of Austins, 162. Epistle.
BEsides these Epistles about which the Cardinal keeps such a coil, there is a
place in the 162. Epistle of Austin, which the Cardinal repeats without end,
and thinks he can never allege it enough. The text is this, Carthage had a
Bishop of no mean authority, who might very well not care for the conspiring
multitude of enemies, Cum se videret and Romanae Ecclesiae, in qua semper
Apostolicae Ecclesiae viguit principatus, and caeteris terris unde Evangelium
ad ipsam Africom venit, per communicatorias litteras esse conjunctum.
seeing that he saw himself conjoined by Letters of communication with the
Roman Church, in which the principality of the Apostolic See has always been
in vigor; and with the other Countries whence the Gospel came into Africa. The
words of this place which seem to favor the Bishop of Rome, are, that in the
Roman Church, the principality of the Apostolical Chair has always been in
vigor. But we have showed already in the precedent chapter that many other
Churches had the same principality, and were called Apostolical, and their
Chairs. Apostolic Sees. As for the title of Principality, it was a degree
which all the Patriarchal Chairs did challenge, pretending to have the
Superintendency over all the Churches. We shall see in the following Chapter,
that Theodoret gives to Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople the title of
Governor of the Churches of all the world. Wherefore also the Patriarch of
Constantinople took a little after Nestorius, the title of Ecumenical
Patriarch, that is, the Prince of the Fathers of all the habitable earth;
although his authority did not extend beyond the Roman Empire. Gregory
Nazianzen speaks thus of Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, in the Oration
made of his praises, The Government of the people of Alexandria, which is as
much as if one said, The Government of all the World, is given him in charge.
And in the same place, (...).
Athanasius gives Laws again to the habitable earth. Basil in the 50. Epistle,
says, that Meletius Patriarch of Antioch (...).
did preside over the whole body of the Church. Thus in the works of Athanasius
there is an Epistle of Arsenius, where he speaks thus to him, Page 610. (...).
We embrace peace and union with the Universal Church over which thou
presidest. And we have showed by many examples, that every Patriarch had an eye
over all the Churches of the Roman Empire, and that their care was not limited
by the limits of their Patriarchate. No wonder then if to the Roman Patriarch
that title of principality is given, since it was common to all the other
Patriarchs, which is signified by the word Patriarch, which is as much as
Prince of Fathers, that is of Bishops. Observe that Austin says not that in
the Roman Church the principality over the Apostolic Sees had always been in
vigor. That would be exalting the Bishop of Rome above other Patriarks, and
making him their Prince; but only he attributes to the Bishop of Rome this
honor, to have the principality of the Apostolic See. As then he that would
say that the family of Capets had the pre-eminence of Royalty these six hundred
years, should not thereby deny that all that time there was a Monarchy in
England, and in Spain where the Kings had the like pre-eminence. Likewise, he
that says that the Bishop of Rome had in St. Austins time the principality and
pre-eminence of the Apostolic See, does not deny that in other places there
were Bishops having, within their verge, the same Principality, of which we
need not seek far for proofs. For Austin in the same Epistle 162. speaks of the
Apostolic Sees in the plural number, to which he says, that the Bishops of
Africa could appeal as well as to the Bishop of Rome. They Qui possent aliorum
collegarum judicio, praesertim Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum, causam suam integram
reservare?
could (says he) reserve their whole cause to the judgment of their other
colleagues, and chiefly to those of the Apostolical Churches. As it is one
thing to have the pre-eminence of a King, another thing to have pre-eminence
over Kings; so it is one thing to have the Principality or pre-eminence of
Apostolical chair, another thing to have the Principality among, or over, the
Apostolical chairs.

We have another place of Austin much like this, in the 2. book of the merit of
sins, and of pardon, chapter 13. where he says that St. Paul, tanti Apostolatus
meruit principatum, obtained the principality of such an excellent Apostleship.
He means not that St. Paul has obtained to be Prince of the Apostles, but that
he has obtained the principality and dignity of an Apostle.

Truly although those titles were then common to many, and were taken in a more
moderate sense, and less advantageous for ambition then in the latter ages: yet
it must be confessed that these titles of honor given to a few Prelates in such
a great Empire as the Roman, have been steps to raise them by degrees to an
excessive power; And that hence the dissensions are come, and the incredible
pride whereby the Patriarks of Rome and Constantinople did since tear one
another for so many Ages, and the Oriental Churches were made to justle against
the Occidental. Had not the Saracens first, and the Turks next, beaten down the
greatness of the Patriarks of Alexandria, Antioch, and Constantinople, and
brought them very low, yet to this day we should see them crossing and daring
the Popes of Rome, although the Popes have been unmeasurably enriched by the
immense liberalities of the Kings of France, who having undergone the Popes
yoke (which did insensibly grow from age to age) have brought also their
Subjects to the like servitude. Yet to this day these Patriarks, as low as they
are, refuse to submit themselves unto the Pope: And the Patriarch of
Constantinople does now style himself Ecumenical, that is, Universal Patriarch.

CHAP. 11. Of Nestorius Patriark of Constantinople. Of the Convocation of the
first Council of Ephesus, which was the third Universal: And that the Emperors
by their own single Authority convocated the Councils.
IN the year of Christ 428. Sisinnius Patriarch of Constantinople dyed.
Nestorius succeeded him, the greatness of whose dignity Theodoretl. 4. (...),
cap. de Nestorio. (...).
Theodoret shows in the 4. book of Heresies, saying, The Government of the
Catholic Church of the Orthodox people of Constantinople, yea of the whole
habitable earth, was entrusted to Nestorius. Had the like been said of the
Bishop of Rome, M. du Perron would allege that testimony a hundredth times, and
would triumph about it. But Theodoret takes the Roman Empire for the whole
World, and speaks thus, because every Patriarch had an eye to all the Churches
of the Empire of Rome.

That Nestorius being exalted to honor, began to spread the venom of a
dangerous Heresy, dividing the natures of Christ, and making one Christ man,
and another Christ God, as if they had been two persons. Then was Celestinus
Bishop of Rome, who assembled a particular Council in that City, where the
Heresy of Nestorius was condemned: and writ Letters to Cyrillus Patriarch of
Alexandria, whereby he exhorted him to assemble also a Council and there to
depose Nestorius, unless within ten days after the signification he renounced
his Heresy. Cyrillus did so, and assembled a Council at Alexandria, where he
framed twelve Articles of Anathema against Nestorius. But for all that,
Nestorius was not deposed; and notwithstanding the sentence of Celestinus and
Cyrillus, he kept his place, because he was not subject unto them. Such
depositions were but declarations that such a Patriarch would not acknowledge
such a man for a Bishop: of which we have seen many examples. There was need
then that the Emperors authority should intervene to assemble a Council from
the whole Roman Empire, to judge definitively of that business.

CHAP. 12. Of the Convocation of the first Council of Ephesus. The Cardinals
falsifications.
IN the year of Christ 430. the Emperor Theodosius the II. assembled a Council
at Ephesus, which is the III. Universal. If the Bishop of Rome had been Head of
the Universal Church, his sentence of deposition against Nestorius ought to
have been sufficient. Or if there had been a necessity of convocating an
Universal Council, it belonged to him to convocate it, and to call to it, not
only the Bishops of the Roman Empire, but also those of Persia, Assyria, and
other Churches without the Empire: Yet nothing of that was done. But the
Emperor Theodosius called that Synod by his mere and sole authority. So says
Evagrius, book 1. chapter 3. (...).
The first Council of Ephesus was convocated by the command of the young
Theodosius. And Nicephorus, book 14. chapter 34. Theodosius Imperialibus literis
suis in Metropoli Epheso locorum omnium Episcopos convenire jussit.
Theodosius by his Imperial Patents commanded that the Bishops from all places
shoul meet in the Capital City of Ephesus. (...).
Socrates says the same, book 7. chapter 34. And that I may not multiply witnesses
for a vulgar thing, the very Council testifies so much; for the Canons of the
Council begin thus: (...).
The holy and Ecumenical Council assembled at Ephesus by the command of the
most religious Emperors. Of the Bishop of Rome not one word: But among the Acts
of the Council there is an Epistle of the Council to Celestinus Bishop of Rome,
where the Bishops of the Council tell him, that they are assembled to obey the
Imperial significations and threatenings. Why do they not add, speaking to the
Bishop of Rome, that they were also assembled by his commandment?

Liberatus Deacon of Carthage, though a flatterer of the Bishop of Rome,
witnesses the same in the 5. chapter of his Breviary, saying, that Scripsit aliam
sacram ad universos Episcopos ut Ephesum convenirent, etc.
the Emperor writ another sacred Patent to all the Bishops, that they should
meet at Ephesus to confer about the Books of Nestorius, and the judgment of
Cyrillus. A little after he relates how that Council met, saying that after
the Feast of Easter, Nestorius with a great multitude came to Ephesus, where he
found the Bishops assembled. Then he adds these words, which M. du Perron
falsifieth with a notorious malice. The words of Liberatus are, Porro Cyrillus
cum suis, habens vices sedis Apostolicae, Concilio evocato ducentorum
Episcoporum, Nestorium vocaverunt. The Cardinal translateth, Cyrillus with his
attendance, provided with the Vicariat of the Apostolic See, having convocated
a Synod, cited Nestorius. Falsification of the Cardinal. Page 317.
It is a false translation. For how should Liberatus say that Cyrillus
convocated a Council, having said a little before that the Emperor Theodosius
had convocated it? And having said that the Bishops were assembled at Easter,
how should he say that Cyrillus did convocate them? Can one convocate a Council
which is already convocated?

Certainly the fraud of the Cardinal is evident, who translates Concilio
evocato, having convocated a Council, whereas he ought to have translated, the
Council being convocated, or the Council being called. Not content with that
falsification, he adds another, translating Nestorium vocaverunt, he cited
Nestorius, to persuade that Cyrillus did that alone, as representing the Pope
of Rome. But Liberatus says that this citation was not done by Cyrillus alone,
but both by him and by the other Bishops his colleagues.

Hereby the Reader may judge how full the Cardinals book is with corrupted and
falsely translated testimonies, seeing that in one page only he has three
notorious legerdemains of that kind. For besides that place of Liberatus to
prove that Pope Julius had convocated the Council of Sardica, he alleges a
testimony of Athanasius, making him say that Eusebius and the Eusebians desired
Julius to convocate a Council. But herein he is wide of the truth; for the
Council which Julius convocated at the request of Eusebius, was not that of
Sardica, of which the convocation was Universal, and over all the Roman Empire,
but a small Council which Julius assembled of his Diocese about Rome; A thing
which all the Metropolitans could do in their Dioceses. Whereas to convocate a
Council from the whole Roman Empire, past the power of Julius.

In the same page he alleges a place of Theodoret, Page 317.
where he translates (...) to convocate, whereas it signifies to invite, or
desire to come: And thereby he will persuade us that Pope Damasus convocated
the first Council of Constantinople; Above book 5. chapter 11.
whereas the place of Theodoret says only that Damasus invited the Bishops
assembled at Constantinople to come to Rome, which summon those Bishops would
not obey, as we have seen before.

CHAP. 13. That none but the Emperor could or ought to convocate an Universal
Council; and that the Bishop of Rome did not meddle with that.
BEsides so many testimonies out of Antiquity, that the Emperors alone with
their single and absolute authority convocated the Universal Councils, reason
it self shows it, and permits not that the convocating of a Council should
belong to any other.

For since the Universal Councils were composed of Bishops of the Roman Empire
only, it appears that a Council limited with the same limits as the Empire, was
convocated by the Emperor. For if the Roman Pope in quality of head of the
Church of the whole world had convocated the Universal Councils, he would have
called to them, as well the Bishops without, as within the Roman Empire. This
shows evidently that the cause why the Bishops of Persia, Assyria, Aethiopia,
etc. were not present in those Councils, was, because the Emperor had no right
to command them. It was therefore at the Emperors, not the Bishop of Romes
cost, that the Bishops came. The Emperors furnished them with Horses, Coaches,
and all that was called parangarias praestationes, and defrayed them during
their sitting: He had his Comites and Officers that presided in the Assembly,
representing the Emperors person. Which is seen by the Acts of this Council of
Ephesus, in which the Comes or Count Candidianus did preside: And by the
Council of Seleucia, as Socrates relates in the second book, chap. 39. And it
will appear yet more evidently by the Council of Chalcedon when we come to it.
Hence it is that the Universal Councils have been greater or smaller, according
to the largness or diminution of the Empire. I measure the greatness of a
Council, not by the multitude of Bishops, but by the greatness, and number of
the Provinces, that send Deputies to it. But nothing gives more light to this
question then the commands which the Emperors made to the Bishops of Rome to
go or to send Deputies to the Council. Before the VI. Universal Council, the
letters patent of the Emperor to Donus Bishop of Rome are prefixed, which
speak thus to him, Per omnia jubemus paternam vestram beatitudinem minime esse
impedimentum voluntati Dei, sed eos dirigere.
We make an absolute command to your fatherly beatitude, to be no hinderance,
but to send Legates. And before the second Council of Nice, which is put among
the Universal Councils, there is an Epistle of Tharasius Patriarch of
Constantinople, who says expressly that In quam Synodum and nos and sacerdotes,
very Vicarii scilicet Papae Romae, secundum mandatum piorum Imperatorum
convenerunt.
the Vicars of the Roman Pope came to that Council, by the eommand of the
religious Emperors.

The same appears by the humble requests of the Bishops of Rome to the Emperor
for the calling of a Council, which supplications very often were rejected. For
either it pleased not the Emperors to assemble a Council, or they assembled it
not at the time and place which they desired. Thus in the second book of
Theodoret chapter 16. Liberius Bishop of Rome beseeches the Emperor Constantius
to assemble a Council: but the Emperor did not so much as give him an answer.
Innocent Bishop of Rome, as we saw before, See Nicephorus. book 3. chapter 31. and
35.
sent to the Emperor Arcadius five Bishops and two Priests to beseech him that
a Council might be called to examine the cause of John Chrysostom; but his
Legates were sent back with disgrace and ill words, as disturbers of the public
peace. Leo the first beseeches Theodosius to assemble a Council in Italy,
saying Leo Ep. 23. and 31. Omnes mansuetudinem vestram cum gemitibus and
lachrymis supplicant sacerdotes generalem Synodum intra Italiam jubeatis
celebrari.
All the Bishops beseech your meekness with sighs and tears, that you command
that a general Council be celebrated in Italy. But Theodosius would have the
Council to be kept at Ephesus. And the same Epist. 19. ad Theodos. Si pietas
vestra suggestioni ac supplicationi nostrae dignetur annuere ut intra Italiam
haberi jubeatis Episcopale Concilium.
Leo makes the like request to Marcianus successor of Theodosius, supplicating
that at least it might please him to put off the Council: but he could obtain
nothing of that he desired.

Of all these things the Cardinal says nothing in chap. 41. of book 1. where
he speaks of the convocation of Councils, and smothereth all that with silence.
It is not to be said how negligently he handles a thing so important to the
Papal Monarchy. He is too wise to allege Hierom speaking thus to Ruffinus in
his second Apology; Doce qui eo anno Consules fuerint, quis Imperator h^nc
Synodum jusserit congregari.
Tell me who were the Consuls that year? What Emperor commands that such a
Council should be assembled? or Socrates in the Preface of book 5. Since the
Emperors began to be Christians, the businesses of the Church have depended
from their will. And the great Councils were convocated, and are convocated
still by their command.

CHAP. 14. Of the Patriarchs that were present in the first Council of Ephesus;
and of the strife between Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria, and John Patriarch
of Antioch.
TO this Council of Ephesus, Celestinus Bishop of Rome came not. For the Bishop
of Rome would never come to any of the ancient Universal Councils: Because he
feared that the precedence should be deferred to some Patriarch of
Constantinople, or Alexandria, or Antioch, who also bore it very high, and were
not deficient in ambition. Which might have been done very easily, because in
those Universal Councils all was done in Greek, which the Bishops of Rome
understood not. Baron. an: 431. Sect. 80.
Wherefore the Letters which Celestinus writ to that Council of Ephesus were
Latin, and were read by an Interpreter.

Then Celestinus Bishop of Rome sent three Legates to that Council, Arcadius,
and Projectus Bishops in Italy, and Philippus a Roman Priest, to represent his
person: There also was Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria, and Juvenalis
Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Memnon Metropolitan of Ephesus. St. Austin was
called to it by the Emperor, but he was then near his last gasp, being fallen
sick while Bona his See was besieged by Gensericus King of the Vandals.

John Patriarch of Antioch came also, but too late, the Synod having proceeded
to the condemnation of Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople: Which the said
John interpreted as a contempt of his Patriarchat and Apostolic See,
pretending that such a judgment could not have been given without him; and
that without him the Council could not sit, nor do a decision that concerned
the Universal Church, such as the condemnation of a Patriarch. For that cause
the said John having assembled the Bishops of East subject unto his
Patriarchat, pronounced a sentence of deposition against Cyrillus Patriarch of
Alexandria, and against Memnon Bishop of Ephesus, and degraded them from their
charge. Cyrillus also in revenge pronounced the like sentence of deposition
against John. All that without expecting the advice of the Bishop of Rome,
which in those days was not thought necessary. But by the intervention of some
persons that loved peace, these two Prelates were reconciled, and as Socrates
says Socrat. lib. 7. c. 37. Depositis inimicitiis reconciliati sibi invicem
seeds restituerunt.
having laid down their quarrels, they restored the one to the other their Sees.

The example is worth observing; for it shows that all the Patriarchs of the
Roman Empire challenged the same right and power, as Julius Bishop of Rome had
assumed in the cause of Athanasius, namely that Councils could not be
assembled, nor Canons made without his advice. The same example teaches how
Sozomenus must be understood, when he says that Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 7. (...).
Julius restored to Athanasius his See, and to some other Bishops dispossessed
from their places by Constantius and by the Oriental Bishops. Also how the same
Sozomenus must be expounded when he says, that the Oriental Bishops deposed
Julius Bishop of Rome, and Osius, and Maximus, from their charges. For neither
were Athanasius and the other Bishops restored to their places by the decree of
Julius, (for they were restored long after upon other occasions) Nor was Julius
dispossessed of his Bishopric by their censures. But that deposition of Julius,
as also that which John and Cyrillus pronunced the one against the other, were
but declarations, whereby they declared that they would not acknowledge such a
one for a Bishop, and as far as in them was, pronounced him deprived of his
right to his Episcopacy. Likewise the restoring of Athanasius by Julius, was
but a declaration that he acknowledged Athanasius to be a lawful Bishop, In
chap. 2. of book 5. toward the end of the chapter.
and worthy to be re-installed. He put him in his charge as much as it was in
him, although his judgment was without effect. The same was done by Maximus
Patriarch of Jerusalem, who having consented to the deposition of Athanasius,
restored him afterward, as we saw before.

CHAP. 15. Of the order of sitting in the first Council of Ephesus. And in what
quality Cyrillus did preside in it. How M. du Perron corrupts this History.
THE Acts of the Council of Ephesus show that the Comes or Count Candidianus,
Officer of the Emperor Theodosius, did preside in it with absolute authority,
as representing the Emperors person: and that he commanded the Bishops of the
Council to proceed with order, and not to take a matter in hand before they had
decided the precedent; and forbad them to treat of any Civil or criminal
matter, reserving to himself the knowledge of such cases.

But among the Bishops, Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria, a man of great
authority, both for his courage and learning, and because of the dignity of his
See, had the precedence. He was elected President by the Council, eighteen
days before the coming of the Legates of Celestinus Bishop of Rome. An evident
proof that in those days they thought not that for the keeping of an Universal
Council the presence of the Bishop of Rome or his Legates was necessary.

See the subscriptions of the Bishops to the Council, and Baron. an. 431. Sect.
51.
When the three Legates of the Bishop of Rome were come, their place was assigned
unto them. Arcadius the first Legate sat after Cyrillus: after Arcadius, was
Juvenalis, Patriarch of Jerusalem, after Juvenalis, Projectus second Legate of
the Bishop of Rome; after him Theodorus Bishop of Ancyra: and after Theodorus
Philippus the third Legate of Celestinus Bishop of Rome. For in that Age,
although one was a Legate of the Bishop of Rome, he might be placed after many
Bishops.

It is a thing out of all controversy, that Cyrillus of Alexandria presided in
that Council. This is certified by the Acts and superscriptions of the Council,
and by the first Action of the Council of Chalcedon, where many things of that
Council are repeated. In the preamhles of the same, Flavianus Patriarch of
Constantinople says, that the Council of Ephesus was held under Cyrillus of
holy memory; and Evagrius toward the end of the second book; (...).
The Council of Ephesus where Cyrillus Primat of Alexandria (who is among the
Saints) presided.

But the dispute is under what name, and in what quality Cyrillus had the
precedence: whether in his own name, and as a Patriarch of Alexandria, or as a
Lieutenant of Celestinus, and holding his place by his concession, as Cardinal
du Perron will have it, in chap. 36. of book 1. For we must know that about a
year before the sitting of the Council, Celestinus had writ to Cyrillus,
exhorting him to proceed vigorously against Nestorius, and desiring him to act
both for him, and for himself, and to deal for him in his absence. The like had
never been done by any Bishop of Rome. But in that time there was no speech as
yet of the Council of Ephesus: And they are deceived that say that Celestinus
desired Cyrillus to hold his place in that Council. Yet it is manifest that so
much as Celestinus desired of Cyrillus, was done in policy. For knowing the
authority of Cyrillus, and foreseeing that in all that should be done against
Nestorius, Cyrillus should have the chief hand and the principal honor, he
devised to yield the place to Cyrillus of his own accord, and to desire
Cyrillus to act for him against Nestorius, and to do all Acts in his name in
his absence. Howsoever, it was by entreaties that Celestinus prevailed with
Cyrillus to do so much, not by any authority that he had over him; and Cyrillus
accepted of that Commission before the Council of Ephesus was called or spoken
of. But though Cyrillus had received a Proxy from Celestinus to deal for him
in the Council in his absence, that could not have taken from the Council of
Ephesus the liberty of choosing such a President, as they judged to be fittest
to moderate. And by all the Acts of the Council, it appears not that the
Council had deferred that precedence to Cyrillus in consideration of his
Commission from Celestinus. In effect, Cyrillus was elected President many
days before the coming of the Legates of Celestinus, to which Legates it
belonged to declare upon that point, the will of him that sent them. And sure,
if such a thing had been, the Letters of Celestinus to the Council, would have
mentioned it. But in those Letters, which are extant, he says only that he had
sent Arcadius, Projectus and Philippus, to represent his person in that
Council; without any mention of the Commission given to Cyrillus to hold his
place in the Council. Wherefore also in the Greek Acts In the Epistle of the
Council to Theodosius, whereby they desire him to release Cyrillus and M^mnon
Bishop of Ephesus, who were prisoners.
of that Council, Cyrillus and Memnon are often called (...), Presidents of the
Council. But as for Celestinus Bishop of Rome, the Bishops say, (...), that he
sits with them: That is to be seen especially by the subscriptions added to the
Acts of that Council; Cyrillus Episcopus Alexandriae subscripsi,
Arcadius Legatus sedis Apostolicae subscripsi.
Juvenalis Episcopus Jerosolymitanus subscripsi,
Projectus Episcopus Legatus sedis Apostolicae subscripsi.


Had Cyrillus presided as Legate or Vicar of Celestinus, had he not subscribed
as a Legate of Celestinus, would he have omitted in his subscription that
quality whereby he had presided in the Council? And if the title of Legate of
the Bishop of Rome, gave necessarily the precedence in the Council, had
Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, been preferred before two Legates of Celestinus?
And whoever heard that in the ancient Councils, the Bishop of Rome absent,
deferred the Presidency of the Council by Commission to any? In all the
Council, Cyrillus speaks always in his own name, not as a Lieutenant or Vicar
of Celestinus. Leo himself in the 47. Epistle 3. chap. says that Ephesinae
Synodi cui sancta memoriae Cyrillus Episcopus tunc praesedit.
Cyrillus of holy memory presided in the Synod of Ephesus. Had he presided
there in quality of Legate of the Roman Prelate, Leo would not have forgotten
it.

To so many and so strong proofs, taken from the Council it self, Cardinal du
Perron opposes the testimony of Marcellinus Comes, a Latin Author, and a
favourer of his Patriarch, who writ a hundred years after that Council. Also
Balsamon and Nicephor. l. 14. c. 34.
Nicephorus, new Authors, who tell tales to this purpose, which Baronius laughs
at: But with M. du Perron Fables go for grave Histories, if they concur with
his ends: All his other witnesses, as Liberatus and Theophanes, and the Acts of
the Council, speak of the Deputation given to Cyrillus by Celestinus, long
before the Council of Ephesus, and speak not of that imaginary Commission to
hold his place in the Council of Ephesus.

The truth is, it was a legerdemaine of Celestinus, like to that which the
Bishops of Rome have oftened practiced since the time of Gregory the VII. which
was to give to a Prince, that which they could not take from him; or to give
some Country or Kingdom to a King, upon condition that he shall conquer it, as
if the same Princes would have presented the Pope with the Moon, upon condition
that he should go and take it. If a Prince so presented by the Pope, suffers
some harm for going about to obey the Pope, and comes short of his undertaking;
his Holiness does not bear him harmless. But if the enterprise is achieved, as
when Charles of Anjou effected the conquest of the Kingdom of Naples, and
achieved it, then the Pope will have that Prince to hold the conquered Kingdom
in Fee from the Papal See, and to make homage for it to the Pope, as to his
Landlord and Liege.

CHAP. 16. Some incidencies happened in the first Council of Ephesus, or by
occasion of the same, conducing to this question.
IN this Council, in the entry of the Action, according to the custom, the Book
of the holy Gospels was laid upon the Table, that the matters propounded in the
Council, might be judged according to the doctrine contained in that Book. A
custom which the Pope has changed, having brought in of late an impious
Ceremony of laying the Scripture at the Popes feet, himself sitting on a
Throne, as it were to say, that the Word of God is subject unto him: And next
to make the Officers of the Council, to come and take an Oath of Allegiance and
Obedience unto him, with their hand upon the Book, laid at the feet of his
Holiness. This is found practiced in the last Council of Lateran, under Julius
the II. In the first Session these words are found; Officiales ad pedes
sanctissimi Domini nostri tactis sacrosanctis Evangeliis, praestiterunt
corporale juramentum. The Officers having touched the holy and sacred Gospels,
at the feet of our most holy Lord, took their corporal Oath.

Baron. An. 431.. 120. and 128. and 129. and 146.
Diverse relations being made to the Emperor Theodosius, about things done in
the Council, with little order and much animosity: that good Emperor not
knowing which of them he might believe, writ Letters to the Council, whereby he
forbad the Bishops to go out of the Council, and commanded that Deputies should
be sent to him from the Council, to give him an account of all the passages,
and to inform him of the truth. And being prepossest wiih the complaints and
calumnies of Nestorius and his adherents, he sent John Count of the sacred
Largitions, to Ephesus with Imperial Letters; whereby he declared, that his
Majesty held Cyrillus and Memnon as justly deposed, and commanded that they
should be apprehended and detained prisoners: Whereupon the Council sent seven
Deputies to the Emperor, among whom were Arcadius and Philippus, the Roman
Bishops Legates, who having informed the Emperor of the truth, made him alter
his opinion, so that he approved the condemnation of Nestorius, and took from
him the dignity of Patriarch of Constantinople.

By this it appears that Cardinal du Perron does very little for the Bishop
of Rome, by affirming that Cyrillus in that Council represented the person of
Celestinus. For thereby he declares that the Emperor made no great account of
the Bishop of Rome, since he made no difficulty of committing that man
prisoner, that represented the person of the Bishop of Rome. Had Celestinus
been present, he had been served in the like manner. The Reader shall observe
also, that the Popes Legates did not take it for a disparagement of their
dignity, to be sent by the Council, as Deputies to the Emperor, with other
Bishops, to appease his wrath.

Four years after the condemnation of Nestorius, John Patriarch of Antioch,
according to the relation of Niceph: l. 14. c. 35.
Nicephorus, writ to the Emperor Theodosius with a remonstrance, that for the
good of the Church he ought to expel Nestorius, and put him out of the
Oriental Empire. Which was presently executed by Theodosius, who relegated
Nestorius to Oasis. Had the Bishop of Rome done that which John of Antioch did,
our Adversaries would triumph about it, and say, that the Emperors are subject
to the Popes Decrees, and that they can bring the greatest Patriarchs to
condign punishment, according to their pleasure.

The same Author relates, that the said John sent to Cyrillus his Confession
of Faith in writing. When some Bishop sends his Confession to the Bishop of
Rome, our Adversaries take that for a most certain proof of subjection to the
Papal See; to which they will have all obliged to give a reason of their Faith.
But we have seen before, that Liberius Bishop of Rome, sent his Belief and
Confession of Faith to Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria: and John being not
subject to Cyrillus, yet sends his Confession to him.

CHAP. 17. Occasion of the second Council of Ephesus, and by whom it was
Convocated.
IN the year of our Lord 448. this occasion of new trouble arose in the
Churches of the Roman Empire. That Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople, degraded
and expelled a Priest named Eutyches, for confounding in one, the two natures
of Jesus Christ. Which was the cause that the Emperor Theodosius convocated
another Universal Council at Ephesus, and writ Letters about it to the Bishops
of all the Provinces of the Roman Empire. His Letters to Dioscorus Patriarch of
Alexandria, are to be seen in the first Action of the Council of Chalcedon, in
which he speaks thus, Si quis vero tam necessariam and vere Deo amicam Synodum
praetermiserit, and non omni virtute secundum praedictum tempus ad praefinitum
locum pervenerit nullam excusationem neque apud Deum, neque apud nostram
inveniet pietatem.
If any let pass a Synod so necessary and truly pleasing to God, and will not
use all his endeavor to come to the appointed place, at the prefixed time, he
shall find no excuse, neither with God, nor with our piety.

The same Emperor writ Letters to the same purpose to Leo Bishop of Rome: to
which the said Leo answers in the 9. Epistle, where he says, that he has
sent to Theodosius his Confession of Faith: which in others is taken by our
Adversaries as a testimony of subjection. In that Epistle he endeavors to
dissuade the Emperor from assembling a Council at Ephesus, and beseeches him
to assemble it rather in Italy. Wherefore (says he) if your piety will do so
much as to consent to my counsel and supplication, that you command that a
Council of Bishops be held within Italy, etc. These words teach us four things.
1. That this Council of Ephesus was not convocated by Leo Bishop of Rome, since
it sat against his counsel, and notwithstanding his humble supplication to the
Emperor, that it might rather be in Italy. 2. That the Bishop of Rome speaks
to Theodosius, as to his Master, with submissive entreaties, beseeching him to
command the assembling of a Council: and by consequent, acknowledging that the
right of Convocation belonged to the Emperor. 3. Above all it is notable, that
Leo was denied by the Emperor, who believed not that the consent of the Bishop
of Rome was of necessity requisite for the assembling of a Council. 4. It is to
be noted also, that the Bishop of Rome being denied, obeyed nevertheless the
Emperors Order, and against his own will sent Legates to Ephesus.

Leonis Epist. 12.
Leo then writ the second time to Theodosius, That to obey his command, he had
sent three Legates to the Council: Julianus a Bishop, Renatus a Priest, and
Hilarious a Deacon, to represent his person, and to keep his place. And in
another Epistle to the same Emperor, which is the 16. he says, Rationalibus
causis ab indicenda Synodo fuisset abstinendum, tamen in quantum Dominus juvare
dignatur meum studium commodavi, ut clementiae vestrae statutis aliquatenus
pareatur.
That although, for causes grounded upon good reason, it had been better not to
call a Council, yet that he might in some manner obey the Emperors commands,
he had sent Legates to supply the defect of his presence. Which he says to
excuse himself for not coming in person, according to the Emperors command.

The same Leo writes to Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople, and tells him that
he thought it needless to have a Council, and yet that to obey the Emperor, he
had sent Legates to the Council.

It is then a thing out of question, that Leo did not convocate that Council,
since himself did dissuade it; and yet by sending his Deputies to it, he
approved the Convocation of the same.

The cause why Leo did so much desire that the Council should rather be
assembled in Italy, is, that Italy was of his Patriarchate, and that he could
have gathered a great number of Occidental Bishops; also that the language of
the Council should have been Latin, and the President one that spoke Latin,
who in all likelihood could have been no other but the Bishop of Rome: Whereas
in Greece, the Grecians surpassing in number, all was done in Greek, and a
Greek President was chosen; and they made the Legates of the Bishop of Rome, to
sit after many Bishops: Which was the cause that the Bishop of Rome never would
be present in the ancient Universal Councils.

Here then is justified the saying of Pius the II. in the first Book of the
Acts of the Synod of Basil; That in old time for the Convocation of Councils,
the authority of the Popes was not much requisite.

CHAP. 18. Of the things happened in the II. Council of Ephesus, and who
presided in it.
THis Council, though justly infamous, and called by the Grecians (...), the
thievish Council, because in the same, Flavianus was not only unjustly
condemned, and Eutychianism established, but Flavianus was also cruelly beaten,
of which he dyed a year after in exile. Yet that Council had all that was
requisite to make an Universal Council: For it was Convocated by the Emperor
from all parts of the Empire; and there all the Patriarchs met, either in
person, or by their Deputies. Leo Bishop of Rome had there his Deputies; and
Dioscorus of Alexandria, Flavianus of Constantinople, Domnus of Antioch, and
Juvenalis of Jerusalem, were there in person.

It happened that the Deputies of the Bishop of Rome, passing by
Constantinople, were feasted by Flavianus Patriarch of Constantinople, which
furnished Eutyches and his faction with a cause of recusation of the said
Deputies: This with other considerations, was the cause that Theodosius possessed
with the persuasions of Chrysaphius Prefect of the Imperial Palace, gave order
that Dioscorus should have the precedence among the Bishops: To which also the
Council consented. So Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria was elected President,
and the Deputies of the Bishop of Rome put under him. This History is related
in the first Action of the Council of Chalcedon, where the things passed at
Ephesus were examined and made void. There an Epistle of Theodosius to
Dioscorus is recorded, where he tells him, We give the authority and the
primacy to your beatitude. Of which we find not that the Deputies of the Bishop
of Rome made any complaint, or that they took it as a contempt or an injustice,
that the Primacy should be deferred to any but the Bishop of Rome: For
Liberatus an African Deacon, and a flatterer of the Bishops of Rome, who writ
about twelve hundred years after, is not a credible witness, when he says that
Leo's Deputies would not sit, because the precedence was not deferred unto
them. For the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, made for the advantage of the
Bishop of Rome, are more to be credited in this matter. And Leo an aspiring
man, and desirous to raise the dignity of his See, would not have forgotten to
expostulate of the wrong done to him. Liberatus himself saying, that the
Deputies of Rome opposed all that was done in the Council, and protested
against it, thereby presupposes their presence. It is false also (though Chapter
37. of the 1. book p. 298.
M. du Perron affirms it as true) that the Primacy which Dioscorus had usurped
was declared a tyranny. That cannot be found, and the testimony which he
alleges to prove that, says nothing of it; but says only that Dioscorus by
his tyranny absolved Eutyches, and restored to him his dignity, and rose
against the Bishop of Rome: which was, when he excommunicated Leo. Besides,
that place is taken from the Greek Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, which are
but a Collection of lies: As that which is said in that place, that Leo deposed
Eutyches; for that was done by Flavianus, before that Leo was made acquainted
with it. Deposing a man who is already deposed, is stripping a naked man:
Though Leo would have restored Eutyches, he could not have done it.

Besides Dioscorus President of the Council, the Emperor had there Count
Helpidius, with some other Patritii and Officers that represented his person,
and presided as for the exterior order. To that Helpidius the Emperor sent
letters, where these words are found. I command thee, that if thou see any
factious and raiser of tumults, to the prejudice of the truth, that thou commit
him prisoner, and reserve unto me the knowledge of the cause. From that penalty
he excepteth not the Legates of the Bishop of Rome, who were no less obnoxious
to be punished by the Emperors then the other Bishops.

CHAP. 19. Of the Appeal of Flavianus, and of Theodoret Bishop of Cyr, to Leo
Bishop of Rome. And of the Appeals in general. That the Cardinal did not
understand the nature of those Appeals.
LIberatus a Deacon of Carthage, who writ some six score years after that
Council, says that Flavianus being condemned by the second Council of Ephesus,
Appealed to Leo Bishop of Rome. This obliges us to speak of the Appeals to the
Bishop of Rome, and to examine those Appeals which Cardinal du Perron produces
in the 43. chapter of the 1. book.

He brings in the first place the example of Athanasius, of whom Theod. l. 2.
c. 4.
Theodoret speaks thus, Julius according to the Law of the Church, commanded
them to come to Rome, and cited the Divine Athanasius to judgment. But for
that it is better to believe Julius himself and Athanasius, by whose testimony
we have showed before that Julius would take knowledge of that business, not
because the judgment of it belonged to him, but because the Eusebians had
desired so much of him, for they being parties against Athanasius, had
requested him to arbitrate that difference. We showed also how these Eusebians,
seeing that Julius abused insolently the power which they had deferred unto
him, would not undergo his judgment, but writ to him letters full of scorn and
threatenings, saying that they were not inferior to him: yea that they came so
far, as to degrade and depose Julius from Episcopacy in the Council of
Philippolis. We have seen also by Hieron. Epitaph. Marcellae. See before, chapter
2. of the 5. book. where this matter is treated at large.
Hieroms testimony, that Athanasius came to Rome not as cited to appear, but as
not able to subsist in Egypt or in the East, which made him to retire to a
Bishop of his communion, and to the protection of Constans, an Orthodox
Emperor. The same is seen in the Oration of Gregory Nazianzen concerning
Athanasius.

That which Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.
Sozomenus says, that Julius restored unto Athanasius and Paulus, and other
expelled Bishops, to each of them his See, must be so understood, that he
pronounced judgment that they ought to be restored, and gave them restitution
as far as in him was: For in effect, they were not re-installed for that. That
restitution was done some years after, by the intervening of the Emperor
Constans then reigning in the West; Who partly by threatenings, partly by
entreaties caused Athanasius to be put in his place again, till the sitting of
a Council, which should decide that business. But a little after, Constans
being slain by Magnentius, Athanasius having lost his support, was expelled
again, and constrained to fly: So that not only the judgment of Julius, but
the assistance of Constans were without effect. Read Theodoret, and Socrates,
and Sozomenus, and the Annals of Baronius, you shall see that Athanasius
recovered not his See by the judgment of Julius Bishop of Rome. See also what
we have said before in chapter 2. of our 5. book.

The example of John Chrysostom Appealing by letters to Innocent Bishop of
Rome, was examined before, In chapter 2. of this book 6.
and upon that point we have convinced the Cardinal of manifest falsehood, and
showed that these letters are not written to Innocent: and that though these
letters had been written to him, yet it is not spoken there of any Appeal but
to a Council, in which the proceedings of Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria
against him might be disannulled. And in effect Innocent took not upon him the
judgment of that matter, but only sent to the Emperor Arcadius to beseech him
to grant them a Council, which he could not obtain, but his Legates were sent
back with contempt and disgrace.

The Cardinal insisteth much upon the Appeal of Flavianus Patriarch of
Constantinople to Leo Bishop of Rome. That will be found repeated fifty times
over in his book. Although I could call the truth of that History in question
for many reasons, Liberatus being a witness much posterior in time, and
suspected, and of small authority; yet I will receive it as true: and show that
M. du Perron never understood well Ecclesiastical History in this point of
Appeals.

For in the ancient Ecclesiastical history the word Appeal is commonly taken
otherwise then in civil matters. The Appeal of Flavianus to Leo was not to
desire him to take knowledge of his cause, and to make himself Judge, as
superior of the Council of Ephesus: That was beyond Leo's power: Wherefore also
he did not undertake it: But by that Appeal he had recourse unto Leo, that by
his mediation and request to the Emperor another Council might be called, where
his cause might be revised, and the Acts of the Synod of Ephesus made void.
Neither did Leo himself understand it otherwise: For upon that Appeal he writ
to the Emperor Theodosius, in these words; Epist. Leonis 23. Omnes partiu^
nostrarum Ecclesiae, omnes mansuetudini vestrae cum gemitibus and lachrymis
supplicant sacerdotes, ut quia and nostri fideliter reclamarunt, and cisde^
libellu^ appellationis Flavianus Episcopus dedit, generalem Synodum intra
Italiam jubeatis celebrari.
All the Churches of our parts are suppliant to your meekness with groanings
and tears, that because our Deputies faithfully opposed themselves [to
heretical decrees] and that Flavianus has given them a bill of Appeal, you
command that a Synod be celebrated in Italy. Experience is the strongest proof
of all. For upon that Appeal Leo made not the parties to appear. He used no
citation. He pronounced no sentence of condemnation, or deposition, or Anathema
against Dioscorus: Only he assembled a particular Council at Rome of the
Bishops of his neighborhood, in which the proceedings of the second Council of
Ephesus were disapproved: and acknowledging that such a judgment was not
sufficient, he urged the Emperor to obtain a general Council. Neither did
Liberatus understand it otherwise. For he says that Leo in consideration of
that Appeal petitioned the Emperor to assemble a Council. Of this, Leo himself
is a witness, and his particular Council assembled at Rome of the Italian
Bishops, who writ thus to the Emperor Theodosius; And a little before; Omnia in
eo statu esse jubeatis in quo fuerunt ante omne judiciu^, donec major ex toto
orb numerus sacerdotum congregetur. And Liberat. cap. 12. Leo Theodoreti
querelas suscipiens, litteris suis Theodosium petit, ut fieret intra Italiam
generale Concilium.
We beseech thee to command that all things be put again in the same state that
they were in before the judgment, until a greater number of Bishops be
convocated out of all parts of the world. Which words evidently demonstrate
that Leo and his Council did not hold their judgment to be determining in that
cause, and that there was need of a Council of greater authority; which Leo
does not command, but petitions for it in all humility. To this the Cardinal
gives an answer of the greatest absurdity that can be devised, saying that
this petition of Leo and his Council to the Emperor, that all things might be
put in their state again, was only intended for the temporal; Whereas there was
question only of Ecclesiastical matters, the deposition of a Bishop, and the
approbation or abrogation of a Council.

It is plain, that if Flavianus Appealed to Leo, he did it in the same manner
as Julianus condemned by Innocent Bishop of Rome Appealed from his judgment to
the Oriental Churches, as Austin says in the first book against Julian, chapter 2.
And in the same manner as Pelagius condemned by the Bishops of Africa, caused
his cause to be revised in the East by the Council of Palestina, where he was
cleared and absolved: And in the same manner as Austin says in the 162.
Epistle, that after the judgment of the African Bishops, there were many
thousands of Bishops beyond the Sea, and Apostolic Sees, to which Cecilianus
might reserve his cause, and have it judged again. All which Appeals to others
then the Bishop of Rome, the Cardinal would not take as Appeals to a superior
Judge; for indeed they were but a recourse to other Bishops, that by their
mediation and authority a Council might sit, in which the condemned might be
heard in their justifications, and might complain of their former Judges.

The Appeal of Theodoret is of the same nature, and must be understood as that
of Flavianus. Yet it must be observed, that in the works of Theodoret there is
no mention of that Appeal of Theodoret, but in an Epistle which is found in the
second Tome of the Councils, and in the Acts of Chalcedon in the same Tome;
which as well as the first, is top-full of falsifications, and where the most
part of the Epistles are suspected, and rejected by Baronius and Bellarmin. I
pass by the Manuscript Epistles which Baronius says he has seen in the Popes
library, for that allegation has no authority. Now whatsoever Theodoret has
done or said in the praise or exaltation of Leo Bishop of Rome, can be no more
then what he says of Nestorius Lib. Haereseon cap. de Nestorio.
Patriarch of Constantinople; that he governed the Church of all the world.
What the Cardinal says in another place, that Eutyches being near to be
deposed, Appealed to the Pope, is false. For the Acts of the Council of
Constantinople, rehearsed in that of Ephesus and Chalcedon, say that he Council.
Chalcedon. Act. 1. p. 114. (...).
Appealed to a Council, where the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and
Thessalonica should be.

In the same 43. chapter M. du Perron alleges the Council of Sardica thus
decreeing, If a Bishop has been deposed by the judgment of the Bishops of the
neighboring Provinces, and pretends to be heard again; let not another be
substituted in his room, till the Bishop of Rome has pronounced his sentence
about it. See above book 5. chapter 3.
But we have seen before that this order was made only by the Occidental
Bishops, which were of the Roman Patriarchat, and that it was of no force in
the other parts of the Empire, much less in the Churches without the Empire;
and that it was unknown unto the Churches of Africa. Also that the constitution
was only for the person of Julius Bishop of Rome, not for his successors, and
under favor of the Bishops of the Council, to whose pleasure that constitution
is submitted. And that the Occidental Bishops in the Council of Sardica did
gratify Julius with all their power to displease the Oriental Bishops, who had
degraded and deposed him in their Council which they held at the same time.

The other examples which the Cardinal alleges, are no Appeals. Valens and
Vrsacius desired the Bishop of Rome to forgive them, because they had offended
him. The Council of Tyane restored to Eustathius his Bishopric at the
recommendation of Liberius. Such examples are nothing to the purpose; for they
are no examples of Appealing to the Bishop of Rome.

He adds the Epistle of Valentinian, to which we will give a Chapter apart; And
heaps up many things out of the Greek Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, which
are all forged things, made to contradict the Canon of the same Council,
whereby, notwithstanding the oppositions of the Legates of the Bishop of Rome,
the Bishop of Constantinople is equalled unto the Roman in all things and
without exception, as we shall see in the proper place.

The other examples which he brings, are much posterior in time to the fourth
Universal Council, which is the term which he has fixed to himself. And none
of them is beyond the limits of the Roman Empire. Neither is all that any thing
in comparison of so many Councils of Africa where St. Austin was present, in
which the Appeals to Rome are forbidden upon pain of excommunication; and the
Bishops of Africa writ letters to Pope Celestinus, warning him to abstain from
receiving any Appeals from Africa, not to take knowledge of their businesses,
not to send Legates or Commissioners into Africa, and not to bring the fumous
pride of this world into the Church of Christ; trusting that the Spirit of God
shall not be wanting unto them to conduct their own businesses. Of which
Councils we have spoken above in the sixth and seventh Chapters.

Let all that have some equity, judge whether the reasons and examples, which I
will now bring, be not of far greater force then all that the Cardinal brings
to establish the Appeals to Rome.

I. First the Reader may take notice, that the Cardinal could not bring any
divine Ordinance, nor one word of Scripture whereby the Bishop of Rome is
constituted a Sovereign Judge of the Universal Church, or Peter's successor in
the quality of head of the Universal Church.

II. Observe in the second place, that all the examples which the Cardinal
brings are since the 340. year of Christ; so that three whole Ages since Christ
and more, afford no example, and no mention of Appealing to Rome from the
remote Provinces.

III. Consider in the third place, that all the examples of Appealing to Rome
which the Cardinal brings are taken from within the verge of the Roman Empire:
But over all his book he could not produce one example of any Church, or any
particular man, without the precincts of the Empire, that ever Appealed to the
Pope.

IV. We have proved that those very examples which he sets forth with so much
show, are false and against the right history. That Athanasius never Appealed
to Rome, and came to Rome without calling, seeking refuge against persecution.
That Chrysostom never Appealed to Rome, and that there is no trace of that in
Antiquity. That the Appeal of Flavianus to Leo Bishop of Rome, was but a
request whereby he had recourse unto him, that by his intercession he might
obtain from the Emperor another Council where his cause might be examined
again; As also Leo did not understand it otherwise, seeing that he cited not
the parties to appear, and bore not himself as a Sovereign, but applied himself
only as an earnest Petitioner to the Emperor for the convocating of another
Council.

V. It is easy to discern what the ancient Church thought of those Appeals, I
say not to the Bishop of Rome (for none were made then in the sense that the
Cardinal takes it) but to Councils and superior Assemblies. For Socrates in the
2. book, chapter 40. Is the 32. in the Latin version.
speaks thus of Cyrillus of Jerusalem, In this place we must know that Cyrillus
was since accused, I know not why, and put down from his Bishopric. Now he was
deposed, because being many times cited in judgment for the space of two
years, he would not appear, fearing accusations. But being (...).
deposed, he signified in writing his Appeal to them that had deposed him,
Appealing to a superior judgment; which Appeal the Emperor Constantius
approved. Now Cyrillus alone did that, and was the first, who against the
custom of Ecclesiastical rule made use of Appeals as in a civil judgment. That
Cyrillus, condemned and deposed by a particular Council, had Appealed to an
universal Council, a thing unusual before that time. How strange then had it
looked if he had Appealed to the Bishop of Rome? The Cardinal could not rid
himself of this difficult passage, but by breaking a gap to get out with a
falsification, his ordinary way: For he disguiseth this history with incredible
boldness. He says that these words are not the words of Socrates, but of
Sabinus, an heretical Author related by Socrates. A thing utterly false. In all
that Chapter there is not one word spoken of Sabinus. And Socrates manifestly
speaks as from himself, and as desirous that his narration should find
belief; saying, We must know that Cyrillus was accused. He says not, We must
know that Sabinus says, etc. We must know says he, that Cyrillus was accused
and deposed, and that he Appealed contrary to the Canons, etc. It is true, that
three pages before he sends the Reader to Sabinus, who makes a more particular
relation of the things happened in the Council of Seleucia, and says that he
will content himself to say the principal things summarily. He says, not as
the Cardinal makes him speak, We running over, will extract only the heads.
Socrates speaks not of (...). And in the version. Nos capita rerum breviter
perstringemus.
extracting, but says, We will only relate the principal things, as running.
But suppose that Socrates had extracted that out of Sabinus, it is enough that
he relates it as true. Shall we reject Justin or Xiphilinus because they have
abbreviated Trogus and Dion? Does he not himself condemn those that reject the
book of Maccabees, because it is a summary of Jason?

VI. To that falsehood he joins another, saying that Cyrillus is condemned, not
for Appealing to a greater Synod, but for getting a writ of Appeal from the
Imperial Chancery. And as he says a little after, for obtaining letters from
the Emperor to get his appeal accepted. All that as false as the allegation of
the words of Socrates, which he untruly says to be the words of Sabinus; For
of that writ of Appeal there is not one word in Socrates: Only he says that
the (...).
Emperor Constantius consented to the Appeal of Cyrillus, or had approved it.
In effect Cyrillus Appealed not to the Emperor, but to a superior Council.

Had it been then the custom to Appeal to the Bishop of Rome, two Councils of
Africa, the Milevitan where S. Austin was present, and the sixth Council of
Carthage, had not prohibited to Appeal from Africa to Rome upon pain of
excommunication.

VII. Austin in his 162. Epistle speaks thus to the Donatists concerning the
judgment pronounced against them by Melchiades Bishop of Rome, and by the
other Bishops his associates; Ecce putemus illos Episcopos qui Romae judicarunt
non bonos judices fuisse, restabat adhuc plenarium Ecclesiae universae
Concilium ubi etiam cum ipsis judicibus causa posset agitari, ut si male
judicasse convicti essent eorum sententiae solverentur.
Let us suppose that those Bishops that judged at Rome were no good Judges;
there remained yet the full Council of the universal Church where the cause
might be debated with the same Judges, so that if they could be convinced to
have judged amiss, their judgment might be reversed. By these words does he
not presuppose that one might have appealed from the judgment of the Bishop of
Rome to a Council? which is very far from appealing from the judgment of the
Council to the Pope. The same Austin taught us before that Julianus condemned
by the Bishop of Rome, had appealed to a particular Council of the Oriental
Churches; so little account they made in those days of the judgments of the
Bishop of Rome.

VIII. We allege also the VI. Canon of the first Council of Constantinople,
which is the second Universal; If they say that they have some Ecclesiastical
accusation against a Bishop, the holy Synod decrees that they propound first
their accusation before all the Bishops of the Province, etc. (...), etc. (...).
But if it happen that the Bishops of the Province be not sufficient to redress
such accusations, let them address themselves to a greater Synod of Bishops of
that Diocese, etc. And if any despising the things decreed according as it was
declared before, make bold to trouble the Emperors ears, or the judical Seats
of secular Magistrates, or disquiet the Universal Council, etc. Let him not be
heard at all in his accusation. That Canon decreeeth that the Synod of the
Diocese judge definitively and without appeal of the causes of Bishops. It is
not material whether he speaks of the accusers of Bishops, or of the accused
Bishops; for the Pope now pretends that both the accusing and the accused
Bishops may appeal to him.

IX. The 9. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon is more express yet to this
purpose. (...).
If a Clark has some business against his own Bishop, or against some other
Bishop, let him cause it to be judged in the Synod of the Province. But if a
Bishop or Clark has some difference with the Metropolitan of the Province, let
him address himself to the Exarch of the Diocese, or to the Sea of the City of
Constantinople, and there let him be judged. The Reader may observe that this
Council is Universal, and by consequent gave orders for the whole Roman Empire,
and that the Legates of the Roman Empire were present, who past this Canon
without murmuring, wherein it is decreed that from the Synod of the Province
one might appeal to the Exarch of the Diocese (for then a Diocese contained
many Provinces, and the first Bishop of the Diocese was called an Exarch) and
that he that would decline the judgment of the Exarch might appeal to the
Patriarch of Constantinople, who judged ultimately, and without appeal. But of
appealing from him to the Bishop of Rome, the Synod speaks not; for it was not
the custom.

This Canon displeased Pope Nicolas the I. so much, that to break the strength
of it, he corrupted it with a notorius depravation. Quem autem primatem
diocescos sancta Synodus dixerit praeter Apostoli primi Vicarium nullus penitus
intelligitur, etc. Nec vero moveat quia singulari numero dioceseos dictum est.
Sciendum est quia tantundem valet dixisse primatem dioceseos quantum si
perhibuisset dioceseon. Plenae sunt enim Scripturae tali forma locusionis.
For in his Epistle to the Emperor Michael, by the Exarch or Primat of the
Diocese he understands the Bishop of Rome; but because the Bishop of Rome (if
he may be believed) has the command of all Dioceses, that venerable Pope will
have that word Diocese to be understood plurally, as if the Council of
Chalcedon had said, Let him address himself to the Primat of Dioceses, that is,
to the Bishop of Rome: Let none find it strange (says he) that the word
Diocese is put in the singular, for it must be known that it is as good as if
he had said of the Dioceses. The Scriptures are full with speeches of that
kind. And he brings for example that which is said, Genesis 2. that a fountain
sprung up out of the earth, instead of saying, the fountains.

This is that Pope who being proud and false in the highest degree, In the same
Epistle.
groundeth his primacy upon that which was said to Peter, Kill and eat; and
upon the command made to the same Apostle, Joh. 21. to draw to the shore the
Net full of Fishes: also upon Christ's saying to him, When thou art converted,
confirm thy brethren.

Cardinal du Perron in the same chap. alleges against himself a Law of
Justinian, commanding that Page 513. and 514.
Clarks be judged first by their Bishops, next by their Metropolitans, and next
by the Patriarch of the Nation, etc. Because against the sentences of Bishops
the precedent Emperors had decreed that there should be no Appeal. The
Cardinal suspecteth, after Balsamen, that the text of that Novell is corrupted;
or that this ought to be understood only of the causes of inferior Clarks. But
there are many other Laws of Emperors, so express, that they admit none of
those shifts; as the Law of Leo and Constantinus related by Leunclavius, in
these words, Lib. qui inscribitur, (...), etc. Tit. 10. cap. 6. page 99. (...),
etc.
The judgment of the Patriarch is not subject to appeal, and is not obnoxious
to revision, or to be retracted by any other, seeing that he is Prince of the
Ecclesiastical judgment, and that from his judgments all Ecclesiastical
judgments depend, and are resolved into it, and thither do return. But it
depends from none, and is not referred to any other: For such is the nature of
principality. But that judgment is judged by it self by a spiritual judgment.
That Law, in my opinion, is express enough.

CHAP. 20. Of the excommunication that Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria
fulminated against Leo Bishop of Rome; and other censures pronounced against
the Bishop of Rome.
DIoscorus Patriarch of Alexandria displeased that Leo Bishop of Rome had
assembled a particular Council at Rome, in which he had condemned Eutyches and
his doctrine; to be revenged of him, assembled a Council at Alexandria, in
which he excommunicated Leo, and declared him excluded from the communion of
the Church. This was a very perverse, proud and unjust action; for which, as
also for his Heresy, and for his violence against Flavianus, he was condemned
a little after, and deposed by the Council of Chalcedon.

Yet such examples show how little the other Patriarchs respected the Roman
Prelate. With the like boldness Steven Patriarch of Antioch, with the Oriental
Bishops (that had separated themselves from the Council of Sardica to make a
Council apart, Socrat. l. 2. c. 16. See before book 5. chapter 2.
) deposed Julius Bishop of Rome, as we showed before. It is true, they were
Arians, and Dioscorus an Eutychian; But we find not in any of the ancients that
have written against these Heretics, and exactly examined their errors, as
Epiphanius, Theodoretus, Austin and Philastrius, that this was ever put among
the errors of the Eutichians or Arians, that they did not subject themselves
to the Bishop of Rome, and had not acknowledged him Head of the Universal
Church.

Wherefore not only the Heretics, but also the Orthodox Bishops used the like
boldness, and feared not to use censures against the Pope of Rome. Of that we
have a notable example in St. Hilary, in his fragments alleged by Baronius,
and published by Mr. Faber Tutour to the King Ann. 1626. he means Lewis the
XIII. of France.
now reigning. Where Hilary repeateth these words often, Anathema tibi a me
Liberi. O Liberius, anatheme is denounced unto thee by me. The reason was, that
Liberius Bishop of Rome, bowing under the persecution, had subscribed the
confession of the Arians made at Syrmicum.

Nicephorus in the Ecclesiastical History, book 17. chapter 26. relates how Eo
insolentiae progressus est, ut and M^nam a communione quatuor mensibus
excluserit. Idem sane and Menas adversus eum fecit. Sed enim Justinianus
ejusmodi rebus ad iram commotus qui eum comprehenderent misit. Vigilius autem
sibi metuens ad ^^rgii martyris aram f^gil, etc.
Vigilius Bishop of Rome grew so insolent as to exclude from the Communion for
four months Menas Patriarch of Constantinople. Menas did the same unto
Vigilius. But Justinian provoked to anger with such actions, sent men to take
Vigilius, who being afraid, fled to the Altar of Sergius Martyr, and there
embracing the holy Organs, could not be drawn from them without breaking them.

Victor Tunensis in his Chronicle, in the 10. year after the Consulat of
Basilius, says, that Post consultatum Basilii V. C. an. X. Africani Antistites
Vigilium Romanum Episcopum damnatorem trium capitulorum Synodaliter a Catholica
communione reservato ei poenitentiae loco excludunt.
the African Bishops assembled in Council, hearing that Vigilius Bishop of Rome
had condemned three Articles confirmed by the Council of Chalcedon,
excommunicated Vigilius, yet reserving unto him time of repentance.

A little before, that is, in the year 484. two fierce beasts troubled the rest
of the Church, Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople, and Felix Bishop of Rome,
striving to exceed one another in pride. Felix assembled a Council at Rome of
77. Bishops, where he declared Acacius, not Heretic, but polluted with the
communion of Heretics. Liberatus in the 18. chapter of his Breviary, says, that
the Legates sent to signify that sentence unto Acacius, durst not appear, but
caused it to be surreptitiously delivered by a contemptible Monk. Nicephorus
adds, that some of them were killed, the others committed prisoners. Upon
that Acacius fulminated against Felix Bishop of Rome, and commanded that his
name should be put out of the The diptychs were certain Tables with two pages,
in which the Names of the dead and the living were written, which for honors
sake were named in the celebration of the Mysteries.
Diptychs or Ecclesiastical Tables, as of an execrable and excommunicated man,
not to be named in the Church. Which censure was for a long time observed, till
the coming of an Emperor that was favorable to the Roman Bishop.

CHAP. 21. Of the Letters, and of the Law of Valentinian the third. And of the
Law of the Emperor Leo, contrary to that of Valentinian.
IN that time Theodosius the second reigned in the East, who was a rare example
of piety, meekness, and integrity of life. The Ecclesiastical Writers think
that they can never praise him enough. See Sozomenus in the Preface of his
History. And Theodoret book 5. chapter 37. where they exalt the virtues and the
godliness of that Prince.

In one thing he cannot be commended, that in the latter end of his life he
suffered himself to be too much possessed by Chrysaphius an Eutychian; by whose
instigation he approved the condemnation of Flavianus, and the actions of
Dioscorus in the Council of Ephesus. Of which yet he repented a little after,
putting in the room of Flavianus an Orthodox Bishop, called Anatolius.

But in the same time a monster for vices reigned in the West, Valentinian the
third, a base and effeminate man, a follower of Magicians and Wizards, as
Procopius de bello Vandalico, l. 50. Baron. An. 455.. 2.
Procopius affirms, and so abandoning the care of his businesses, that by his
idleness and cowardice the Empire fell, and became the Prey of barbarous
Nations, and could never recover since. Sidonius Apollinaris in his verses
calls him, semivir amens, a mad half man. It was he that killed Aetius, whose
virtue was the bulwark of the Empire of the West, and ravished the wife of
Maximus, Sidonius Apollinaris in carminib. Aetium placidum mactavit semivir
amens.
a Patritian, who in revenge conspired against his life, and having killed him,
usurped the Empire.

As much as Valentinian was idle and careless of his businesses, so much was
Leo Bishop of Rome vigilant to do his, and industrious to advance the dignity
of the Roman See. He had the care of Valentinian, and of his mother Galla
Placidia, and abused the brutish understanding of that Emperor to further his
own interest.

Valentinian and his mother being at Rome, Leo so prevailed with them by
supplications and flatteries, that they writ to the Emperor Theodosius, to
beseech him to permit that a general Council should assemble in Italy. The
conformity of these Letters with the request which Leo made unto Theodosius for
a Council in Italy, and the titles of praises and greatness which in
Valentinians Letters are bestowed upon Leo and his See, show evidently that the
Letters were written at the suggestion of Leo. It were an error to think that
an Emperor that cared not for the ruin of his Empire, took the pains to read
these Letters, and to examine the terms. There Leo is styled Princeps
sacerdotum, Petri successor, cui fas sit de sacerdotibus judicare.
the Prince of Bishops, Peter's successor, to whom it belongs to be judge of
Bishops.

But the Emperor Theodosius that governed the East, made little account of
these letters, and regarded not all these high titles. For he would not grant
to Valentinian nor to Leo that a Council should be held in Italy.

Another occasion was presented to Leo to abuse the stupidity of Valentinian.
And that was a quarrel between Leo and Hilary Bishop of Arles, who called
himself Primat of the Churches of Gauls subject to the Roman Empire, that is,
of Province and Daulfine. For the rest of the Gauls was then held by the
Wisigoths, and by the Franks. The quarrel was, that Hilary conferred the degree
of Bishop in his Diocese, not expecting the consent and approbation of the
Bishop of Rome: But Leo would oblige him to acquaint the Roman See with it, and
to get his approbation.

Upon that Leo sends Letters to the Bishops of Daulfine, where after he has
exalted in magnificent words the dignity of the Roman See, he adds, Epist. 87.
ad Episcopos per Viennensem provinciam constitutos.
Hilary to trouble the state of the Church and the concord of Bishops by new
presumptions, has exceeded measure, desiring so to subject you to his power,
that he will not suffer you to be subject to the blessed Apostle Peter,
challenging to himself the Ordination of all the Churches in Gauls.

In the inscription of these Letters, though puffed up with pride, as also in
other Letters, he takes no higher title then that of, Bistop of the City of
Rome. And to sooth up the Bishops of Daulfine, he tells them, Non enim nobis
ordinationes provinciarum vestrarum defendimus.
We will not challenge the ordination of your Provinces. That is, he would not
himself confer Orders, or the Degree of Bishop in Daulfine, but he was
contented that the Bishops elected and created might not do the functions of
their charges, but after his approbation.

In that strife Leo according to his custom had his recourse to Valentinian,
who presently without hearing what Hilary could say for himself, gave sentence
for Leo, and made a Law which is extant in the Theodosian Code among the Novell
constitutions, in the 24. title. That Law M. du Perron sets forth with much
ostentation, and speaks of it very often; especially in the 25. chapter of the 1
book, where he alleges these words of that Epistle, Whereas the merit of
Peter, who is the Prince of the Episcopal society, and the dignity of the Roman
City, and the authority of the sacred Synod, have established the Primacy of the
Apostolic See: Let not presumption attempt any unlawful thing against the
authority of that See; for then shall the peace of the Churches be maintained
every where, if the Universality do acknowledge their Governor. In which words
the Reader may observe by the way, that Valentinian does not ground the Popes
primacy upon the word of God. He adds, We Decree by a perpetual Ordinance,
that it be not lawful either to the Bishops of Gauls, or to those of other
Provinces to attempt any thing against the ancient custom, without the
authority of the venerable Pope of the eternal City; but that to them and to
all, whatsoever the authority of the Apostolic See has decreed, or shall
decree, may be a Law; so that what Bishop soever being evocated to the
judgment of the Roman Prelat shall neglect to appear, he be constrained by the
Governor of the Province to make his appearance.

Author vitae Hilarii Arelatensis apud Cujacium, Obser. l. 15. c. 38.
An unknown Author who has written the life of that Hilary, says that he was
forced to bow under the Emperors will, and to go to Rome to make his peace with
Leo. So the Mystery of iniquity advanced it self by the support of impious
Emperors: for never such language was spoken before.

But Valentinian being deprived of Africa by the Vandals of Africa, and of
Spain and Guienne by the Goths, and of most part of Gauls by the Franks,
nothing remaining to him but Italy, Sicily, Province and Daulfine, all the East
being in the power of Theodosius; that Law had but small vigor, and but a
short extent.

In vain M. du Perron to augment the force of that Law, says, that it bears
the title of Theodosius and Valentinian; for whenever two Emperors reigned in
the same time, the one in the East, the other in the West, as in the time of
Valens and Valentinian the first, or of Theodosius and Gratianus, or of
Arcadius and Honorius, or of Theodosius the II. and Valentinian the III. the
Laws of the one bear the title of both, although one of them had made a Law
without the communication or approbation of the other. Thus in the second
Council of Ephesus all the Letters of the Council were written to Theodosius
and Valentinian, although they were addressed to Theodosius alone, who alone
convocated and governed that Council; while the age, the course of life, the
weakness, and the remoteness of Valentinian made him incapable to think of
those matters.

How much that Law was despised in the Empire of the East, it is easy to see.
For in the year 472. that is about 22. or 23. years after that Law of
Valentinian, a contrary Law was established by the Emperor Leo, which is the
16. Law in the Code, de Sacrosanctis Ecclesiis; the words of the Law are these,
whereby the Emperor decrees that the Church of Constantinople be the first of
all Churches, and the Bishop of Constantinople the first of all Bishops. These
are the words of the Law. Sacrosanctam quoque hujus urbis Ecclesiam and matrem
nostrae pietatis and Christianorum Orthodoxae religionis omnium, and ejusdem
religiosissimae urbis sanctissimam sedem privilegia and honores omnes super
Episcoporum creationibus and jus ante alios residendi, and caetera omnia quae
ante imperium nostrum vel nobis imperantibus habuisse dignoscitur, habere in
perpetuum firmiter regiae urbis intuitu, judicamus and sancimus.
We Judge and Decree that the most holy Church of this Town, which is Mother of
our piety, and of all Christians of the Orthodox Religion, and the most holy
See of the same most Religious City, have all the privileges and honors
concerning the creations of Bishops, and the right of sitting before others;
And that the said Church may have perpetually and firmly, in consideration of
the Royal City, all that she had before we were Emperors, or in time of our
Empire. See also the 24. Law, bearing this title. Constantinopolitana Ecclesia
omnium aliarum est caput.
The Church of Constantinople is the Head of all other Churches.

Baronius upon the year 472. of his Annals declaimeth against that Law of Leo;
and says that it proceeded from him, who is the Head over all the sons of
pride, which is the Devil. Wherein I will not contradict him; for both that
Law, and that of Valentinian have been suggested by those Prelates, who
emulating one another, raised their Sees, and insinuating into the favor of
Emperors, wickedly abused their simplicity. Thus a little before that Law of
Valentinian, the Patriarch of Constantinople had suggested a Law to Theodosius,
whereby the Lege 6. Cod. de Sacrosanctis Ecclesiis. Omni innovatione cessante
vetustatem and Canones pristinos, etc.
Illyric [now Slavonia] which the Roman Bishops claimed, is subjected unto the
Patriarchate of Constantinople; and the Emperor Mauritius That is seen in the
Epistles of Gregory the first.
maintained the same Patriarch against Gregory Bishop of Rome, and approved
that he should style himself Universal Bishop, calling Gregory a fool for
making so much noise about a word.

For my part, I am of opinion that these Laws and Imperial Epistles are of no
force in this question; and the force which they might have, if they had any,
can have no strength beyond the precincts or the duration of the Roman Empire;
neither can it serve to make the Bishop of Rome Head of the Universal Church.
Rather these Laws serve to show that the greatness of the Popes came by the
concession, and by the stupidity of Emperors, not by the word of God, of which
not one word is alleged in this matter.

Then lived Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Clermont in Auvergne, of whom we
have the Epistles, great part of which are written to the Bishops of Gauls his
Colleagues: But in none of them is there any trace of subjection to the Roman
See, or of communication with the Bishop of Rome. The same Sidon. l. 6. Epist.
1. and saepe alibi.
Sidonius calls Lupus Bishop of Troyes, Pope and Bishop of Bishops, and the
first Bishop of the World, and says that he is sitting in the Apostolic See.

Note also that in the same time great part of Gauls was possessed by the Franks
and Wisigoths, who had invaded them upon the Roman Empire; without whose limits
the Bishops of Rome claimed no Superiority.

CHAP. 22. Of the Ordination of the Patriarch of Antioch by that of
Constantinople.
IN the year 449. a little after the dissolution of the Council of Ephesus,
Anatolius an Orthodox Bishop, and free of Eutychianism, was promoted to the
Patriarchate of Constantinople by the Emperor Theodosius: a certain proof that
the Emperor was no Eutychian.

Anatolius raised to that dignity, created Maximus Patriarch of Antioch, and
conferred the Ordination upon him. If Leo Bishop of Rome had done so much, M.
du Perron would triumph about it, and would take that for an undoubted proof of
the primacy of the Bishop of Rome over the Universal Church. That which is most
considerable in that business, is, that Anatolius did that without asking Leo's
counsel; wherefore Leo complains of it in an Epistle to the Emperor Martianus,
saying, that it was a presumptuous action of Anatolius: Yet in spite of Leo,
Maximus remained in his place, and Leo durst not take upon him to displace him.
Already Valentinian's Law was vanished, and no more mention made of it. If that
Law of Valentinian had been of some authority, Leo ought to have employed it in
that occasion; but he knew that the Greek Churches, and all the Churches of the
East received not that Law.

CHAP. 23. Of the assembling of the Council of Chalcedon, which is the IV.
Universal Council.
IN the 450. year of Christ, dyed the good Emperor Theodosius, having reigned
42. years. Martianus succeeded him: that Emperor upon the instant request of
the Bishops, resolved to convocate an Universal Council from all parts of the
Empire. Leo Bishop of Rome was the least forward of all the Bishops to desire
that Council, foreseeing that it should not be assembled in Italy, and that the
Emperor would have it near him; he petitioned then that at least the Council
might be put off till another time. But the Emperor Martian pressed by the
Patriarch Anatolius, and by other Bishops, resolved to assemble it with speed.
This is seen in the 41. Epistle of Leo to that Emperor, where he speaks thus to
him, Poposceram a gloriosissima clementia vestra ut Synodum quam pro reparanda
pace Orientalis Ecclesiae a nobis etiam petita necessariam judicastis
aliquantisper differri ad tempus opportunius juberetis.
I had petitioned your most glorious clemency, that you would be pleased to
command that the Synod which you judged necessary to restore the peace of the
Oriental Church, should be put off to a more seasonable time. Although then
Leo's advice was, that the Council should be put off, yet to obey the Emperor,
he sent Legates to it to represent his person, as he says in the same Epistle.
One may see also by his Epistle to the Empress Pulcheria, that he had
petitioned that the Council should be assembled in Italy: But the Emperor would
have it to sit at Nice; afterward altering his resolution, he would have it to
sit at Chalcedon. In the preambles of the Council of Chalcedon the Imperial
Patents of Martian are set down, written to the Bishops of the Empire, where he
commands them to be at Nice upon the appointed day; and threateneth them
together, Whosoever will reject this Universal Council, which shall be
altogether useful, he sins against God himself, and offends our piety. And Leo
was so little informed of the alteration of the Emperors will about the place,
that the Letters which he writ to the Council, of which his Legates were the
bearers, were written to the Bishops assembled at Nice in Council, as we learn
of Evagrius, book 2. chapter 2. See also Liberatus, in the 13. chapter and Nicephorus
in the 15. book, chapter 2. Baron. an. 451.. 8.
Baronius himself acknowledges that the Council was assembled by the Emperors
command: The Emperor (says he) upon the tenth of the Calends of June published
an Ordinance for the Universal Synod, to which he convocated the Bishops. Here
is then an Universal Council, which not only was not convocated by the
authority of the Bishop of Rome, but was also convocated to another place, and
in another time then he had requested. For he had been a suppliant to the
Emperor that it should be put off, and that it might sit in Italy. So the
saying of Pope Pius the II. Pius II. lib. 1. Hist. Council. Basiliensis. At ego
dum veteres lego historias, dum actus perspicio Apostolorum hunc equidem usum
non invenio ut soli Papae Concilia congregaverint, etc. Nec post tempora
Constantini magni and aliorum Augustorum ad congreganda Concilia quae situs est
magnopere Romani assensus Papae.
is made good. When I read the ancient Histories and the Acts of the Apostles,
I find not this custom, that the Popes alone assembled the Councils; and a
little after, Since the time of great Constantine and of the other Emperors,
the consent of the Roman Pope was not much required for the assembling of
Councils.

CHAP. 24. Who presided in the Council of Chalcedon.
THis Council is one of the most grave and famous that have been at any time.
For there the Emperor himself was present, and there 630. Bishops met from all
parts of the Empire. From the Kingdoms of France, Spain and Great Britain no
Deputies were sent, because those Countries were no more in the Roman Empire,
nor in the Patriarchate of the Bishop of Rome. And yet that Council is called
Universal, because it was convocated out of all the Roman Empire.

Some Patritians and Counts representing the Emperors person, presided in that
Council, sitting in the highest place, in the midst, between two rows of
Bishops. This is seen in every Session of the Acts of the Council, where they
are always named the first. And it is evident by the Acts that the Bishops
spoke only by their leave, and that they represt by their authority the Bishops
that behaved themselves with insolence and importunity. Thus in the first
Action, a confused clamor being raised, Gloriossimi Judices and Senatus
dixerunt, Acclamationes istae populares neque Episcopos decent, neque parts
juvant. Patimini ergo universorum fieri lectione^.
The most glorious Judges and Senate said, These popular acclamations neither
become Bishops, nor do good to the parties: have patience then till all be
read. So in Evagrius, book 2. chapter 4. (...).
The Senators have thus decreed. In the 16. Action the Legates of the Bishop of
Rome, speak thus to the Judges: Hesterna die, post quam potestas vestra
surrexit and humilitas nostra vestigia vestra sequuta est.
Yesterday after that your highness was risen, and our lowness followed your
steps: And a little after, Poscimus ut magnificentia vestra haec relegi
praecipiat.
We petition that your magnificence command that these things be read again.
The Bishops had not so much power as to read a Paper the second time, without
the leave of those Judges. A Bishop presenting a Petition, said unto them, We
fall down, petitioning before the knees of your Highness; as Evagrius relates
in the 18. chapter of his 2. book. Liberatus in the 13. chapter says that A judicibus
and Episcopis omnibus illa contradictio suscepta non est.
the Legates of Rome having formed an opposition, the Judges and Bishops would
not regard it: a certain proof that those Legates were not Judges.

Those Senators had at their right hand Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, and
Juvenalis Patriarch of Jerusalem: and at their left hand Paschasinus and
Lucentius Legates of the Bishop of Rome, and Anatolius Patriarch of
Constantinople. And although in the Acts of the Council these Legates be often
named before Anatolius, yet Anatolius is also in many places named before them.
And in all the actions generally Anatolius speaks far more then they, and does
all the actions of a President, and has the chief authority in the Council.
The words of Paschasinus Legate of Rome in the first Action are notable; Page
20. Ecce nos Deo volente Dominum Anatolium primu^ habemus. Hi quintum posuerunt
beatu^ Flavianum.
Behold (says he) we hold, by the will of God, My Lord Anatolius for the
first, but these have put Flavianus in the fifth place. Meaning, that although
Anatolius was the first, yet the Eutychians in contempt had put Flavianus
Predecessor of Anatolius in the fifth place. Which he says, not because the
Patriarch of Constantinople was the first Patriarch: but because in the present
Action he held the first place, and presided in the Council.

CHAP. 25. Of that which past in the Council of Chalcedon, and of the Canons
made in the same about the order of the Patriarchs, and the Ecclesiastical
policy.
IN the fourth Action of this Council a memorable accident happened. This is
added to the Canons of Chalcedon, in the Greek copies of du Tillet, and in
Balsamon, in the end of the same Council.
The Legates of Leo Bishop of Rome having produced in the Council the Epistle of
Leo, comprehending the wholesome doctrine about the two natures of Christ, did
instantly require that the Bishops of Egypt should approve and subscribe it,
that it might appear that they were not of the sect of their Patriarch
Dioscorus, who a few days before had been deposed by the Council. But the
Bishops of Egypt refused to subscribe, saying that they had no Archbishop,
without whose authority it was not lawful for them to do any thing. Whereupon
they desired the Council to give them leave to assemble apart to elect an
Archbishop; which being elected, they would do what they should command them;
Their request was granted, and they elected an Archbishop in the place of
Dioscorus, by whose leave they might afterward sign the said Epistle. This
example shows, that the Bishops of Egypt held not themselves subject to the
Bishop of Rome nor to his Legates, since they thought it not lawful for them to
do what the said Legates required of them, without the permission of their
Patriarch. Who also was elected by the Bishops of Egypt only.

In the same Council this Canon, related before, chapter 19. was made, which is the
ninth. The Greek text of this Canon is in the margent of the 19. chapter of this
book 6.
If a Clark has some difference with his Bishop, or with any other Bishop, let
him be judged by the Synod of the Province. But if a Bishop or a Clark has a
difference with the Metropolitan of the same Province, let him address himself
either to the Exarch of the Diocese, or to the Sea of the Royal City of
Constantinople. In the Roman Empire there were thirteen or fourteen Dioceses,
and every Diocese contained many Provinces, each of which had many Bishops, and
over these Bishops a Metropolitan. The first Bishop of the Diocese was called
Exarch, to whom many Metropolitans obeyed: Such Exarchs were the Bishops of
Alexandria, Antioch, Cesarea, Cappadocia, Carthage, Rome, Constantinople,
Thessalonica, Ephesus, Arles, etc. Among which some by an especial honor were
called Patriarchs, as the Bishops of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch,
and Jerusalem, and had pre-eminence among the Exarchs, save only the Patriarch
of Jerusalem, who was even subject to the Bishop of Cesarea, because Cesarea
was the Capital City of Palestina, according to the civil order. For the
Bishops of the Roman Empire had their places according to the dignity of the
Cities. I find also in Gregory of Tours in book 5. of the history of the
Franks, chapter 20. and in the Council of Mascon, that the Bishop of Lions is
called a Patriarch.

This digression was necessary for the intelligence of that Canon: Of which the
sense is this: That if a Clark has a difference with his Bishop, he must be
judged by the Synod of his Province. If he have a difference with the
Metropolitan Bishop, let him address himself to the Exarch of his Diocese. And
among the Exarchs that privilege is given to that of Constantinople, that from
all Dioceses Appeals may come to him: and that who so will not undergo the
judgment of his Exarch, may remove the cause, and evocate it to the judgment
of the Patriarch of Constantinople, who shall judge the cause ultimately, and
without Appeal. A certain proof that there was no Appeal from his judgment to
the Bishop of Rome.

This is that Canon which Pope Nicolas the first in the Epistle to the Emperor
Michael does wickedly corrupt, putting Dioceses for Diocese, the plural for the
singular; and by the Exarch of the Dioceses, meaning the Bishop of Rome only;
as if the Canon said, Let him address himself to the Exarch of the Dioceses,
that is, to the Roman Pope. A great licentiousness, to corrupt and change the
words of such an express Canon; which though we should pass by and wink at it,
still this would remain, that the Bishop of Constantinople is by that Canon
equalled unto the Bishop of Rome; if so be that the Canon decrees, that he
that has a difference with a Metropolitan, must address himself to the Pope of
Rome, or to the Bishop of Constantinople, and gives no leave to Appeal from
the judgment, either of the one or the other.

The twelfth Canon of the same Council acknowledges, that when the Emperors
made a City to be Metropolitical for civil causes; according to the increase of
the civil dignity, the Ecclesiastical dignity grew also, and the Bishop was
styled Metropolitan. The words of the Canon are, (...).
Let all the Cities which by Royal letters have already been honored with the
title of Metropolitan, enjoy that only honor, etc.

The seventeenth Canon says the same, (...).
If by the Imperial power a City has received, or hereafter shall receive some
new degree, let the order of Ecclesiastical Parishes be also conformable to the
civil and public form. There the word Parish signifies all that is under a
Bishops jurisdiction, and is the same thing as is now called a Diocese. The
ninth Canon of the Council of Antioch confirms that very thing, saying. The
Bishops of every Province must acknowledge the Bishop of the Metropolitical
City, and take care of the whole Province; because all they that have
businesses resort to the Metropolitical City: therefore we have decreed that he
should be preheminent in honor. Of which we have an example in the second
Novel of Justinian: where that Emperor gives to the first Justinianea (the
City of his birth) the title of Metropolitical and Archiepiscopal over many
Provinces.

This is the true source and origin of the pre-eminence of the Bishop of Rome,
even because Rome was the Capital City of the Roman Empire: As it is said in
very express terms in the same Council of Chalcedon, in the twenty eighth
Canon, (...).
The Fathers have with good reason given prerogatives to the Sea of the ancient
Rome, because that City reigns. That is, it is the Capital City of the Empire.

If the ancient Church had regarded Peter's being at Rome, and dying there; no
doubt but the Church of Antioch where they say that St. Peter kept his See
seven years, should have preceded the Church of Alexandria founded by St. Mark
only. And the Church of Jerusalem where Christ taught, and where he dyed, (...).
and where all the Apostles a long time resided, ought to have been the first.
But because in the civil order Alexandria was before Antioch, and that
Jerusalem was subject to Cesarea the Metropolitical City of Palestina, the
Bishops also sat according to that order, and followed the civil order.

For this reason the first Council of Constantinople, in the third Canon,
decrees, that since the City of Constantinople is become another Rome, and the
second Capital City of the Empire, that the Bishop of Constantinople also
should have the pre-eminence next to the Bishop of Rome, which was a
posteriority in order without any subjection. So much is declared by the title
of the 31. Novel of Justinian, De ordine sedendi Patriarcharum. Of the order of
sitting among the Patriarchs. Which the Council of Chalcedon has more plainly
expressed in the 28. Canon, where the Bishop of Constantinople is declared equal
to the Bishop of Rome in all things, although according to the civil order
Constantinople be the second after Rome. To which Canon that made so much
noise, and which still makes our adversaries heart ache, we owe a Chapter apart.

CHAP. 26. Of the XXVIII. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and of the
protestation which the Legates of Leo Bishop of Rome made against it: And how
they offered to falsify a Canon of the Council of Nice.
THE Council of Chalcedon was one of the most solemn Assemblies of Christian
Prelates that ever was; they were 630. Bishops chosen out of all the Roman
Empire. Pope Leo the first then living, acknowledges in the thirty seventh
Epistle to the Emperor Leo, that this Council was assembled by the Holy Ghost.
It is the fourth among the Universal Councils; Of which four Councils,
Praedictarum quatuor Synodorum dogmata sicut sanctas Scripturas accipimus and
regulas sicut leges observamus.
Justinian in the 131. Novel, chap. 1. and Sicut sancti Evangelii quatuor
libros sic quatuor Concilia suscipere and venerari me fateor, Nicenum, etc.
Pope Gregory the first, say, that they receive and honor them with the like
respect as the four Gospels.

In that Council that famous Canon was made whereby the Bishop of
Constantinople is equalled to the Bishop of Rome in all things, and the City of
Constantinople, though second in order after Rome, among the Cities of the
Empire, is declared equal to Rome, as well in Ecclesiastical as in Civil
things. The Canon is this, The Fathers with good reason have given prerogatives
to the Sea of the ancient Rome, (...).
because that City reigns. And the hundred and fifty Bishops [of the first
Council of Constantinople] most beloved of God, moved with the like
consideration, have attributed to the most holy See of the new Rome [ which is
Constantinople] equal privileges, judging with good reason that the City
honored with the Empire and the Senate, and having the same privileges as the
ancient Imperial Rome, ought to be magnified as much as that City in
Ecclesiastical things, being the next after her.

Three things displease our Adversaries in this Canon. The first is, that there
the pre-eminence of the Bishop of Rome is founded only upon the Civil dignity
of the City of Rome, which is the seat of the Empire, and the capital City. The
second is, that by this Canon, the Bishop of Constantinople is declared as
equal in Ecclesiastical things to the Bishop of Rome, as the City of
Constantinople was equal to the City of Rome in Civil things, and to have the
same privileges. Whence it follows, that the Bishop of Constantinople was
not subject to that of Rome, although Constantinople was the second in order.
The third is, that by this Canon the order of the Patriarchs is changed, and
the Bishop of Constantinople, who sometimes was but suffragant to the
Metropolitan of Heraclea, is preferred before the Patriarchs of Alexandria, and
Antioch, and is made the second among the Patriarchs; and that without the
consent of Leo Bishop of Rome, and without acquainting him with it, and
notwithstanding the opposition of his Legates in the Council: and that which
grieveth most our Adversaries, is, that this order has held and continued firm
for many Ages, and was renewed in the Universal Councils that followed,
especially in the sixth Council Council. Constantinop. VI. in Trullo. c. 36.
Page 241.
assembled again in the Palace of Trull to make Canons, where the same Canon is
repeated in the same terms. And indeed since that time the Patriarchs of
Alexandria, who had the chief interest to oppose that change, did not dispute
the precedence to the Bishop of Constantinople, but without contestation obeyed
the order of the Council. The Bishops of Rome would have acquiesced unto it,
but that the strength of the Emperors was falling in Italy, and barbarous
Kings were then invading Rome and Italy, and the Empire of the West; so that
the Bishop of Rome being then subject to other Masters, might without danger
despise the authority of the Emperors.

Our Adversaries boasting of the authority of Councils, show here that they
speak not in earnest. For they declaim against this which they acknowledge to
be Universal, and dispense themselves from the rules established in it. M. du
Perron among others, does his worst to weaken the authority of this Council.

He says in chap. 34. that in the evening of the twelfth day Anatolius
Patriarch of Constantinople spying the occasion that the Popes Legates (for so
he calls always the Bishop of Rome, although the name of Pope was then common
to all Bishops) and the Senate were retired, and all that could cross him;
caused that Decree to be drawn and signed by some Bishops of the neighboring
Provinces. His witness for this relation is Liberatus, who in such matters is
liberal of his lies. But M. du Perron was sure not to say that it appears by
the Acts of the Council, that the Legates of the Bishop of Rome made their
complaints the next day, saying that they had been surprised, that they were
not present when the Council had made this Canon, and that violence was used to
make that Canon to pass. And that upon their exceptions all the Bishops Acts
16. Reverendi Episcopi clamaverunt. Nemo coactus est.
cried out with one voice, that they had voluntarily subscribed that Canon, not
by constraint; and all declared in the presence of the said Legates, that they
approved and confirmed that Canon. And which is more, Eusebius Bishop of
Dorylea arose, and affirmed, that being at Rome he had communed with Leo about
that matter, and that Leo thought it just that such an Order should be made. So
that Article was ratified, and remained to posterity.

It is true that the Greek Acts say, that the Council writ to Leo about it,
beseeching him to approve that Canon. But those Acts swarm with untruths, and
experience gives them the lie. For if the Council had submitted this Article to
the judgment of Leo, that resolution of the Council should have been broken,
and the Canon disanulled, when Leo declared a little after, that he could not
approve that doctrine. But it remained fixed notwithstanding Leo's oppositions,
and was practiced without hinderance since the sitting of that Council, as long
as the Empire of Constantinople stood. And all that Leo declaimed against, it
was without effect; as Liberatus says in chap. 13. of his Breviary: Although
the Apostolic See to this day contradict that Decree, yet the resolution of
the Synod remains in some sort, by the Emperors protection. For to allege
here (as the Cardinal does) Leo's Epistles, wherein he speaks to Anatolius as a
Master, and as forgiving him, would be an abuse offered to the Reader; for who
cares to hear the Pope bearing witness in his own cause? Never is the Pope
sooner inclined to pardon, then when he can do no harm, and when the offenders
are not in his power. Of which this same Anatolius, in whose favor this Canon
was made, affords us a notable example, which we shall see hereafter.

Also the Cardinal was too wary to say that Leo's Legates in this Council to
defend his authority brought forth the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice; but
corrupted, and beginning by this clause falsely added, Quod Romana Ecclesia
semper habeat primatum; That the Roman Church has always the primacy. And that
thereupon Aetius an Archdeacon brought forth out the Archives of the Church of
Constantinople, the original of the Canons of the Council of Nice, where that
clause was not found.

Thus all the nullities which M. du Perron brings against this Canon vanish
away. He says that it was suggested and contrived by the Clarks of the Church
of Constantinople, in an undue hour, in the absence of those that had interest
in it; and that the Clarks of Constantinople have added some words to it, that
were not in the first Council of Constantinople. But all these nullities (if
there were any) were taken off the next day, when in the presence of the Judges
and the Legates of the Bishop of Rome, and the Patriarchs, and the whole
Council, the business was resumed, the reasons of the Roman Legates were heard,
and all they could say against it: and the Canon was generally approved and
ratified by the Council. Neither did the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch,
who were chiefly concerned in it, either at that time, or since that time,
oppose it.

The prudent Reader will observe this, That when our Adversaries find a text of
an ancient Author, which seems to favor them, they set it out with great show
and noise, and with a little meat they make three dishes, repeating the same
text a hundred times over, as Cardinal du Perron does. But when they meet in
Antiquity with something that displeases them, they make no difficulty to
condemn whole Councils, yea and the Universal, and to find fault with their
Canons. It is certain that of all the Canons made in that Council, this was
that which was established with most solemnity and authority, seeing that it was
more examined and debated then any, and that after the hearing and weighing of
all the oppositions, it was approved and confirmed by the Council, and
practiced in the following ages. But let us suppose that in the passing of that
Canon, all the requisite forms were not practiced. Yet this remains, that above
six hundred Bishops approved this Canon, yea those whose dignity was most
imbezelled by it. If you will not take the votes of those Bishops as suffrages
pronounced in an Universal Council: Yet those Bishops are six hundred Fathers,
and so many particular witnesses, more credible then the Bishop of Rome, who
was a party, and cannot be Judge in his own cause. Neither would he have been
so bold as to contradict an Universal Council approved by the Emperor, and by
all the Bishops, his own Legates only excepted, if the Roman Empire had kept its
former vigor in Italy, and in the other Western Provinces. But it was the time
when the Occidental Empire was falling, and at the last gasp. Valentinian who
still kept the name of the Empire in Italy, being rather a monster then a man,
and a shadow, then an Emperor: with whom the Empire fell in the West soon
after. Be sure that if Leo Bishop of Rome and his successors had been subject
to the Roman Emperors reigning at Constantinople, as they had been until the
time of Honorius, Uncle to this Valentinian, they could never have had the
boldness to contradict a decree so solemnly established.

How weakly did those Legates of the Roman Bishop plead their Masters cause
against that Canon, whereby the Bishop of Constantinople is made equal unto
that of Rome in all things, even in the Ecclesiastical, as it is related in the
sixteenth Action of that Council? The question being of the primacy of the
Bishop of Rome in that solemn Assembly, then or never those Legates ought to
have alleged those texts of the Gospel, which are used in our days for that
end, Thou art Peter, etc. And Feed my sheep. But that they do not: For the
Council would have derided those proofs. They grounded themselves only upon a
Canon of Nice, which they falsified, but so grossly, that the falsehood was
presently manifested.

CHAP. 27. Answer to the nullities which M. du Perron brings against this Canon
of Chalcedon.
CArdinal du Perron bends all his strength to dismount this Canon. He charge
it with no fewer then thirteen nullities, each of which deserves a dash of our
pen.

He says 1. That this Canon has been contrived and suggested by the Clarks of
Constantinople. 2. At an undue hour. 3. In the absence of the Judges and
Patriarchs, but that of Antioch. 4. That they that signed it, did it against
their will. To all these I answer in one word, That these nullities, if there
was any, were all taken off the next day, when in the presence of the Judges,
and of the Popes Legates, and of all the Council, the business was debated, and
the Canon approved and ratified by the Council; all crying with one voice, that
they had signed it with their good will, and unconstrained. And it is like that
the Legates of Leo absented themselves purposely when that business was moved,
that they might protest against it of nullity. But the business was resumed in
their presence, and they were condemned notwithstanding their protestations.
Hereby also the sixth nullity is confuted, that the Officers of Constantinople
had fore-stalled the liberty of the Assembly, since all the Bishops that had
already approved that Canon, unanimously protested, that neither force nor fear
had moved them to it; but that they had freely spoken their judgment. That
which he says of the absence of the Patriarchs, is both false and ridiculous.
For the Patriarch of Rome had his Legates in that Council, who might be present
when they had a mind to it. Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople, and Maximus
of Antioch were present. The Sea of Alexandria was vacant, and had not yet any
Patriarch since the deposition of Dioscorus, as Page 260.
M. du Perron acknowledges: It is then an error to reckon the Patriarch of
Alexandria among the absent.

He reckons for the fifth nullity, that the Clarks of Constantinople in the
writing of this Canon committed two falsifications. The one, that they added
the word equal, which was not in the Conc. Constantinop. 1. Can. 3. (...).
third Canon of the first Council of Constantinople: The other, that they added
the clause that commands that the Bishop of Constantinople ordain the
Metropolitans of Pontus, Asia, and Thracia. But he was in an error if he
thought that this Canon of Chalcedon was only a repetition of the third Canon
of the first Council of Constantinople, for it was also made both to expound
and to amplify the same. Adding is not falsifying, when they that add do it
with authority.

He brings for the seventh nullity, that Eusebius Bishop of Dorylea surprised
the Council, falsely affirming that he had heard from the mouth of Leo himself,
that he approved this Canon. But of that Eusebius, partner of the sufferings of
Flavianus, the zeal and piety is commended, and he is more credible then Leo,
who being acted by his own interest, and having since better considered what
prejudice he might receive by that Canon, did alter his opinion. But howsoever,
it was not upon the testimony of that Eusebius that the Council grounded his
decision.

The eighth, ninth and tenth nullities are, that the Legates of Leo did oppose
it, and protest against it; That Leo has abolisht and made void that Canon,
and that Anatolius concealed it from the Council, detaining the letters of Leo.
I answer, that these Legates were condemned, and the Council held not their
opposition considerable. Neither is Leo's judgment of any weight in this case,
for he is here a party, and speaks for his own interest. He has indeed
declared that this Canon displeased him, but to abrogate and disanull it, it
was beyond his power. The Bishops of Rome at that time had not climbed yet to
that degree of pride, to boast that they were above Universal Councils.
Wherefore also that Canon remained firm, and was practiced in the following
ages, notwithstanding the opposition of the Roman Pope, as Liberatus says in
his chapter 13. As for the concealment of Leo's letters by Anatolius, Leo complains
of it in his Epistles to Marcianus. But whether that expostulation be true or
false, it does not invalid that Canon, which so much grieveth our adversaries.
For this Council was sufficiently instructed of the intention of Leo, by the
instructions of his Legates, and by their opposition, and had no need of Leo's
letters to learn his intentions. And if those letters were written to
Anatolius, not to the Council, Anatolius was not bound to read them to the
Council.

For the eleventh nullity he adds, that Anatolius did himself wave those
privileges that were granted to him by this Canon. But he brings no witness
for that but Leo himself, who may justly be suspected as a party too much
interessed in that cause, to give an impartial testimony. Especially seeing
that the Bishops of Rome of that time used to expound the letters of friendship
that were written to them as so many Acts of submission, and the entreaties of
those that desired to live with them in concord, as confessions of persons that
crave pardon: Also that they used to give what they cannot take away; to
forgive those whom they cannot punish; and to take from a man that which he
has already lost. Of which this Anatolius will give us a fair example, as we
shall see hereafter. So much I will say for Anatolius, that though he would
have waved that privilege, he could not have done it: For that privilege was
not personal nor particularly conferred upon the person of Anatolius, but upon
the Church and Patriarchal See of Constantinople; and that, in consideration of
the Emperor and the Capital City of the Empire: so that others greater then
Anatolius had an interest in it.

The Cardinals twelfth nullity, is, that this Canon was falsely inserted in the
Catalogue of the Canons of Chalcedon, and that a time was, that it was not in
the Acts. Wherein he confutes himself, for a Canon must be put among the
Canons, not within the Acts, which must be separated from the Canons. Wherefore
also that Canon is found in all the Editions of the said Canons that I have
seen. It is in Zonaras, in Balsamon, in Harmenopolus, in the Latin Tomes of the
Councils printed by our adversaries, in the Greek Canons set forth by du
Tillet, in the Nomocanon of the Greek Churches published by the learned
Justellus: And that Canon is repeated in the same words in the sixth Council
assembled again at Trull, and inserted in the Roman Decree, in the Canon
Renovantes, in the two and twentieth distinction. Truly hardly in all antiquity
can any thing be found more authentical, or any Canon established with better
forms, or by a more solemn Assembly then this Canon. And I am confident that
this objection of the Cardinal, that this Canon was not at the first in the
Acts of the Council, is an invention of his own, forged against his conscience.

For it is abusing the Reader to send him (as the Cardinal does) to a
Manuscript of the Library of Queen Catherine de Medicis, and to Dionysius
Parvus a Roman Abbot, who says that this Council made but twenty seven Canons.
That Abbot being at Rome, followed the inclinations of the Church of Rome, to
which this Canon was always very odious. Gratian, who has compiled the Roman
Decree, seeing that a Canon so public and so authentical could not be
suppressed, has inserted it in the body of the Decrees, but with the most
perfidious and bold falsifications that can be imagined. For whereas this Canon
equalleth Constantinople with Rome in all things, even in the Ecclesiastical:
Gratian has put, but not in Ecclesiastical things; Sed non in Ecclesiasticis,
in stead of, Etiam in Ecclesiasticis. And that corruption has remained so many
ages in a book which contains the Rules and Decrees of the Roman Church, and is
as it were the Bible of the Roman Clergy, and the text of Lectures in the
Schools of Canon Law.

Yet that we may deal kindly with the Cardinal, let us suppose that in the
establishing of that Canon all the forms requisite were not observed, and that
it was not a Canon of a Council. Yet this remains, that it is the voice of
above six hundred Bishops, unanimously declaring their sense. If they may not
be considered as speaking together, this cannot be denied them, that they were
so many single witnesses, and every one of them more credible then the Bishop
of Rome, who is a party in this cause, and who already in that time did not
want ambition.

Also the Reader may observe, that when our adversaries find in an ancient
Author some sentence that seems to favor them, they make great trophies with
it, and sound the Trumpet before it; But if they find in Antiquity something
contrary to the Popes dignity, they fear not to tread Universal Councils under
their feet, and to oppose the consent of six hundred Fathers speaking in a
Council; presuming to be wiser then their Pope Gregory the first, who in the
24. Epistle of the 1. book declares, that he receives this Council of
Chalcedon with the like reverence as the Holy Gospel.

CHAP. 28. A Confutation of the Exposition which M. du Perron gives to the
Canon of the Council of Chalcedon.
TO invalid the strength of this Canon, M. du Perron says that Anatolius by
this Canon pretended not to be equal unto the Pope in relation to the Pope, but
under the Pope; and to have only the same privileges over the other
Patriarchs, as the Pope had over him and them: and that for all this he
acknowledged himself inferior and subject unto the Pope.

But the words of the Canon cannot bear that interpretation; for that Canon
commands without exception that the Sea of Constantinople be equal unto that of
Rome in Ecclesiastical things. The same is confuted by the example of the
equality in civil things, upon which this Canon groundeth the equality in
Ecclesiastical things, decreeing that there be between Rome and Constantinople
an equality as well in the Ecclesiastical as in the Civil: as then
Constantinople was not subject unto Rome in the Civil, although it was second
in order; so this Council decrees that the Church of Constantinople may not be
subject to that of Rome, although Rome be the first in order.

But the Cardinals shift is full of absurdity, and of things inconsistent, when
he says that by this Canon Anatolius pretended to be equal unto the Pope, yet
under the Pope: he that is under another is not equal to him. With the like
absurdity, he says that by this Canon Anatolius pretended not to have the same
power over the other Patriarchs as the Pope had over him and them: Certainly it
is impossible that the Subject of a Monarchy have the same power over the other
Subjects, as that which the Sovereign has over him: for the Sovereign can
reverse the judgments of such a one, and take away or diminish his power; such
a Subject should be as much a King over the other Subjects, as the King is over
him. Had one the like power over the French as the King of France, he should
not be the Kings Subject; for if the King could not punish him, and deprive him
of life or dignity, by that subjection his power should be much diminished, and
he could not execute all his will. I make no doubt, but that as the Cardinal
giving that interpretation spoke against common sense, he spoke also against
his own sense.

CHAP. 29. Of the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, and of the little credit
which ought to be given to the Tomes of the Councils, both Greek and Latin.
THe most certain Monuments of the ancient Councils are the Canons and Symbols
made in them. We have that obligation to the Greek Churches that they have
preserved for us with great care and fidelity, those excellent Monuments, which
contain in a Summary the whole substance and result of the deliberations and
matters treated in the ancient Councils, and which therefore were read in the
beginning of Councils.

As for the Acts and Preambles of the Councils, and the History of all the
passages of the same, the Grecians were not careful to preserve them, and the
Latins have labored to corrupt them. They are found in the Latin Tomes that
are published by our adversaries, which swell at every new Edition, and receive
a continual alteration: These Tomes, the first especially, and part of the
second, are the most corrupt Books, and fullest of falsifications that ever
were made in matter of Religion. There the Father of lying had free scope, and
multiplied forgeries at his own pleasure: There for a suitable beginning to the
work you have eight books of Apostolical Constitutions falsely ascribed to
Clement, contemporary to the Apostles, there the falsehood is evident; For in
the 6. book, chapter 24. the Author says that then the Romans had renounced the
Pagan Religion, and kept the Jews tributary, showing that the Book was made
when the Roman Emperors were Christians. Then follow about threescore Decretal
Epistles of the Popes of the three first Ages, the falsehood of which Epistles
is known by the date of the Consuls, by the barbarousness of the style, and by
diverse other evident errors. Pope Leo the IV. Can. de libellis, in the 20.
Distinction, acknowledges no Decrees, and no Rules of Popes before Sylvester.
And both Baronius and Bellarmin freely acknowledge the falsehood of these
Epistles: in the same first Tome of Councils, whole Councils are found which
never were, as the Council of Sinuessa under Marcellinus, and the Roman Council
under Sylvester. The donation of Constantine is of the same stuff, and many the
like pieces forged purposely to exalt the Popes power, but so grossly, that the
learned among our adversaries, as Baronius and Bellarmin dare not defend them,
and acknowledge the falsehood of them.

In the same Tomes of Councils the Acts of the Councils are so confused and
depraved, that it appears plainly impossible that things should have been done
in that manner.

Of late the same Acts of the Councils have been published in Greek, drawn out
of the Manuscripts of the Vatican, made by our adversaries, who have given them
to us such as they listed. Between those Greek and Latin exemplaries there is
such a discord, that we could never take them for the same Councils, did not
the titles tell us so much. Of this Council of Chalcedon especially, Baron. An.
451. sect. 69. and 92.
Baronius acknowledges that the Acts are corrupted: and the Greek Copies agree
not with the Latin, so that one cannot discern whether the Latin must be
corrected by the Greek, or the Greek by the Latin. In the Latin Copies the
order of the Sessions is troubled: and it is easy to know that the Acts are
falsified both in the Latin and in the Greek. For the ninth and the twenty
eighth Canons of this Council which we have produced, are contrary to the Roman
Prelat, and derogate to his Primacy, as we have showed: But in the third
Session of those Acts there is a Synodical The Epistle begins thus, Repletu^
est gaudio os nostrum.
Epistle of the Council to Leo, where the Fathers of the Council acknowledge
him for their Head, and submit their decisions to his judgment, beseeching him
to ratify them. Which words the Cardinal alleges very often: But God
permitted that the falsehood of that Epistle should appear by the date of the
month and the year; for in the end of the Epistle these words are found,
Scripsi pridie Calendas Apriles feria tertia Indictione decima tertia, I writ
this the last of March, being Tuesday, in the thirteenth Indiction: But the
Synod of Chalcedon was separated long before that month of March, having begun
the third day of October, and ended toward the end of the same month. And
Martian, under whose Empire that Council sat, lived not till the thirteenth
Indiction, but dyed in the eighth, as Baron. An. 451. sect. 146.
Baronius observes. But is it credible that the Fathers of this Council (who
knew already that Leo condemned their Canon, and upon that had given a repulse
to his Legates, and despised their protestations against the said Canon) would
submit to his judgment? And how had they submitted to it, seeing that,
notwithstanding all the invectives of Leo and his successors against that
Canon, they remained fixed in their resolution, and that this Canon was kept in
force to posterity? and that the Popes have always complained that their
authority was despised by that Council?

The same I say of some other Epistles of private men, where Leo is called the
Universal Pope and Head, who has the pre-eminence over the members: For the
Canons of that Council speak a contrary language. In brief, all that the
Cardinal brings out of the Acts of the Councils, for the Pope, is without
strength, suspected of falsehood, and grounded upon that sandy foundation of the
fidelity of our adversaries, who of late have published Greek Acts which never
were seen before.

CHAP. 30. Answer to the examples which Cardinal du Perron brings in the 34.
chapter to prove, that notwithstanding this Canon of Chalcedon, the Bishops of
Constantinople have been subject to the Bishop of Rome.
Page 245.
TO invalid this Canon which strongly battereth the Papal See, the Cardinal
brings some examples of the power and superiority of the Bishop of Rome over
that of Constantinople.

He says that Paul of Constantinople was restored to his See by Julius Bishop
of Rome, as Sozomenus says. That Chrysostom Appealed by letters to Pope
Innocent. That Flavianus appealed to Pope Leo. But we have showed already that
neither Paul nor Athanasius were re-invested with their places by Julius: that
his judgment had no effect; that Chrysostom never appealed to Innocent, and
that the superscription of Chrysostoms letters to Innocent is false: Also that
Flavianus appealed not unto Leo as to his Judge, but that he put into the hands
of Leos Legates his appeal to the Council, beseeching Leo that by his authority,
and intercession with the Emperor, another Council should be called, where his
cause might be judged. Which Council Leo began presently to desire of the
Emperor, but he was denied, for he undertook not the judgment of that
business.

He adds the example of Anatolius himself, in whose favor this twenty eighth
Canon of Chalcedon was made, which example the Cardinal ought to have concealed
for the Popes credit. That Anatolius was unjustly, and unlawfully promoted to
the Patriarchat of Constantinople by the false Council of Ephesus, and put in
the place of Flavianus unjustly deposed, and cruelly handled. That election
being null, yet Leo seeing Anatolius supported by the Emperor, and knowing
that all his efforts against Anatolius should be vain, he approved that
election as lawful; and after, with a ridiculous arrogance writ to the
Emperor Martianus, speaking as if Anatolius held his place by his favor and
approbation, saying Leonis Epist. 32. ad Martianum. Satis sit praedicto quod
vestrae pietatis auxilio and mei favoris assensu Episcopatum tantae urbis
oblinuit.
Let it be enough for him, that by the help of your piety, and by the consent
of my favor he obtained the Bishopric of so great a City. It is not now that
the Popes begin to give what they cannot take away, and to be gracious to those
whom they cannot oppress. Wherefore Anatolius was not moved with that: But
without asking Leo's advice he established a Patriarch in Antioch. About which
Leo in the same Epistle to Martianus makes great complaints, but the Emperor
did not regard them: Neither was the thing altered, or any amends made to Leo.

Anatolius was no more subject to the Bishop of Rome, then Gennadius his
immediate successor in the Bishopric of Constantinople. This Gennadius who is
reckoned among the Saints both by the Greek, and by the Latin Church, being
informed that in the Roman Church the laying on of hands was conferred for
money, assembled a Council of the Bishops of his Patriarchat, with whom he made
a strict decree against the traffic of Holy things: Which Decree, according to
the care that the Patriarchs took of their fellow Patriarchs, he made known by
letters unto Hilary Bishop of Rome, that it might be received in all the
Churches subject to the Roman Prelat. These letters are found in the first Tome
Juris Graeca Romani tam Canonici quam Civilis a Leunclavio publicati, Tom. 1.
page 187. (...).
of Greek-Roman Law, in which he saluteth thus the Bishop of Rome, Gennadius
and the Synod assembled in the Imperial City of Constantinople, to our
companion in the Ministry of holy things, the most religious, etc. No higher
title: And in the end of the Epistle he lays upon him this Injunction. Let
your Holiness (says he) take care with all diligence that these things be made
known by copies transcribed to all the godly Bishops that are subject unto you.

Here many things are to be observed: 1. That the Bishop of Constantinople
calls the Bishop of Rome his companion. 2. That he signifies the Decrees and
Orders made by the Greek Church unto the Bishop of Rome, (...).
holding that the Bishop of Rome is bound to observe them. 3. Above all it is
observable that he sends this Decree to the Bishop of Rome, that he might
notify it to all the Bishops subject unto the Roman Prelat. Gennadius could
not more evidently declare that he and his Bishops were not subject to the
Bishop of Rome. Else one might say that Gennadius required that this decree
should be signified to those very men that had done it, and by consequent to
himself.

A few years after this Gennadius, came Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople, a
man of great authority, who raised himself above the Bishop of Rome, and used
him as his inferior, as we shall see hereafter.

CHAP. 31. A summary Answer to the examples posteriour to the IV. Universal
Council, brought by the Cardinal in his thirty fourth Chapter.
IN the end with Gods assistance we are come in the deduction of the History of
Papacy as far as the year of the Lord 451. and the sitting of the fourth
Universal Council, which is the term that Cardinal du Perron had set unto
himself, taking the Fathers of the time of the first four Universal Councils,
for his Judges. But esteeming not his cause made strong enough by the history
of those times, he goes further, and brings examples of the Popes power over
the Bishops of Constantinople, from the last Council to Cyriacus and John
Bishops of Constantinople, who lived in the end of the sixth Age. He brings
also the examples of Acacius, Macedonius, John, Anthimus, Patriarchs of
Constantinople, over which the Bishop of Rome made use of his power, or that
were punished by him, or that have yielded obedience to him. He adds, that the
Bishop of Pataria in Lycia says, that Sylverius was Pope over all the earth:
That Pope Lib. 7. Epist. 63.
Gregory the first in an Epistle says that the Church of Constantinople was
subject unto the Apostolic See.

It were an easy task to show that of these examples some are false, some to
no purpose. For example Page 137. Evagrius, l. 3. cap. 18.
in chap. 25. he alleges Evagrius saying, that Felix Bishop of Rome sent to
Acacius a sentence of deposition. But he forgets to add that which Evagrius
adds, that (...).
Acacius rejected that as a thing done against the Canons. Besides Evagrius
gives no credit to that story, as reported by one Zacharias, (...).
who (says he) was ignorant of all that was done in that matter, and related
that which he had but superficially heard. It must be considered also, that
Italy being then possessed by the Heruls, and since by the Ostrogoths, the Pope
had changed Master, and was no more subject to the Emperors of Constantinople.
Wherefore he began to speak more boldly to the Emperor, and masterfully to the
Patriarchs of Constantinople, who also answered him with the like liberty. And
while the Emperor upheld the Patriarchs of Constantinople, they despised the
censures and arrogant words of the Roman Bishops. And at the same time the
Emperor Leo, Martian's successor, made the forementioned Law, that the
Patriarch of Constantinople should have the precedence before all, and that the
Church of Constantinople should be the first of the world.

It was also in that time An. 481.
that the Bishops of Asia, having (by the force and constraint which the Tyrant
Basilicus used with them) subscribed to the condemnation of the Council of
Chalcedon, presented a petition to Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople, not to
the Bishop of Rome, beseeching him to forgive them their offense. This Acacius
in the year 479. created Stephen Patriarch of Antioch by his single authority,
without communing with the other Patriarchs about it, or with the Roman Pope.

At the same time also Acacius deposed Calendion from the Patriarchat of
Antioch, and established in it a pernicious man, called Peter (...).
the Fuller.

The same Acacius born by the Emperors favor misused the Bishops of Rome. For
Felix the Roman Prelat having assembled a Council of Italian Bishops condemned
Acacius, not as an heretic, but as polluted with the communion of heretics.
But Acacius caused the bearers of that sentence to be apprehended, some of
which were killed, some imprisoned, as Nicephorus Lib. 16. c. 16. and 17.
Liberatus, c. 18.
relates. And he caused the name of Felix to be put out of the Diptycha, as we
related before.

Acacius being dead, his successors Flavitas and Euphemius preserved his memory
with honor, and would have his name registered in the Diptychs, and solemnly
read in the Church; which so angered Felix, and his successors Gelasius and
Hormisdas, that they excommunicated all the Oriental Orthodox Churches, because
they honored the memory of Acacius. Whereupon Baron. an. 493.. 8, 9. and 16.
and 17.
Euphemius commanded Gelasius, as his subject, to appear before the Sea of
Constantinople, to give an account of his actions. That injury Gelasius bore
with admirable patience.

This is that Gelasius who in the second Distinction Ca. Comperimus.
says, that to take the bread without the cup in the Eucharist is a great
sacrilege: Of which Canon we shall say more in the proper place.

This is that Gelasius who in the Decree about the Apocrypha's says, Romana
Ecclesia non habens maculam, neque rugam nec aliud hujusmodi.
that the Roman Church is that Church which has neither spot nor wrinkle,
Ephesians. 5.27. falsely ascribing to the Roman Church, that which the Apostle says
of the Universal Church of Gods elect; for in earth there is no visible society
without some imperfection.

This is that Gelasius, who in the Commonitory or instruction which he gives to
his Legate Faustus, says, that Non mirum si isti sedem Beati Petri Apostoli
blasphemare praesumunt, etc. and nos insuper superbos esse pronunciant.
the Greek Churches blasphemed against St. Peter's See, and accused the Bishops
of Rome of pride; and in the same commonitory declares, that the Bishop of
Rome cannot give absolution to the dead, because it is written, Super terram
inquit nam in hac legatione defunctum nunquam dixit absolvi.
That which thou shall loose on earth, not under the earth; condemning his
successors that give indulgences to the dead, and fetch souls out of Purgatory.
In the book of the Tax of the Apostolical Chancery these words are found, Pro
mortuo excommunicatio pro quo supplicant consanguinci litera absolutionis venit
ducato uno Ca^ol. 9.
For a dead man excommunicated, for whom his kindred supplicate, the letter of
absolution is sold for one ducat and nine pence.

This is that Gelasius who in the same Commonitory says, Quod non tantum
Praesuli Apostolico facere licet sed cuicunque Pontifici ut quoslibet and
quemlibet locum secundum regulam haereseos ipsius ante damnatae a Catholica
communione discernant.
it is not only lawful for the Bishop of Rome to excommunicate one heretical
Bishop of what place soever he be, but that it is also lawful for any other
Bishop: thereby confuting all the examples of condemnations and
excommunications of Bishops out of the Roman Patriarchat, made by the Bishop of
Rome, whereby the Cardinal goes about to prove the Popes primacy. And indeed
the same Gelasius in his Epistle to the Bishops of Dardania, speaking of the
excommunication of Acacius, says not that the Bishop of Rome has cut him off
from the communion of the Church, but that he Acacium a sua communione removit
and multi modis transgressorem a sua societate secit alienum.
has rejected or separated him from his communion, and removed him from his
society. That is, he had declared that he would communicate no more with
Acacius; who notwithstanding the excommunication pronounced by the Bishop of
Rome, enjoyed still the communion of the Church, and possessed his Patriarchat
peaceably, and fulminated against the Bishop of Rome, whom without question he
had overthrown, so powerful was this Acacius, if Rome had then been in the
Roman Emperors power. But the Goths reigned at Rome at that time, who
acknowledged not the Emperor.

This Gelasius in chap. 12. of the first Epistle, following the example of his
predecessors, Vt praeter Paschale tempus vel Pentecostes nemo baptizare
praesumat.
forbids baptizing at any other time but Easter and Whitsuntide. A certain
proof that he held not baptism to be necessary for salvation. Wherefore the
present Roman Church rejecting that rule, baptizeth at all times. Before they
hold Baptism necessary to salvation, in chapter 11. of the same Epistle, he proves
that the Laws of the Roman Church ought to be followed, because it is written
(at least as he alleges it) Ordain charity toward me, and go about Sion, and
embrace it, and tell the towers thereof. Which are concluding proofs and jolly
reasons: Are they not?

The same Gelasius in the Tome of the bond of Anathema disputes against the
authority of Universal Councils, against the Council of Chalcedon especially,
upon which he bestows many ill words. And the reason he gives, why he will
not have all that is prescribed by Universal Councils to be received, is Quid
enim? quia in libris sanctis quos utique veneramur and sequimur, quoniam
quorundam illic and profanitates esse feruntur, and scelera gesta narrantur id
o nobis pariter aut veneranda sunt, aut sequenda, quia in sanctis libris
continentur?
that even in the holy Scripture many profane and wicked actions are recorded,
which we must neither respect nor follow. Wherefore his judgment is, that of
Universal Councils, and of Scripture likewise, the good be kept, and the evil
rejected: And to exalt himself, not only above the Universal Councils, but
above Scripture, he disputes against Jesus Christ for saying, that to those
that blaspheme against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven, neither in this
world nor in the other. And pronounces a contrary judgment in these words,
Notandu^ quod quolibet genere blasphemantibus in Spiritum sanctum si
resipiscant and corrigant and hic and in futuro saeculo remittetur.
Note that to all that blaspheme against the Holy Ghost in any sort, if they
repent and amend, it shall be forgiven both in this world and in that which is
to come. In the same place he gives many examples of persons to whom it was
forgiven, after they had blasphemed against the Holy Ghost. And by diverse
proofs he endeavors to show, that all that holy Scripture says, is not always
accomplished.

The same being angry, because the Emperor had restored Peter of Alexandria,
and absolved him from the crimes laid to his charge, says, that Vt and
Christiani Imperatores pro aeterna vita Pontificibus indigerent, and Pontifices
pro temporalium cursu rerum imperialibus dispositionibus uterentur, etc. and
ideo militans Deo minime se negotiis saecularibus implicaret.
God has ordained that Emperors should have need of Popes to have eternal
life: and that Popes should make use of the Imperial Laws for temporal things,
and should not meddle with secular matters. For then the Bishops of Rome,
though puffed up with pride, were not yet Princes, and did not meddle with the
affairs of Empires and Kingdoms. And indeed in the forealledged Commonitory he
says, Et ego nulla ipsius scripta unqua^ percipiens honorificis eu^ literis
salutare curaverim.
that having written to the Emperor letters full of respect, the Emperor
never honored him so much as to answer him; for he made little account of this
Gelasius, and laughed at his pride.

By the same Commonitory it appears how small was the Roman Bishops authority
in Greece and in the East, when he says that Calendion Patriarch of Antioch
was expelled without his advice, and that the Greek Churches, that is, the
Patriarchs of Constantinople, had been so bold, as to Qua traditione majorum
Apostolicam sedem in judicium vocant?
cite the Bishop of Rome to judgment to justify himself before the Patriarchs
See.

This same Gelasius in an Epistle to the Emperor Anastasius speaks with an
arrogant humility, mingled with impiety. For after he has exalted his Primacy,
to which he will have all men to be subject, he adds, Quapropter sub
conspectu Dei pure ac sincere pietatem tuam deprecor obtestor and exhortor ut
petitionem meam non indignanter accipias: Rogo, inquam, ut me in hac vita
potius audias deprecantem quam (quos absit) in divino judicio sentias
accusantem.
Therefore in the presence of God, I beseech your piety, with purity and
sincerity, and adjure and exhort you, that you receive my petition without
indignation: I beseech you (I say) that you rather hear me petitioning to you
in this life, then to have me (which God forbid) your accuser in judgment
before God. It is to be feared that this Pope shall have so much to do to
answer for himself, that he shall want leisure to accuse others. With the like
pride in the Epistle to the Bishops of Dardania he puts himself in the place of
Christ, speaking thus of himself, He that is not with me is against me, and he
that gathers not with me scatters abroad, Matthew. 12. That pride made this
Gelasius odious to the Greek and Oriental Churches. Wherefore he says in the
same Epistle, Yet they persist to call the Apostolic See proud and arrogant.
For this was the quarrel; Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople had fulminated
against the Bishops of Rome, and used them as his inferiors. Against him also
the Bishops of Rome had retorted thundering excommunications, which hindered
him not from keeping the quiet possession of his Patriarchat till death, for
the space of seventeen years. After his death (which was in the year of Christ
488.) the Bishops of Rome labored to make his memory odious, and required that
the Churches of Greece and Asia should put the name of Acacius out of the
Diptychs, or Ecclesiastical tables. But the successors of Acacius and the
Oriental Churches, did so much the more honor and cherish his memory:
Wherefore the Bishops of Rome excommunicated all the Churches of the East; not
for any heresy, but only for the name of a dead man, whose memory the
Patriarchs would not disgrace, by racing his name out of their tables. For such
a small matter so many millions of persons of the same faith and Religion as
the Roman Church, that were no causes of this quarrel, have been for the space
of near forty years separated from the Communion of the Church of Rome. And
our adversaries hold, that all that are dead in all the Empire of the East
during that time are eternally damned; The Bishops of Rome, of which this
Gelasius is one, rather choosing that all these millions of souls should
perish, then to suffer the name of Acacius to stand in a register. Was that the
part of a good Pastor and Father of the Church, that has a tenderness for the
salvation of souls? Therefore the Eastern Churches accused Gelasius of pride,
and detested his arrogance: So far, that Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople
commanded the Bishop of Rome to appear before his See to give an account of his
actions. Which he did in a bravado, not out of any hope that the Bishop of Rome
should obey his command.

This Gelasius is the first that (remembering the Canons of the Councils of
Africa, which forbid Appeals to Rome upon pain of excommunication, Note --
and the Canons of Chalcedon, which equal the Bishops of Constantinople with
those of Rome, and will have them to judge sovereignly and without Appeal)
renounced all the Canons of the Councils, saying that Gelasii decretum eum 70.
Episcopis de Scripturis Apocryphis. Sancta Romana Ecclesia nullis Synodicis
constitutis caeteris Ecclesiis praelata est, sed Evangelico voce Domini tu es
Petrus, etc.
the Roman Church had her authority, not from any Ecclesiastical Canons, but
from the only Ordinance of Christ, which yet is no where found; for neither
Christ nor his Apostles ever spoke of Peter's succession, nor of the primacy of
the Church of Rome. Yet by these words he renounceth that Ecclesiastical Canon
which Julius the first would use, and the Canons of Sardica which the Cardinal
keeps such a coyl with.

I did a little extend upon this Gelasius, who was Bishop in the year of Christ
495. because he spoke with more arrogance then any of his predecessors, and
that the Reader, observing the progress of the mystery of iniquity, may
acknowledge that all that pride which then did rise, is nothing in comparison
of that which happened since. For the Popes did not speak as yet of giving and
taking away Kingdoms, nor of degrading Emperors, nor of drawing souls out of
Purgatory, nor of Canonizing Saints, nor of forbidding the people to read
Scripture, nor of denying the cup in the Eucharist unto the people, nor of
giving his feet to kiss, nor of causing himself to be adored, nor of calling
himself God, nor of giving a hundred thousand years of pardon. Of tripple
Crown, of infallibility in the faith, and of a College of Cardinals there was
no speech yet in those days.

To resume now the history from the time Theod. Lector. Collect. l. 2.
of this Gelasius, The authority of the Patriarchs of Constantinople was so
great at that time, that the Patriarch Euphemius threatened the Emperor
Anastasius to hinder him from being Emperor, unless he promised in writing to
embrace the Catholic Faith. But Anastasius being confirmed in the Empire,
turned out that Euphemius, and gave him Macedonius for successor, who also
favored the memory of Acacius, in spite of the Bishops of Rome. And for that
only reason (so prodigious was the ambition and the hatred of those Prelates)
the Roman Church was separated in communion from the Greek and Oriental.

That Schism lasted till the Emperor Justin; who in the year 518. being
desirous of concord, and delighting besides to depress the Patriarchs of
Constantinople who grew too great, made the Patriarch John to agree with
Hormisdas Bishop of Rome, and the name of Acacius to be put out of the
Diptychs, together with the names of Euphemius and Macedonius, as of abominable
and damned persons; although these two last had suffered hard persecutions
under the heretic Emperor Anastasius, for the defense of the true doctrine.

But the Churches of the East (among whom the memory of Euphemius and
Macedonius was precious, as of faithful defendors of the truth) chose rather to
be without the Communion of the Roman Church, then to race their names out of
the Church tables, and disgrace their memory after their death. Only John
Patriarch of Constantinople, to obey the Emperor, put out their names out of
the Church tables of Constantinople, and put in the names of Leo and Hormisdas
Bishops of Rome, which had been put out before. Baronius brings an Epistle of
that Hormisdas, where he gives a reason why he remained firm in denying to
receive the Oriental Churches to his Communion, before those names that
offended him were blotted out of the Diptychs; His reason is, because it is
written, None that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is fit for
the Kingdom of God.

In the year of Christ 523. dyed Hormisdas, John succeeded him, who was sent
Ambassador to the Emperor Justin by King Theodorick, to intercede for the
Arians, whom Justin had deprived of their Churches. But when he returned, the
King put him to death in prison, because he had not executed that Embassy to
his mind.

Athalarick succeeded Theodorick in the Kingdom of Italy, who made a Law which
is to be seen in Cassiodorus, Variarum l. 9. Epist. 15. ad Johan. Papam.

Quicunque in Episcopatu obtinendo sive per se, sive per aliam quamcunque
personam aliquid promisisse declaratur, ut excrabilis contractus, etc.
sacrilegii reus protinus habeatur accepta restituens compulsione judicis
competentis.


in the Epistle of Athalarick to Pope John, whereby he decrees that the
Bishops of Rome for their entry, pay to the Kings coffers three thousand
crowns, and the other Prelates two thousand, and forbids Simony and factions to
enter into the Episcopacy; and commands that who so will enter by such ways be
declared execrable, and punished by competent Judges. In the following Epistle
he commands Salvantius Prefect of the City to write that Law in Marble, and set
it before the Bishop of Rome's house. Justinian who a little after reconquered
Italy, Novel. 123. c. 3. Jubemus beatissimos Archiepiscopos and Patriarchas hoc
est seniores Constantinopoleos and Alexandriae, and Theopoleos, and
Jerosolymoru^ siquidem consuetudo habet Episcopis aut Clericis non minus quam
viginti libras auri dari, etc.
continued that Law, taxing every Patriarch in twenty pounds weight of gold for
his reception.

After Athalarick, Theodatus reigned, who sent Agapetus Bishop of Rome
Ambassador to the Emperor Justinian, who made use of him to depose Anthimus
Bishop of Constantinople; which is more then Agapetus could have done without
the strength and authority of the Emperor. In the same manner as Theophilus
Patriarch of Alexandria being come to Constantinople, and there upheld by the
authority of the Emperor Arcadius, deposed John Chrysostom from his place.
Which authority Peter of Alexandria would have used a little before toward
Gregory Nazianzen Bishop of Constantinople. And it was so that Acacius made and
unmade the Patriarchs of Antioch, as we have seen.

This Emperor Justinian is he that caused the body of the civil Law to be made
up. The Code and Novels of the same have several Laws and constitutions about
the Christian faith and Ecclesiastical policy, wherein he gives absolute
commands to the Clarks, and uses sovereign power and authority toward the
Bishops, without excepting the Clergy, or sparing the Bishop of Rome. For
example, in the first book of the Code, there is a title, De Episcopis and
Clericis, Of Bishops and Clarks, where in the Law Generaliter sancimus, he
speaks thus to the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, Ex hoc non solum vel in
vetere Roma vel in hac regia civitate sed and in omni terra ubicunque
Christianorum nomen colitur sancimus.
We decree that this be observed, not only in the old Rome, or in this Royal
City of Constantinople, but also over all the earth where the Christian name is
honored. And his Laws subject the Clarks to the penalties attending the Civil
Laws, as much as the rest of the people. Thus in the same title, the Law
Presbyteri speaks thus, Priests and Deacons, if they be convicted to have born
false testimony, if it be in a pecuniary cause, let them be suspended from the
sacred Ministry for three years only, and shut up in a Monastery to be
tormented. But if it be a criminal cause, let him be divested of the honor of
the Clergy, and punished legally. But let the other Clarks be by the common Law
put by their Ecclesiastical Offices, and chastened with rods, without
distinction. In the Code and among the Authenticks of that Emperor there is a
great number of those Laws.

Upon this Baronius An. 528. laboring to excuse the Emperor in some sort, yet
says that Baron. An. 528. sect. 2. Dum sacrarum legum conditorem agit de
sacerdotibus leges far in eosque poenas statuere praeter jus fasque
praesumere. Sect. 6. and 7. Cum opus esset ab authoritatem habente erudiri jam
senex imprudens in haeresis barathrum sese praecipitem dedit. Vetus est Regum
morbus, etc.
against right and reason he presumed to do the part of a builder of sacred
Laws, and to give Laws to Bishops, and lay penalties upon them: Yea he comes so
far as to say, that thereby he cast himself headlong into a gulf of heresy,
and that it is the old malady of Kings to be infested with that itch of seeking
to usurp that which belongs to Bishops. But I find not that the Church of
that age and the next following blamed Justinian for making these Laws; wherein
he imitated the good Kings, David, Ezekiah, Josiah, who gave Laws to the
sacerdotal order, and made constitutions for Ecclesiastical policy. Neither do
I find that the very Bishops of Rome complained that this Emperor undertook to
give Laws to the Roman Bishop and Clergy. Presbyteri seu Diaconi si falsum
testimonium perhibuisse convincantur, siquidem in causa pecuni aria, a divino
Ministerio duntaxat per tres annos separati monasteriis pro tormentis
tradantur, etc.
For he could not complain of it without accusing the good Emperors that had
been before, as Constantine the Great, Valentinian the I. and the two
Theodosii, of whom we have many Ecclesiastical Laws in the Theodosian Code, and
in that of Justinian.

Among many Laws of that Emperor, two especially displease our adversaries;
The 123. Novel in the 3. chapter whereby the Bishop of Rome is to pay 20. pound
weight of gold for the investiture of his Bishopric; And the Law which is
found in the same Novel in the Greek Editions, that the public service be
celebrated with a loud voice, intelligible unto the people.

As for Menas whom Page 147.
the Cardinal mentions, it is he who in Justinians time (as Niceph. l. 17. c.
26.
Nicephorus relates) excommunicated Vigilius Bishop of Rome for four months;
Victoris Tunensis Chronicon.
And shortly after the same Vigilius was excommunicated by the Bishops of
Africa assembled in Council.

The Epistle of the Bishop of Patara in Lycia who calls Sylverius Pope of the
whole earth, is found in the second Tome of the Councils, which is stuffed with
false and supposititious Epistles. And though that Epistle should be true, yet
the like things are said of other Patriarchs, as Athanasius, Meletius,
Nestorius, and others, as we have seen; for by these words of the whole earth,
the Roman Empire is understood.

In that time the Bishops of Constantinople styled themselves Ecumenical, as
having the Government of the Churches of all the habitable world. The Council
of Constantinople held under Menas, gives that title to that Patriarch. And
Cod. tit. 1. leg. 7.
Justinian gives the same title to Epiphanius predecessor of Menas. Yea there
is in the second Council of Nice an Epistle of Adrian Bishop of Rome to
Tharasius Bishop of Constantinople, where he calls him Universal Bishop.
Wherefore it was with little reason that Gregory the first took it so ill, that
Cyriacus and John the Faster, Patriarchs of Constantinople took that title
after the example of their Predecessors; saying, that if one is Universal
Bishop the others are no more Bishops, and there is no more Bishop but him
alone in the world: For the Patriarchs of Constantinople meant not thereby to
make themselves the only Bishops. And if that be true, which Gregory the first
so often repeateth in his Epistles, that the Council of Chalcedon offered unto
Leo the title of Universal Bishop, is it credible that the Bishops of that
Council offering that title unto Leo, intended thereby to depose themselves,
and to put off their Episcopacy? Now because the Emperor Mauritius upheld
Cyriacus and John Bishops of Constantinople, all the coyl that Gregory the
first kept about that, turned into smoke, and wrought no effect; And Mauritius
writ to Gregory that he was a fool to make so much noise for a word. This
Emperor Mauritius being slain with his wife and children by a Captain of his
Guards called Phocas, Pope Gregory began to flatter that Tyrant, and to commend
such an execrable action. For he writ to him, and in his letters spoke thus to
that Monster; Gregor. Epist. lib. 11. Epist. 36. Benignitatem pietatis vestrae
ad imperiale fastigium pervenisse gaudemus Laetentur coeli, etexcultet terra,
and de vestris benignis actibus universae Reip. populus, nunc usque vehementer
afflictus hilarescat:
We rejoice that the meekness of your piety is attained to the Imperial
dignity. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, and let the people
of the whole Commonwealth, which hitherto was in deep affliction, rejoice at
your meek actions. But Gregory did not long enjoy the fruit of his abominable
flattery; for he dyed soon after. As for Phocas, when he could not obtain from
his Patriarch the approbation of his parricide, he began to bring him low, and
to exalt the Bishop of Rome; and made a Law, whereby he commanded that the
Bishop of Rome should step before that of Constantinople. So much Platina
says, Platina in Bonifacio tertio.

Bonifacius a Phoca Imperatore obtinuit magna cum contentione, ut seeds Beati
Petri Apostoli quae caput est omnium aliaerum Ecclesiarum, ita and diceretur
and haberetur ab omnibus. Quem quidem locum Ecclesia Constantinopolitana sibi
vendicare conabatur.


Bonifacius the third, with great striving obtained of the Emperor Phocas that
the Sea of St. Peter the Apostle, which is the head of all the Churches, should
be called and acknowledged such by all. Which degree the Church of
Constantinople endeavored to attribute unto its self. The Reader may observe
by what ways the Papal See was advanced.

Yet though the Bishops of Rome were already very corrupt, and though Satan was
then advancing the mystery of iniquity, yet all their pride and malice was but
modesty and simplicity, compared to that height of iniquity which they came to
some ages after. For this very Gregory speaks to the Patriarchs of Alexandria
and Antioch as to his equals, and acknowledges that he had no authority to
command them. In the 30. Epistle of the 7. book, he speaks thus to the Bishop
of Alexandria, Beatitudo vestra mihi loquitur dicens sicut jussistis, Quod
verbum jussionis peto a meo auditu removeas quia scio quis sim, and qui estis
loco enim mihi fratres estis, moribus patres. Non ego jussi sed quae utilia
visa sunt indicare curavi.
Your beatitude [or blessedness] speaks to me saying [as you have commanded me]
Which word of commanding, I beseech you to put far from mine ears: For I know
who I am, and who you are. You are my brethren in degree, and my Fathers in
manners. I give you no command, but I have declared to you what I thought to be
profitable to you. And in the 5. book, 60. Epistle, he says to the same
Patriarch, that they preside mutually the one upon the others See, So that
(says he) it seems that I preside upon the He means St. Mark.
Disciples See because of the Master, and that you preside upon the Masters See
because of the Disciple. And in the 37. Epistle of the 1. book, exalting the
dignity of the three chairs of St. Peter, of Rome, of Alexandria, and of
Antioch, he says, that Cum ergo unius atque una sit seeds cui ex authoritate
divina tres Episcopi praesident, etc.
they are but one See, over which three Bishops preside by divine authority.

It was then the year 595. And the Bishops of Rome were not yet temporal
Princes, and wore no triple Crown, dispensed not from oaths, exacted no
adoration nor kissing of their feet, took not upon them to degrade Kings, and
gave no indulgences. There was no speech then of the treasure of the Church,
where the Pope lays up the superabounding satisfactions of the Saints, to
distribute them by his indulgences; nor of the Roman stations, nor of the tax
of the Roman Chancery, where every absolution of sin and the dispensations are
taxed at a certain rate. The Popes then boasted not that they could not err:
They canonized no Saints, and drew no souls out of Purgatory. Neither did they
oblige the other Bishops to swear fidelity to them in their reception, or to
pay them annats and first fruits: These things and many more were by degrees
introduced by the following ages, and by an insensible increase, whilst Satan
was pouring a thick mist of ignorance upon the minds of the people, giving them
images instead of the Word of God, and fables of Legends for the doctrine of
the Gospel.

That then I may not tire the Reader with long and tedious histories, and
examine all those which the Cardinal alleges, all posterior to the fourth
Council; I will say but three things. The one, that though they were all true,
yet they are but examples of things happened within the verge of the Roman
Empire; which shows that the Popes greatness grew upon the greatness of that
Empire, but did not exceed the limits of the same. Neither did the Pope pretend
any right over the Churches of Persia, Assyria, India or Ethiopia.

The second is, that all his proofs are humane, and are wanting in one point,
which is to show by the Word of God, that God has appointed the Bishop of Rome
to be Peter's successor, in the Office of Head over the Universal Church.

The third, that whenever the Bishops of Rome would attribute unto themselves
some superiority in Councils, in the time of the four first Councils, they
never alleged Scripture for it, or made use of Tu es Petrus, Thou art Peter,
etc. But only they brought some Canons, and those always with some
falsification; and were always cast in their suit.

CHAP. 32. A multitude of falsifications of Cardinal du Perron.
THE Cardinals book which every where swarmeth with forgeries and corruptions,
abounds in that ware, especially about the questions of the Church, and of the
Popes Primacy. There chiefly he exercises his faculty. We have showed many of
them, which may serve for a scantling to judge of the whole piece; for if I
would have examined them all, there had been need of a volume apart; I will
mark here a few more.

In the second Observation, chapter 2. he says that the Catholic Church in the
Council of Nice had made a Law, commanding the observation of Easter upon the
Lords day after the fourteenth Moon of March, upon pain of anathema; and proves
it by the testimony of Socrates in the 5. book chapter 21. (...) (...), that is,
that the Council of Nice denounced excommunication to the Quartodecimani of
Asia. If the Reader will take the pains to consult the place, he shall find
that Socrates in these words speaks not of the Council of Nice, but of Victor
Bishop of Rome. The Cardinal falsely attributes to the Council of Nice that
which was done by Victor, and makes Socrates to speak contrary to his mind.

In the 2. chapter of his 3. book, page 774. to prove that we must consult the
Church rather then the Law of God, he corrupts a text of Deuteronomy. 18. The Lord
will raise Prophets unto you, you shall hear them. But there is according to
the Hebrew, yea according to the Roman vulgar version, Propheta^ de gente tua
and de fratribus tuis sicut me suscitabit tibi Dominus Deus tuus, ipsum audies.
The Lord thy God shall raise up a Prophet unto thee, from the midst of thee,
of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him you shall hearken. That this Prophet is
Christ, Steven teaches it, Act. 37. The Prophet knew well enough, that if it
be here spoken of one Prophet only, who is Christ, that text cannot serve to
send the people to the Pastors of the Church to learn of them the unwritten
Word. Therefore he corrupted the text to make it serve his turn.

In the same place he makes Calvin to say that which he never thought on. He
says that Calvin in his Comment upon the Pentateuch expounds that text, Deuteronomy.
18. of sending the people from the Law to the Prophets. This shall not be found
in Calvin. And though Calvin had said, that in that text God sends us from the
Law to the Prophets, yet we ought not thereby to understand, that God sends us
back to the Prophets to learn the traditions and an unwritten Word from them,
but to learn the exposition of the Law by the Law it self.

Christ Matthew. 22. proves the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection
unto the Sadduces, by these words of God himself, Exodus 3. I am the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, for (says Christ) God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living. But the Cardinal, page 775. disputes against Christ,
and brings many reasons to prove, that there is neither reason nor consequence
in the proof that Christ brings. And to confirm his affirmation, he says, that
the Doctors of the Jews wondered at it, as at a new thing. A thing altogether
false. For first, the Gospel says not that the Doctors, Mat. 22.33.

(...).


but the multitudes were astonished at his doctrine. Then it was the excellency
of his doctrine, not the novelty, that the multitude did wonder at; as the
Cardinal will make us believe.

In chap. 2. of the third book he makes Calvin to say, that such as sacrificed
with another fire then that which was come down from heaven, were cursed, and
quoteth in the Margin Calvin's Comment upon 1 Cor. 10. Who so will consult that
place, shall find that false, and that Calvin says no such thing.

In chap. 25. of the first book he alleges the thirty seventh Epistle of book
2. of the Epistles of Gregory the first, where he makes him say, If one of the
four Patriarchs had committed such an Act, such a disobedience could not have
past without a most grievous scandal. He translateth contumaciam, disobedience,
whereas it signifies obstinacy to resist. But the Cardinal would persuade the
world that Gregory pretended that other Patriarchs owed him obedience. Whereas
Gregory himself in Epist. 30. of book 7. writing to Eulogius Patriarch of
Alexandria, acknowledges that he had no power at all to command him, as we
have observed in the chapter before, and set down the words of Gregory.

In chap. 14. of the third book, to weaken a text of Hilary, Page 841.
who says upon Psalm. 132. That which is not contained in the book of the Law,
we ought not so much as to be curious to know it. He says that Hilary means,
that such things as are set forth in the quality of holy Scripture, and are not
found in the body of Canonical Scriptures, ought to be rejected. For (says he)
it was question of an Apocrypha, which said, that the Angels coming to lust
after the daughters of men, would assemble in mount Hermon. The Cardinal would
make the world believe that they against whom Hilary disputes in that place
alleged that Apocrypha as a Canonical book: Which is a plain untruth, for
Hilary says nothing of that, and the question in that place, is only whether
that history be true, not whether the book whence it is taken be Canonical.
Therefore the sentence of Hilary disputing for the perfection of Scripture
remains firm, That which is not contained in Scripture, we ought not so much
as to be curious to know it.

In chap. 34. the Cardinal falsely affirms that the title of Ecumenical or
Universal Bishop was offered to the Bishop of Rome in the Council of Chalcedon.
It is true that Gregory the first who lived about a hundred forty five years
after that Council, boasts of that, and adds that the Bishop of Rome
refused that title as arrogant, and robbing other Bishops of their quality of
Bishop: For (says he) if any be Universal Bishop, the others are not Bishops.
But the contrary is seen by the twenty eighth Canon of that Council, in which,
in spite of the Legates of Leo, it is decreed that the Bishop of Constantinople
be equal unto that of Rome in Ecclesiastical things, as those two Cities were
equal in the Civil. It is clearer then the day, that they that made that Canon,
never had an intention to confer the Universal Sovereignty upon the Bishop of
Rome; much less to give him a title whereby they should divest themselves of
their Episcopal Office. And if they offered that title to the Bishop of Rome,
it shows that he had it not before: And that by decreeing that the Bishop of
Constantinople should be equal unto the Bishop of Rome, they decreed also that
the Bishop of Constantinople should be called Ecumenical or Universal. Of that
nothing at all is found in the place quoted by the Cardinal, which is the Sea
the second Tome of the Councils in the third Action of the Council of Chalcedon
in the Edition of Collen an. 1567.
third Action of the Council of Chalcedon, in the request of the Clergy of
Alexandria. In all the Tomes of Councils that ever I saw, I find no such
request. And though it might be found there, who knows not how much those Acts
are falsified, and that the Greek Acts agree very ill with the Latin? Yet let
us suppose that the Clergy of Alexandria deferred that title to the Bishop of
Rome: Must the titles which some private persons defer to the Bishops of Rome,
be taken for an Ordinance of an Universal Council? This I say, because in the
Acts of the said Council some Epistles are found, of some private men, that
give that title to the Bishop of Rome. But I find also that the Council of
Constantinople, held under the Emperor Justinian, Act. 2. Dilecto fratri
Tharasio Generale Patriarchae Adrianus, etc.
gives many times the same title to Menas Patriarch of Constantinople; And that
the same Emperor in the Law to Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople, styles
the said Epiphanius Ecumenical Patriarch. And before him Justin gives the
same title to John Patriarch of Constantinople. What more? In the second
Council of Nice, where Tharasius Patriarch of Constantinople did preside, there
is an Epistle of Adrian Bishop of Rome to the same Tharasius, with this title,
To my well beloved brother Tharasius General Patriarch, etc.

In the same Page 246. and 247.
chapter he alleges the promise which Anthimus Patriarch of Constantinople
made in his reception, to do all that the Sovereign Pope of the great Rome
should decree: but he cuts off the head of that sentence, which is (...).
Anthimus using fraudulent words, promised to do all, etc. So then Anthimus did
not speak in earnest: But he was forced to make that promise by the Emperor,
who for some considerations labored to depress the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, who since the time of Acacius had bearded the Emperor, and
over-mastered and abused the Bishops of Rome. Note, that the Cardinal
translates the word (...) to his advantage, decreeing, instead of suggesting,
advising, or representing.

Page 282.
In chap. 35. of book 1. he says that Athanasius in the second Apology puts
Hosius, Vito and Vincentius in the same place: which is false, since by the
same place, he understands the same rank. For that is the question. Or if by
the same place, he understands the same line: one may say that the Scripture
puts God and the Devil in the same place, by naming them in the same line.

In the following page he makes Photius to say in the Treatise of the Synods,
With Vito and Vincentius was joined Hosius Bishop of Corduba. That Treatise of
the seven Councils composed by Photius is found in the beginning of the first
Tome of the Councils; which whosoever will consult, shall find that there is no
mention at all of Hosius. But he shall find these words in the first chapter,
where he speaks of the Council of Nice, Alexand. etc. praesidebat.
Alexander was President there, who held the Sea of Constantinople, and
Sylvester, etc.

Page 308.
In chap. 39. of book 1. he falsely relates the History of Pope Vigilius. That
Vigilius being but a Deacon, secretly treated with the Empress Justinians wife
who promised him to make him Pope, if he would promise to embrace the opinon of
the Eutychian heretics, and by express letters to confirm their faith, and
condemn the Council of Chalcedon. To compass these ends Belizarius the
Emperors Lieutenant in Italy, having got a promise from Vigilius of two
hundred pound weight of gold, deposed Sylverius, and banished him, and caused
Vigilius to be elected Pope in his place. Vigilius fearing lest that Sylverius
should be restored by the Emperor, obtained of Belizarius that Sylverius
should be put in his hands. And when he had him, he starved him to death in
prison. Sylverius being dead, Vigilius fulfilled his promise, and writ letters
to the Eutychian Bishops. The title of the letters was, Vigilius to my Lords,
and Christ's, etc. And in these letters he openly declared himself an Eutychian,
and denied that Jesus Christ had two natures.

That History is related by Victor Tunensis in his Chronicle, and by Liberatus
Deacon of Carthage, in chap. 22. of his Breviary, where he puts very expressly
the death of Sylverius before these letters of Vigilius, whereby he declared
himself an Eutychian. And Victor Tunensis adds, that he was for that reason
excommunicated by the Bishops of Africa assembled in Council.

But Cardinal du Perron, that it may not be believed that the Popes can fall
into heresy, would persuade us that this Epistle, whereby Vigilius approves
heresy, was written before the death of Sylverius, and that Sylverius at that
time was not yet a lawful Bishop, contradicting the two only historians that
relate that history; Liberatus especially, who speaks thus, Qui in Palmariam
insulam adductus sub eorum custodia defecit inedia.

Vigilius autem per Antoninam Belisarii conjugem impleus promissionem suam quam
Augustae fecerat talem scripsit Epistolam, Dominis and Christis Vigilius.


Sylverius carried into the I Will of Palmaria, and being kept prisoner, died for
want of meat. But Vigilius by the means of Antonina wife to Belizarius,
fulfilling the promise made to the Emperess, writ such letters, Vigilius to my
Lords, and Christ's, etc. After these letters the Author makes no more mention
of Sylverius, and of his death. But that which is most express to discover the
Cardinals error, is that Victor Tunensis puts the ordination of Vigilius in the
place of Sylverius, and the letters written by Vigilius in favor of the
Eutychian heresy, in the second year after the Consulat of Basilius; But he
says that after that, in the tenth year after that Consulat of Basilius (that
is eight or nine years after these letters written) Vigilius was excommunicated
by the Bishops of Africa. Now it is to be observed that since the coming of
Sylverius to the Bishopric of Rome, to his death See Platina in the life of
Sylverius, where he says that Sylverius was Pope but a year and five months.
And Baron. an 540.. 2.
there is not two full years. Whence it is evident that the condemnation of
Vigilius for being a favourer of heresy, happened eight years after the death
of Sylverius.

Sometimes our Cardinal will play the Philosopher, as in chap. 34. of the first
book, Page 249.
he says that the Bishops of the Council of Chalcedon understood not that the
dignity of the City of Rome was the next, conjunct, and immediate cause of the
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, but the antecedent, objective and remote cause.
Children that have tasted the first elements of Philosophy know that there is
no cause but antecedent, whether it be near or remote; for always the causes
go before the effects, the efficient causes especially, which are the matter in
question in this place. Yea, the final causes which are posteriour as for the
execution, are antecedent as for the intention. With the like absurdity he
speaks of objective causes, for there are no objective causes, and these words
have no sense. If any cause might be called objective, it should be the final,
because the agents aim at it; but the question is not here of the final cause,
but of the efficient.

It becomes him no better to play the Cosmographer, as when he says in chapter 31.
of book 1. that Idumea is seated toward the West of the Meridional Judea;
contradicting Scripture, which says that the Mediterranean Sea is at the West
of Judea, as Numb. 32.6. As for the Western border, you shall even have the
great sea for a border. And Josh. 1.4. The great sea toward the going down of
the Sun shall be your coast. He has little knowledge in the situation of
Countries, that knows not that the West border of Judea is the Mediterranean
Sea, not Idumea, which is meridional to Judea, yet so, that it bends a little
Eastward. And this is so true, that in Hebrew the same (...)
word signifies both the West and the Sea: Look Northward, and Southward, and
Eastward, and The English version has Westward.
toward the Sea, that is, Westward: as also the vulgar Latin Bible (the only
approved by the Council of Trent) translateth it. And Exodus 10.19. The Lord
turned a mighty strong wind from the sea. Both the Vulgar and the English
version translate a Westwind, See Isa. 49.12. and Genesis 24.14. and Exodus 26.22.
and Ezekiel. 48.17. and Jos. 15.12. Sanctes Pagninus, a Monk of Luca, in his
Lexicon upon the word (...) says thus; (...) Mare, and Occidens, id est, plaga
Occidentalis, eo quod mare magnum sit ad plagam Occidentalem terrae Israel.

This Cardinal never made conscience of feeding the people with false
allegations and forged stories. Even in the solemn Assembly of the States
sitting at Paris an. 1615. he was not ashamed in his Oration, to allege
Scripture falsely, to prove that the Pope can depose Kings. That is seen in the
Oration of this Cardinal published by himself.
Samuel (said he) deposed Saul, or declared him deposed. Again, The Prophet
Ahija deposed Roboam from the Royal right over the ten tribes. Again, The
Prophet Elijah deposed Ahab, because he embraced the Religion of false Gods.
Again, Azariah the Priest expelled King Uzziah from the conversation of the
people, wherefore the administration of the Kingdom was taken from him. This
Oration was sent by our Cardinal to his Majesty of great Britain, who seeing
both the Crown and the life of Kings subjected to the Popes pleasure by that
Oration, made an answer to it, and laid open his false dealing both in these
and in other allegations. The Cardinal did quietly swallow that dishonor, and
made no answer, though he lived four years after the Kings answer.

Of his ignorance in Greek, I have brought forth many examples: to which I will
add this. In the first chapter of his Treatise of the Sacrifice, whereas these
words (...) signify non amplius polluent, they shall pollute no more; he
translates, They shall smoke no more.

BOOK VII. WHEREIN Diverse Controversies are examined, HANDLED BY Cardinal Du
PERRON IN His Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth BOOK.
FIRST CONTROVERSY OF THE Invocation of SAINTS.
CHAP. 1. State and Distribution of the Question.
CArdinal du Perron in the eighteenth chapter of his first book, slideth over
the question of the Invocation of Saints, saying, that in the ancient Church,
Christians would make voyages and pilgrimages to the bodies of Martyrs to be
associated to their merits, and assisted by their intercessions, and prayed to
the holy Martyrs to pray for them, etc. Which he goes about to prove by some
testimonies of the Fathers; and in the Margin sends us to his fifth book, where
he treats that question fully, and more exactly then any other. There he
protests often that he disputes not of the right, nor of that which ought to
be believed concerning this question, but only of the fact: And that his end is
only to show what was believed in the ancient Church in the time of the first
four Councils, that is, from the year of the Lord 326. to the year 451. For he
freely acknowledges, that as in the holy Scripture, there is neither command
nor example for the invocation of Saints, likewise in the writings of the
Fathers that have written before the four first Councils, no trace is to be
found of that invocation.

As for us, since we think it an idle labor to dispute of that which was
believed in such or such an age, unless it be to learn together what ought to
be believed, and that the question of the fact without that of the right is to
no purpose, we will treat of both, and seek first what the faithful ought to
believe about this point, that the Reader may judge of the examples by the
rules, instead of forging rules upon examples, which have not the strength of
Laws.

Before we enter into that matter, the Reader must be desired to distinguish
carefully the question of the intercession of Saints, from the question of the
invocation of Saints: They are very different questions; Whether the Saints
pray for us, and Whether we must pray to them. It is one thing to know what the
Saints do in heaven, another thing to know what we must do in earth. This
advertisement is necessary, because Cardinal du Perron carried away by the
stream of the common error, confounds these two things, and labors to prove
that the Saints intercede for us; which is not the thing in question. For we
deny not that the Saints in heaven pray for the Church in earth. Of that we
have an example, Rev. 6.10. where the souls of Martyrs cry unto God, How long O
Lord holy and true do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell
on the earth? But whether we must invocate those Martyrs, it is another
question, and the very knot of the difference; to which if M. du Perron had
kept himself close, he might have made his work shorter by the half, and had
not loaded his book with useless proofs. For the felicity of the Saints has
not diminished their charity. They pray in general for the Church militant here
in earth, though they know not the thoughts of men, nor the necessities of
every private man.

This question consists in four points.









CHAP. 2. That the glorified Saints know not all that is done in earth, and
know not the hearts and thoughts of men.
Confutation of the Cardinal.
CArdinal du Perron in chap. 18. of book 5. page 997. speaking of the souls of
Saints, says that they see within themselves the light of the Almighty; whence
he infers, that there is nothing without themselves but they know it. In the
same chapter page 991. he speaks of a looking-glass in Gods essence, in which
all the things that are in being are represented. Which is a rash Divinity,
repugnant unto nature, and to the blessedness of the Saints, and (which is
more) unto the word of God. For the Saints though never so much exalted in
glory, yet are creatures and of a finite nature, and by consequent incapable of
knowing infinite things in an instant, and to bend their attention upon
infinite things in the same moment. For as the being, and life of creatures
consists in a duration, and successive flowing, so their actions are done
successively, and one after another. Whence it follows that affirming that
the Saints think of all things at once, and see all that has been, is, and
shall be in the world, and all the thoughts of all men at once, and that St.
Peter being prayed to by a hundred thousand persons in diverse places, sees the
thoughts of all these men at once, and of all the men that shall in the time to
come call upon him: This, I say, is equalling his knowledge, both in latitude
and extent, unto the knowledge of God.

Besides, God does nothing in vain, and gives no virtue or knowledge to his
Saints but to make them more happy. Now in this life and in humane society
there is a numberless quantity of vain, sordid, filthy, and wicked things and
actions, the knowledge whereof would contribute nothing to the blessedness of
the Saints, and would be altogether unsuitable with their happy state. For that
looking-glass, which the School men say to be in the face of God (in which both
they, and Cardinal du Perron after them, will have the Saints to see all
things) was broken long ago, neither is any thing seen in it, but the rashness
of those that invented it, without any warrant of the word of God. It is a
gross error to believe that who so sees God, necessarily sees all that God
sees: and that any man that sees another person, has always as good eyes as
that person: Or that one that sees from a low ground another that stands on a
high place, sees all the prospect which that man sees from that high place.
By that reason he that sees a blind man, should see nothing at all. Indeed if
the Saints could see and know God with such a perfect knowledge as that
wherewith God knows his own self, I make no doubt but that the Saints by that
knowledge should know all things, because that knowledge would be infinite as
the essence of God is infinite. But Gods essence is incomprehensible and
invisible to the creature, and though the Saints be never so excellent, there
is always an infinite distance between them and Gods perfection. The Angels
see the face of God always, Mat. 18. and yet they are ignorant of the day of
judgment, Mark 13.32. and by the manifestation of Jesus Christ by the Gospel,
the Angels have learned things which they knew not before, as St. Paul says,
Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God.

The Jesuit Salmeron in the eighth disputation upon 1 Timothy 2. says, that when
Jesus Christ prays for us, the Father hears him always: But when the Saints
pray for us, God hears them not always, and grants not always what they
ask. By speaking thus, he ascribes idle actions unto Saints, and such as are of
no use, either for them or us. Hence also it follows, that it is far better for
one to address himself unto Christ, then to the Saints. But this is most
notable in that assertion of his, that by speaking thus, he breaks that
looking-glass, and acknowledges that the Saints see not things future in the
face of God, and know not whether God will hear them or no. For if they knew
it, they would not ask such things as they might be sure never to obtain,
because by their prayers they should contradict the known counsel of God.

I acknowledge that God can reveal what pleases him unto the Saints; but of
that will of God, nothing is manifested to us in his word. Rather we learn of
Job, speaking of a deceased Father, Job 14.21. That his sons come to honor,
and he knows it not; and they are brought low, but he perceives it not.

2 Kings 22.20. God promises to King Josiah, thou shall be gathered into thy
grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring
upon this place. If that King saw not after his death the ruin of his
children, and desolation of his Kingdom, how could he have seen all that was in
the world, and the thoughts of all men?

Wise Solomon, Eccles. 9.5. is express upon this point, saying, that the dead
know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward. And a little after,
neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under
the Sun: Then have they not any portion in the religious service which men
offer unto them, and no knowledge of men's businesses. To this the Cardinal
answers, that it is not the spirit of God that speaks thus, but these are
objections which the Prophet frames as from the sense of the flesh against the
spirit. Else (says he) we must infer out of these words that the death of a
man, and the death of a beast are both alike. The Reader that will consult the
place, shall find, that in the whole chapter there is no mention of the death
of beasts, and that it is not there compared with the death of men. Rather he
shall find in that ninth chapter many holy and true sentences, which cannot be
suggestions of the flesh against the spirit of God. Such as this sentence in
the first verse, that the righteous and the wise, and their works are in the
hand of God: And this v. 16. and 18. Wisdom is better then strength: Wisdom is
better then weapons of war, but one sinner destroys much good.

Now in the question whether the Saints must be prayed to, the main point is,
to know whether the Saints deceased understand the prayers which the living
conceive in their heart? For the true prayer is that of the heart, otherwise he
that has the best voice should be best understood. And he that is prayed to,
must know whether he that prays does it seriously, and with faith and true
repentance: And he must know how to discern them from those that pray out of
hypocrisy. Now the Word of God says, that there is none but God alone that
knows the hearts of men: As it is said, 2 Chronicles. 6.30. Lord, thou only
know the hearts of the children of men.

Page 990.
The Cardinal, after others, answers, that Scripture thereby means, that the
Angels and the souls of men know not the hearts in the same manner as God
knows them, because that God has that knowledge essentially and from
himself, but the Angels and the souls of men have it only by participation, and
because God gives it them. In the same manner as Paul, 1 Timothy 6.16. says that
God only has immortality. There is nothing so express in Gods Word, but may be
so eluded. The Word of God says simply and absolutely, that God alone knows
the hearts of men, not as the Cardinal will make Scripture say, that God knows
the hearts in a manner proper unto himself alone. By the same reason I could
say that God alone knows, that Jesus Christ is our Redeemer, because he knows
it from himself, but we know him but by revelation. If a man in a town has
taught others Grammar, may it be said that he alone knows Grammar, because
others have learned it of him? Nay, it follows, that he knows it not alone,
since he taught it them. As for these words, that God alone has immortality;
To take the word immortality in the sense that the Apostle takes it, for
eternity, and for a life independent from another, not flowing, and not loosing
any thing of its time and duration, I say that God alone has immortality; For
the life of Angels and men's souls consists in a successive duration. The
years of an immortal man are flowing, and his past duration is no more.

The Word of God in many places makes this distinction between God and all the
creatures, that he is searcher of the hearts, as Psalm. 7.9. The righteous God
tries the hearts and rains: And Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart: And 1 Chronicles. 28.9. The Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts. And Act. 1.24. Peter casting the lot for the
election of an Apostle, said, Thou Lord which know the hearts of all men,
show whether of these two thou have chosen. Matthew. 6.6. the Lord Jesus says,
When thou prayest, enter into thy closet -- and pray to thy Father which sees
thee in secret. His exhortation should loose its strength, if the same could be
said of the Saints.

Wherefore Austin in the book de dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis (if that book be
his) chapter 81. makes this conclusion, That only one knows the secrets of the
hearts, to whom it is said, Thou only know the hearts of the sons of men.

CHAP. 3. The opinion of the Fathers upon this point.
IT was a received opinion among many of the Elders, that the souls of the
Saints do not yet enjoy the sight of God, and shall not be put in possession of
the heavenly glory before the day of the resurrection. They that hold that
opinion, hold by consequent, that the souls of the Saints know not all the
things that are done in the world, and know not the hearts of men, since the
reason why the Roman Church and M. du Perron after others, hold that the Saints
know our hearts, and hear our prayers, is, that they enjoy the glory of God.

Tertullian in chapter 55. of the book of the Soul, delivers thus his opinion;
Constituimus omnem animam apud inseros sequestrari in diem Domini.
We hold for certain, that every soul is set apart in hell until the day of
the Lord. Irenaeus says the same in the fifth book, where speaking of the
Paradise where God had placed Adam, he says that Plantavit Deus Paradisum in
Eden contra Orientem, and posuit ibi hominem quem plasmavit, etc.

Qua propter dicunt Presbyteri qui sunt Apostolorum discipuli eos qui translati
sunt illuc translatos esse, etc.


the Ancients which were Disciples of the Apostles say that they that were
transported hence, have been transported to that place, and that it is the
Paradise prepared to the righteous, where St. Paul being carried up, heard
unspeakable words.

The same Irenaeus in the end of the fifth book rebukes severely those that
say that the souls departing from the bodies, go up to heaven, Quomodo non
confundentur qui dicunt interiorem hominem ipsorum derelinquentem hic corpus
insuper coelestem ascendere locum?

Cum enim Dominus in medio umbrae mortis abierit, ubi animae mortuorum erant,
etc. Manifestum est quia and discipulorum ejus propter quos and haec operatus
est Dominus, animae abibunt in invisibilem locum definitum ipsis a Deo, and ibi
usque ad resurrectionem commorabuntur, etc. sic venient ad conspectum Dei.


How shall they not be confounded (says he) that say that the inward man
leaving this body, goes to a place above heaven? For seeing that the Lord is
gone in the midst of the shadow of death, where the souls of the dead were, and
after that did bodily rise again, and was lift up after his resurrection, it is
an evident thing that the souls of his Disciples, for whom the Lord has done
these things, shall go into an invisible place which has been assigned unto
them of God, and there shall wait till the resurrection, etc. and so shall come
to the sight of God.

Origin in the book of principles, chap. 12. Puto quod sancti quique
discedentes de hac vita permaneant in loco aliquo, and (ut ita dixerim)
auditorio.
I hold that all the Saints going out of this life remain in some place in the
earth, which the holy Scripture calls Paradise, as in a certain place of
instruction, and as it were in an auditory.

And upon chap. 7. of Leviticus, Nondum sancti receperunt laetitiam suam.
The Saints have not yet received their joy.

Ambrose in the second book of Cain and Abel, chap. 2. Solvitura corpore anima,
and post finem vitae hujus adhuc tamen futuri judicii ambiguo suspenditur.
The soul is loosed from the body; and yet after the end of this life it is in
suspense about the ambiguity of the judgment to come.

The Author of the questions to the Orthodox ascribed to Justin Martyr, qu. 60.
(...).
The retribution of things done in this life, is not done before the
resurrection.

Lactantius book 7. chapter 21. Omnes in una communi custodia detinentur, donec
tempus adveniat, quo maximus Judex meritorum faciat examen.
All the souls are detained in a common prison till the time come, that the
great Judge examine what they have deserved.

Novatianus in chap. 1. of the book of the Trinity, Quae infra terram jacent,
neque ipsa sunt digestis and ordinatis potestatibus vacua. Locus enim est quo
piorum animae impiorumque ducuntur, futuri judicii praejudicia sentientes.
The things that are under the earth, are not destitute of powers digested in
order; For it is the place whither the souls both of godly and ungodly are
brought, feeling already the foretasts of the last judgment.

Hilarious upon Psalm. 138. Humanae ista Lex necessitatis est, ut sepultis
corporibus animae ad inferos descendant, quam descensionem Dominus ad
consummationem very hominis non recusavit.
It is the Law of necessity unto which man is subject, that when the bodies are
buried, the souls descend into hell, which descent Christ himself did not
refuse for the consummation of a true man. And upon Psalm. 120. he says that
all the faithful coming out of the body, are placed in Abraham's bosom,
quousque introeundi rursum in regnum coelorum tempus adveniat, till the time
come of entering again into the kingdom of God.

The sacred Poet Prudentius, toward the end of the hymn Gremio senis abdita
sancti, recubabit ut illa Lazari, etc. Patet ecce fidelibus ampli. Via lucida
jam paradisi. Licet and nemus illud adire.

Homini quod ademerat anguis.


upon the obsequies of the dead, puts the souls of the faithful in Abraham's
bosom, which he places in the earthly Paradise, whence Adam was expelled.

Victorinus Martyr upon Rev. 6. where the souls of Martyrs are set under the
Altar, expounds these words sub ara, id est, sub terra, under the Altar, that
is, under the earth.

Almost all the Greek Fathers are of the same opinion, and so was Pope John the
XXII. as Gerson witnesses in the Sermon of the Passover: And Ockham in the
work of ninety days: And Villanus in the tenth book of his history. And
Erasmus in his preface upon the fifth book of Irenaeus.

Bernard himself, though much posteriour in time to the forealledged Fathers,
was of that opinion. In the third Sermon upon All-Saints-day, he puts three
several habitations of souls, The Primum in tabernaculis secundum in atriis
tertium in domo Dei.
first in Tabernacles, [meaning the bodies] the second in Courts, [meaning
receptacles where the souls are shut up] the third in Gods house. And a little
after In illam beatissimam domum nec sine nobis intrabant nec sine corporibus
suis, id est, nec sancti sine plebe, nec spiritus sine carne.
The Saints shall enter neither without us, nor without their bodies into that
most blessed house; that is, neither the Saints without the common people, nor
the soul without the body.

Chrysostom and Austin are ambiguous upon this matter, and speak not always in
the same manner. You shall find some places in those Fathers that speak of the
souls of the godly, of Martyrs especially, as enjoying already the sight of
God, and heavenly glory: But in other places they will affirm the contrary.
Chrysostom in the twenty eighth Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, says
that Abel and Noah have not yet received their Crowns. (...);
What shall then Abel do, who has overcome the first of all, who is sitting
without a crown? What shall Noah do? etc. And in the thirty ninth Homily upon
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, (...).
Although the soul remain, although it be a thousand times immortal, as indeed
it is; it shall not receive without the flesh those unspeakable goods, as also
it shall suffer no punishment.

Austin in his Manual to Laurentius chap. 109. Tempus quod inter hominis mortem
and ultimam resurrectionem interpositum est, animas abditis receptaculis
continet, sicut unaquaeque digna est vel requie vel aerumna.
The interval of time between a man's death and the last resurrection, contains
the souls in hidden receptacles, as every one of them is worthy either of rest
or disrest. And upon Psalm. 36. Post istam vitam parvam nondum eris ubi erunt
sancti quibus dicetur, Venite benedicti patris moi, percipite regnum quod vobis
paratum est ab initio mundi.
After this short life, thou shall not be yet where the Saints shall be, etc.
Thou shall not be there yet, Who knows not that? But thou may be where the
proud rich man, being in torments, saw the poor man resting, that had been
sometimes full of sores; In that rest thou shall quietly stay for the day of
judgment. And in the twelfth book of the City of God, chap. 9. Cujus pars quae
conjungenda immortalibus Angelis ex mortalibus hominibus congregatur, and nunc
mortaliter peregrinatur in terris vel in iis, qui mortem obierunt secretis,
animarum receptaculis sedibusque requiescit.
That part of the City of God which must be joined with the immortal Angels, is
congregated from the mortal men, and is now in a pilgrimage on earth; or is
resting in the receptacles and dwelling places of the souls of those that are
dead.

That such was the opinion of the Fathers, that the souls enjoy not yet the
heavenly glory, it is manifest, because it was a belief generally received
among the Ancients, that the Saints must all pass through the fire of the last
judgment to be touched with the flame, and purged from their sins, some more,
some less, as they are more or less stained with sin. Hilarious in Psalm. 118.
litera Gimel.
Hilary makes even the Virgin Mary to pass through that fire, as needing
purgation, as we shall see hereafter. Now it is not fit that those whose souls
are not yet purged, enjoy the sight of God and heavenly glory.

M. du Perron denies it not. For in page 994. to avoid the strength of a place
of Austin, which says that the souls of the deceased are in a place where they
see not the things that are done, or that happen unto men in this life, he
says that this doctrine of Austin is conformable to the hypothesis of some
private men, who believed that the souls of the godly have not the vision of
God before the final judgment; adding, that it was not a doctrine condemned,
because the Church had not yet pronounced a decision upon that.

Bellarmin says the same in chap. 14. of the fourth book de Pontifice Romano,
where he thus excuses Pope John XXII. Respondeo Johannem hunc re vera sensisse
animas non visuras Deum nisi post resurrectionem: Caeterum hoc sensisse quando
aduc sentire licebat sine periculo haeresis. Nulla enim adhuc praecesserat
Ecclesiae definitio.
I answer, that this John believed indeed that the souls should not see God but
after the resurrection: But that he had that opinion when it was yet lawful to
have it without danger of heresy. For the Church had not yet made any decision
about that. Yet it was then the fourteenth Age of the Church.

If that be true (as it is so indeed) in vain the Cardinal heapeth up
testimonies of Antiquity to prove that in the time of the first four Councils
they believed that the Saints know our hearts, and hear our prayers, and that
they must be prayed to. For with what confidence could they call upon the
Saints, when it was an uncertain thing, and not yet decided whether they were
in hell, and in underground receptacles, or in the earthly Paradise, enjoying
neither the glory of God, nor the sight of that imaginary looking-glass, where
the Cardinal holds that they see all things?

Now in this question, Whether the souls of the deceased Saints see the things
that are done here below, and hear our prayers, this advantage we have, that
both Scripture and the Fathers of the three first Ages, and above half the
fourth are for us. For we shall see hereafter that they are not only silent
about this matter, but even contrary to the invocation of Saints; And we shall
see the Cardinals confession upon this point, for having searched all Antiquity
with incredible diligence, he could not find one testimony for his purpose in
the three first ages, and therefore he confines himself within the time of the
first four Councils.

Cyprian who writ about the year of the Lord 250. in the fifty seventh Epistle
makes this agreement in the form of an exhortation with Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, whom he calls brother, that Et si quis isihinc nostru^ prior divinae
dignationis celeritate praecesserit, persevere apud Dominum nostra dilectio pro
fratribus and sororibus apud misericordiam Patris non cesset oration.
the first that shall depart out of this world shall pray for the others, and
for him that shall outlive. For he believed that the deceased Saints had no
other knowledge of things on earth, but by the memory of the things and persons
which they had seen before their death. According to the opinion of that holy
woman Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 5.
Potamiena who when she was led to martyrdom, promised to Basilides that led
her unto death, to pray for him after her death. And Hierom toward the end of
the Epitaph of Paula, by a rhetorical Prosopopeia commends himself to Paula,
speaking to her, as if she were yet alive, and near her death. Adieu Paula!
help with thy prayers the extreme old age of thine honourer; thy faith and thy
works join thee with Christ: being present with him, thou shall easily obtain
what thou will request. Of which place more hereafter.

The words of Chrysostom are very express upon this point, in the eighteenth
Homily upon the Epistle to the Romans, (...), etc.
To whom (says he) shall thou have recourse? Whom shall thou call to thy help
and relief? Shall it be Abraham? but he shall not hear thee. Shall it be these
Virgins? but they shall give thee none of their oil. Whence he infers, that
none must be invocated but he alone that has power to blot out our
obligations, that is, none but God alone.

The first Father, in whose writings prayers to the Saints are found, is
Gregory Nazianzen, that writ about the year of Christ 370. for before him
nothing of that kind is found in all Antiquity. These prayers presuppose that
the Saints see our thoughts, and hear our prayers. Now that in that matter
himself was wavering, and was not settled in his persuasion, he shows it
sufficiently in his first Gregor. Naz. (...) adversus Julianum. (...) etc.
(...).
Oration against Julian, Hear thou also, O thou excellent soul of Constantius,
if thou have any sense. And in the funeral Oration upon his sister Gorgonia, he
speaks thus to that holy deceased woman, (...).
If thou have some regard to the honor which we yield to thee; and if that
reward is given to holy souls by God, to have the sense of such things; receive
this speech of mine. A man fixed in his belief would not speak thus ambiguously,
for this particle if is not put instead of for, or since, as M. du Perron will
have it; P. 1040.
as it is evident by this word some, which is added to it; For these words
should want reason, Since thou have some regard: That would sound as if he told
her that she had but little regard to it.

Hierom was a disciple to this Gregory, and yet followed not his Masters
opinion. For in the Epitaph of Nepotianus he says, Scimus quidem Nepotianum
nostrum esse cum Christo, and sanctorum mixtum choris.
We know that our friend Nepotianus is with Christ, and mingled among the quire
of Saints. And yet he says, that he neither knew nor heard the afflictions
wherewith the Church was then tormented. Felix Nepotianus qui haec non videt,
felix qui haec non audit.
Blessed Nepotianus (says he) that neither sees nor hears these things.

M. du Perron says, that Nepotianus did not see them with his bodily eyes. But
since Hierom accounts Nepotianus happy for not seeing the desolations happened
since his death, it is clear that his plain meaning is, that he has no
knowledge of them, because that knowledge would disturb his happiness, for the
diverse manner of seeing would not diminish his sorrow. Wherefore he says in
the same place, Quicquid dixero, quia ille non audit mutum videtur.
All that I shall say will seem dumb, because he hears it not. And again, Cum
quo loqui non possumus, de eo loqui nunquam desinamus.
Let us not cease to speak of Nepotianus, with whom we can speak no more. The
Cardinal answers, that Hierom means that he could speak no more with
Nepotianus in a dialogue or reciprocal discourse, and that therefore he says
not, that he could speak no more to Nepotianus, but with Nepotianus. But if
that were Hieroms sense, he would have said, Let us not cease to speak to
Nepotianus, since he can no more speak with us. But he contents himself to
speak of him, because he can no more speak with him. And to leave no doubt
about his sense, these are the words of that Father upon Isaiah 65. Licet
possit and hoc dici, quod in coelo novo and in terra nova omnis conversationis
pristinae memoria deleatur, ne hoc ipsum pars malorum sit, prioris angustiae
recordari.
It may be said also, that in the new heaven and new earth, all the memory of
the past conversation is blotted out, lest that very thing be part of misery,
to remember the former misery.

In all the works of Hierom one only place is found, where disputing against
Vigilantius, who asked in scorn whether the souls of the Martyrs love their
ashes, and fly about their tombs? He answers, that if the Lamb is every
where, they that are with the Lamb must be believed to be every where; and
since Devils are wandering over the world, and by an excessive swiftness are
present every where, should the Martyrs after the shedding of their blood be
enclosed in a chest, and not be able to come out of it? M. du Perron makes use
of that place, though it be nothing to this purpose. For Hierom intends not to
prove that they know all things. Of that he speaks neither there nor any where
else. But only he maintains, that their spirits are not shut up in their
tombs, but are present wheresoever Christ-man is present, following the Lamb
wheresoever he goes. Here M. du Perron does advertise us that we must not
learn the opinion of the Fathers from their writings, in which they dispute
against the Adversaries: For (says he) in those writings they speak
gymnastically, not dogmatically; and dissemble and disguise many things. Why
then does he allege this place, which is taken from an Epistle against
Vigilantius, whom he accuses that he would have the bones of the Martyrs to be
cast upon the dunghill, and that he would be worshipped alone?

Austin is very unequal and perplexed in this matter. In the book of the Spirit
and the Soul, chap. 29. (which M. du Perron page 994. holds to be of Austin)
Ibi quidem sunt spiritus defunctorum, ubi non vident neque audiunt quae aguntur
aut eveniunt in ista vita hominibus.
The spirits of the deceased (says he) are in one place, where they neither
see nor hear that which is done, or that which happens unto men in this life.
Yet they take care of the living, although they know not at all what they do,
in the same manner as we take care of the dead, although we know not what they
do. Which text the Cardinal seeks to elude, saying that Austin speaks of the
dead, considered in their general condition, and in their proper faculty, not
of the dead constituted in the actual vision of God. I answer, that Austin
speaks in the present tense, for he says that the spirits of the dead are in a
place where they see nothing of all that is done in this life. He speaks then
of the dead that were dead in his time: Now he speaks not of the damned, but of
the Saints; for a little after, he says, that they have communication with the
life of God. He speaks then of those that enjoy the sight of God. Had the
Cardinal read the whole text, he would never have said a thing so contrary to
truth as this, that Austin speaks not of the dead constituted in the vision of
God. But how absurd is he with that general condition of the dead? seeing that
they are all in a condition, which is particular unto them, being all either
saved or damned. This Cardinal forgeth unto us a general condition of the dead,
which are neither saved nor damned. By the way, I wonder that he receives that
book as written by Austin, seeing that Boethius is alleged in it, who hardly
was born when Austin dyed.

Austin in his book of the care to be had of the dead, inquireth how, and in
what manner the dead can know something of the businesses of this world here
below, and conceives three ways for it: either by the relation of those that
come from the earth unto them, or by their communication with Angels, or by so
much as God will reveal unto them; for, says he, God reveals not all unto
them, but as much as they ought to understand. But of seeing all in the face of
God, or of that imaginary looking-glass, he speaks never a word.

In the same place chap. 13. Let every one take as he will what I shall say, Ut
volet accipiat quisque quod dicam, si rebus viventium interessent animae
mortuorum, and ipsae quando eas videmus nos alloquerentur in somnis, ut de
aliis taceam me ipsum pra matter nulla nocte desineret, etc.
If the souls of the dead were present in the businesses of the living, and
spoke themselves unto us when we see them in dreams; that I may say nothing of
others, my good and careful Mother who followed me by Sea and Land to live
with me, would not forsake me one night.

Ibi ergo sunt spiritus defunctorum, ubi nonvident quaecunque aguntur aut
eveniunt in ista vita hominibus.
In the same place chap. 13. The spirits of the dead are then in a place where
they see not all the things that are done, or that happen unto men. How then
should they see their tombs or their bodies, whether they lie forsaken, or
whether they are buried? And in chap. 15. Fatendum est nescire mortuos quid hic
agatur; postea vero audire ab eis qui hinc ad eos moriendo pergunt. Non quidem
omnia, etc.
It must be confessed that the dead know nothing of all that is done here, while
it is done: But that they hear it afterward from them who by death go from
this world to them: Yet not all indeed, but as much as they are allowed to
declare, etc. They may also learn something from Angels intervening in the
businesses done here below. And chap. 16. We know not where the Martyrs are,
nor what they do.

Pope Gregory the I. speaks much like that, upon Job Nec ubi sint Martyrs, nec
quid agant scimus.
As they that are yet alive are ignorant in what place the souls of the dead
be, so the dead are ignorant of the condition of life of those that live after
them.

In vain contrary places of the same Fathers are alleged, for what certainty
can be expected from persons that speak with so much irresolution? Truly, who
so in matters of faith, not contenting himself with the authority of the word
of God, seeks to resolve his doubts by the writings of men, besides the
infinite length where he shall lose himself, shall find himself sinking in the
quick-sand of their inconstant opinions.

The Cardinal Page 993.
alleges a place of Prosper in the first book of the contemplative life,
chap. 4. No secret thing shall then be hidden from the perfectly blessed. A
thing of transcendent excellency. With their pure spirits they shall behold
God. That place bears the answer to it. For it is clear that he speaks not of
the knowledge which the souls of Saints have now, but of that which they shall
have after the resurrection. He puts off the vision of God till that time. The
precedent words show it. Receptis cum incorruptione corporibus municipatum
patriae coelestis accipiunt.
Having (says he) taken their bodies again, with incorruption and immortality,
they shall receive the right of Citizens of their heavenly Country. Where it
is clear that he speaks of the felicity of the souls after the resurrection of
their bodies. The very title of the chapter shows it. De resurrectione vel vita
sanctorum.

The Cardinal page 993. alleges Basil, who says in the book of true
Virginity. (...).
There is none of them but sees all things every where. But there is in the
Greek, There is none of them but looks all about. These words [all things] are
of the Cardinals addition*

CHAP. 4. Examination of the texts and reasons which the Cardinal brings to
prove that the Saints know all things, see our thoughts, and hear our prayers.
His foul dealing is laid open.
Page 989.
THE Cardinal contrary to his custom alleges many texts of Scripture upon this
matter.

If (says he) St. Steven being on earth saw the body of Christ exalted to
heaven, Now that he has the same illumination of divine light which lightened
him at that time, he may well see and hear from heaven the things that are done
upon earth. It is an humane conjecture that has no solid ground. For God
gives graces to his Saints, according as he knows it fit for them, and for
the good of his Church. He made St. Steven, when he was near his end to see
Christ in heaven, to strengthen his faith against the sufferings of martyrdom.
He made him pronounce these words, Behold I see the heavens opened, and the Son
of man standing on the right hand of God, for the comfort of the godly there
present, and for ours: But the same reasons equire not that God give the
knowledge of all things unto the Saints, and make them see all the secrets of
men's hearts.

He goes on: The spirit of Elisha (says he) being enlightened with the light
of prophecy, which is but a small beam of the light of heavenly blessedness,
saw and heard the negotiating of Gehezi absent. Being now enlightened all about,
all through, and bright with that light of glory, which arises out of the
sight of God, he may with more reason see and hear the discourses of humane
commerce. To this I say, that sometimes, yet seldom, God has revealed to his
Prophets the thoughts of some man, and that as much only, as was necessary for
the execution of their charge. Elisha says, 2 Kings 4.27. that God had hid
from him the death of the Shunamites son: how much more did God hide from him
the thoughts of all men? The Prophet Eliah did not know, that there were seven
thousand in Israel which had not bowed their knee unto Baal: 1 Kings 19.
So then that revelation of men's thoughts, and humane accidents unto the
Prophets being but seldom, and that the Prophets might do the charge which God
employed them in; from thence one cannot infer, that the Saints have an
ordinary knowledge of all things, and that they know all the thoughts of men,
seeing that the word of God gives them no charge over men, which to exercise
that knowledge is necessary. Note also that M. du Perron is in an error, when
he says that the light of prophecy is a small beam of the light of heavenly
blessedness. If that were true, those two knowledges would differ, not in kind,
but in degree only. Now they are so different in kind, that God has sometimes
given that Prophetical light unto wicked and reprobate men, as to Balaam and to
Caiaphas.

Falsification of the Cardinal. Page 990.
To the same purpose the Cardinal alleges a text of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.24.
where he makes the Apostle to say, that by the gift of prophecy the secrets of
the hearts are manifested. Which is a text unfaithfully alleged, and falsified
both in words and sense. In words, for the true text runs thus, If all
prophecy, and there comes in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is
convinced of all, he is judged of all: and thus are the secrets of his heart
made manifest, and so falling down on his face he will worship God. In sense,
for by prophesying St. Paul understands expounding the word of God in the
Church by revelation. He means not, that they that have the gift of prophecy,
know the thoughts of men, but that by hearing of the word of God propounded in
an intelligible way, their hearts are convinced, and come to confess their
faults, and to give glory to God before men. The Cardinal not content to have
falsified that text in this manner, Another Falsification.
falsifieth it in another manner, page 992. making the Apostle to speak thus,
When a man prophesies, they that come in are confounded, because the secrets
of their hearts are manifested. This licentiousness is horrible, thus to wrest
and falsify the holy Scripture. The chief fraud lies in the word because,
which he adds of his own. But the whole allegation is depraved and corrupted.

He goes about to prove that the Saints behold in Gods essence, as in a
perfect Vasquez. Did. 50. c. 4, and 5. confuteth that mirror.
mirror, all the things that have an actual being, by Psalm. 36. In thy light
shall we see light. But God may well enlighten his Saints with his light, and
yet not make them know all the thoughts of men. Besides David speaks not of the
light which the Saints enjoy in heaven, but of that wherewith he enlighteneth
our eyes and our souls in this life.

The text of 1 John 3. is to no better purpose alleged. We shall be like him,
because we shall see him as he is. The text says like, but not equal in
latitude of knowledge. God had created man after his likeness, but he did not
therefore give him the knowledge of all things. The Saints, though infinitely
inferior unto God, are like unto God, as not in simplicity and infinity of
essence, nor in allmightiness, nor in eternity without beginning, so not in
knowledge of all things, nor in the sight of the heart and thoughts, but in the
imitation of holiness and righteousness, for God only knows the hearts of the
children of men, 2 Chronicles. 6.30.

He adds another text of 1 Cor. 13.9. Now I know in part, But when that which
is perfect is come, then shall I know as I am known. The Cardinals Exposition
is, I shall know others as I know my self, or rather as God knows me. But the
Apostle in this chapter speaks not of the knowledge we shall have of others in
the heavenly glory, but of the knowledge we shall have of God, whom we shall
know perfectly; that is, with the highest and most perfect knowledge that
creatures can attain unto. But that the Reader may not discern that St. Paul
speaks of the knowledge which we shall have of God, he clippeth and falsifieth
that text, Falsification of the Cardinal.
of which these are the words, Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face
to face: Now I know in part, but then shall I know even as I also am known.
These words, that we shall see face to face, which he has fraudulently
omitted, show that he speaks of that knowledge whereby we shall know God, not
men.

That falsification is followed with another. Another Falsification.
For after he has alleged the fabulous book of Tobit which is not found in
the original Hebrew of the Bible (where yet it is not written that the Saints
know our thoughts) he alleges the eighth chapter of the Revelation, which
(says he) teaches us that the Angels offer the prayers of the godly unto God,
and by consequent know them. But that is false; for there it is not spoken of
many Angels, but of one Angel who has that Office, 1 Timothy 2. (...).
who can be none else but the Lord Jesus, whom St. Paul calls our only
Mediator. Yet let us suppose that the Angels present our prayers unto God; What
does that for the deceased Saints? For the Angels are appointed keepers of the
godly, Psalm. 34.8. Heb. 1.14. which the word of God ascribes not unto Saints.
Wherefore St. Paul says that he was made a spectacle to Angels and to men, but
not to the deceased Saints. The Angels rejoice for a converted sinner; 1 Cor.
4* 9.
For being appointed by God to be keepers and leaders of men, they see the
fruits of their repentance. But Scripture says not that an Angel, keeper of a
godly person knows all things, or that he knows the hearts of all men. In
the same place he quoteth in the Margin, Matthew. 22.30. and Mark 12.25. and
makes them say, that we shall be equal unto Angels, but there is only that
they are as the Angels. Yet let us receive that translation, for the Angels
know the hearts no more then the Saints do. Besides, Christ in that text speaks
not of the knowledge which the Saints now have, but of the glory which they
shall have after the resurrection.

The other allegations which he brings, scarce deserve an answer. It is written
(says he) Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my
throne: and John 12.26. Where I am, there shall also my servant be. And 2 Pet.
1.4. Christ has made us companions of the divine nature; and Rev. 14. They
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; and 1 Cor. 15. God shall be all in all.
What can he pick out of all these texts to prove that the Saints know the
thoughts of all men, or hear their prayers? Is not this an abusing either of
the ignorance, or the patience of the Reader? 2 Pet. 1.4* (...).
We must not omit that he falsifieth the text of St. Peter, who says not that
God makes us companions of the divine nature, but partakers. The Saints being
partakers of Gods nature, that is, of his virtues, are not therefore his
companions.

The text of Rev. 5.10. which he alleges, affords us an answer to his
allegation. There the twenty four Elders say that Christ has made them Kings
and Priests unto God, and that they shall reign on the earth. By saying they
shall reign, they show that they speak not of the present glory of the Saints,
nor of their conducting or knowing humane businesses, but of the glory which
they shall enjoy after the resurrection. Neither is that earth which they shall
reign upon, the earth which we live in now, but that which is mentioned, 2 Pet.
3.13. New heavens and new earth. And that of which David speaks, Psalm. 37.11.
and Christ, Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth;
according to the style of the Prophets, as Isa. 33.17. Thine eyes shall see the
King in his beauty; they shall behold the land that is very far off. And that
because the land of Canaan was a figure and a Sacrament of the Kingdom of
heaven.

Page 992. Falsification of the Cardinal.
Here is another falsification. The same Apostle (says he) forbids us to judge
one of another in this life, and commands us to stay till the other life, where
the thoughts of the hearts shall be manifested the one to the other. And he
alleges St. Paul's words in this manner, judge of nothing before the time,
until the Lord has enlightened the hiding places of darkness, and manifested
the thoughts of the hearts. He will persuade us that St. Paul bids the godly to
put off the judgment of the actions of others till they be in the heavenly
glory, and that then God will give them the knowledge of men's thoughts. But St.
Paul says no such thing; only he forbids us to judge of the actions of others
before the time, but to put off the judging of them until the Lords coming,
who shall judge of all things, and lay open the secret actions and thoughts.
These are the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time until
the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
will make manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have
praise of God. The Reader may observe how fraudulently the Cardinal has clipped
that text, having left out these words, until the Lord come. And these words
again, and then shall every man have praise of God, that it may not be
perceived that the Apostle speaks of the judgment and retribution of the last
day at the Lords coming.

Must we wonder now why this Prelat has recourse unto the Fathers, and to
humane writings, since he can find no help in the holy Scripture but by
falsifying the same? He has then his refuge to the Fathers. But himself has
confuted all his allegations by his confession, that in Austins time, that is
in the fifth Age, the Church had not decided yet whether the souls of Saints
enjoy the sight of God and heavenly glory. And we have showed before how
diversely and dubiously the Fathers write of this matter.

CHAP. 5. What assurance the Roman Church has, that the Saints whom they call
upon, are true Saints?
THis is an important question: For one cannot call upon Saints, unless he be
first certainly persuaded of their Holiness. Of the holiness and blessedness of
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and other holy men to whom the Scripture
bears witness, and especially of the holy Virgin Mary, no man can doubt
without impiety and unjust diffidence. To which I add the Martyrs and the
faithful Pastors who have been since the Apostles, of whom ancient history
speaks with honor. But the Roman Church yields a religious service to many
imaginary Saints, of whom we may justly doubt, not only whether they be Saints,
but whether they ever had any being, and whose life is notoriously fabulous,
Cassander Consultatione de Articulis religioonis, cap. de Meritis and
Intercessione Sanctorum.
as it is acknowledged by Cassander a Divine of Collen. That error (says he)
is frequent, that the people almost despises the old Saints that are known,
and serves with more fervor and affection new Saints, whose holiness is less
certain, and which sometimes are known only by revelations. Yea there are some
of them of whom one may justly doubt whether they ever lived in the world. And
yet the devotion to their service is very much increased by feigned stories and
impostures of miracles. Which fictions have defiled even the histories of the
true Saints. He says, that in the Roman Church they despise the true Saints,
because they yield no particular service to any Patriarch or Prophet of the Old
Testament.

They say not Saint Noah, nor St. Abraham, nor St. Moses, nor St. Samuel. To
none of them the least candle is offered, which is very far from building
Churches to their memory. But great honor is deferred to Saint Francis, Saint
Dominick, and Saint Juniperus, and to such Saints of late Edition, made by the
Pope.

Of those Saints, of whom one might justy doubt whether they are Saints, or
whether they ever were in the world, many examples might be given.

The three Kings whose bodies lie at Collen, and whose feast is in the
Calendar, are Saints that never were. They are said to come out of the East,
yet two of them have German names, for they call them Gaspar, Melchior, and
Balthazar. St. Matthew says, that they were Sages of Mages come from the East,
and defines not their number.

The Ancients speak of them in the same manner. The narration about Lazarus
placed in Abraham's bosom, and the rich glutton tormented in hell, is a
parable: Chrysostom. in Lazarum, (...). And Hom. 4. (...).
Chrysostom calls it so in the fourth Homily upon Lazarus. And the Author of
the questions to the Orthodox, ascribed to Justin Martyr, qu. 60. Otherwise we
ought to believe that souls have fingers and a tongue, and that the damned call
upon the Saints, hoping for ease of their pains. Yet Baronius Martyrolog.
Martii 15. and Annalib. An. 34.. 131.
Baronius in his Martyrology acknowledges, that in the Roman Church there are
Churches built to the memory of St. Lazarus, that is, to the memory of a man
that never lived in the world. That Saint is the patron of the leprous. I put
in the same rank St. Longinus, whom they say to have pierced our Saviors side
with a spear. For of a spear (which in Greek after the ancient pronunciation,
is called lonchi) they have made a spearman.

And St. Martial, whose life says, that he was St. Peter's cousin, and that he
waited at the table when Christ instituted the Eucharist, and that he expelled
Paganism out of Gauls in the time of the Goths. But in that time there was no
Goths in Gauls, and Paganism was not driven out of it but a long time after.

What shall we say of St. Vrsula, patroness of the Vrsulines, daughter of a
Christian King of England? They say that she lived in the year 300. of Christ,
but then there was no King of England. There might be some petty barbarous King
in the North of the Island, but he was not a Christian. They make her the
leader of eleven thousand Virgins going in pilgrimage to Rome, and say, that
meeting with troops of Huns that would violate them, they were slain upon their
resistance. But in those days the Huns were not yet entered into Germany. And
where could she have got those eleven thousand Virgins? Neither were
pilgrimages to Rome in fashion at that time, but came long after.

How grossly fabulous is the life of St. Catherine? They make her live in the
time of Maxentius, and to have been daughter to Costus King of Alexandria, a
man that never was. For then Alexandria had no King, but was subject to the
Roman Empire. Her life says, that she converted Queen Faustina and fifty
Philosophers, which are blind tales. There was then no Queen Faustina, neither
in Egypt, nor any where else.

Of the like stuff is the history of St. Margaret, whom the Tyrant Olybrius put
in prison, because she would not turn a Mahumetan. And being in prison, she was
swallowed by a Dragon, who burst with it, which was a kind of childbirth;
wherefore her Legend is read to women in labor; And women with child will gird
themselves with her girdle, which is kept in St. Germans Abbey of Paris: The
Friars of that Covent do them that Office. That Olybrius was never in the
world. Neither is it the custom of Mahumetans to force any by Martyrdom and
public punishments to renounce Christian Religion. In what time that Saint
Margaret lived, no man can tell.

It is believed in Spain (and to doubt of it, is a case of Inquisition) that
James the Apostle beheaded by Herod, Act. 12. is the Patron of Spain, and that
he preached in Spain, and converted the Country to the Christian faith; and
that after he was beheaded by Herod, his body was miraculously transported from
Jerusalem to Compostella, where pilgrims resort from all parts to visit his
relics. But Baronius in his Annals an. 816.. 48. and seq. confuteth that fable
by the authority of two Popes, Innocent the I. and Gregory the VII. Which is
one of the causes, why the Annals of Baronius are forbidden in Spain. O holy
Apostle! who put upon thee that Office of Patron of Spain after thy death, upon
imaginary causes, and against the Popes will?

Acts 17.34. Dionysius the Areopagite is mentioned, an Athenian and a Disciple
of St. Paul. Gregorius Turoneusis in book 1. of the history of the Franks,
speaks of another Dionysius, who preached the Gospel at Paris in the time of
the Emperor Decius, about the year of Christ 250. Of these two Dionysii they
have made but one, whom they call Areopagite, although he that is mentioned in
the Acts was never in Gauls; neither was Christian Religion planted in Gauls
but a long time after his death, that is, about the time of the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, about the year of the Lord 162. as Sulpitius Severus witnesses in
the second book of his sacred history. Sub Aurelio Antonini filio persecutio
quinta agitata. Ac tum primum intra Gallias martyria visa, serius trans Alps
religione Dei suscepta.
Under Aurelius (says he) the fifth persecution was moved, and then the first
martyrdoms were seen in Gauls; divine religion being received but late beyond
the Alps. Yet at St. Denis by Paris, they keep the body of that pretended
Dionysius the Areopagite, Patron of Gauls, and his relics are there worshipped
with great devotion, against the express declaration of Pope Leo the IX.
related by Baronius an. 1052. in which the said Pope decided the difference
between Ratisbone and Paris, which both pretend to have the body of Dionysius
the Areopagite, and pronounced in favor of Ratisbone, condemning the error of
the French. But the French superstition has carried it against the Popes
declaration.

How ridiculous is the fable of the Giant St. Christopher? And that of St.
George fighting on horseback against a Dragon? Every one knows that the
enemies of St. Athanasius laid to his charge that he was a Magician, and that
his capital enemy was George an Arian, who invaded his See. This St. George
then was an heretic Arian; For his life says, that he had great combats
against the Magician Athanasius.

We doubt not but that there was such a man as St. Francis, the inventor and
Patron of the order of Franciscan Friars. But his Legend, and the Chronicles of
St. Francis attribute unto him a thousand actions destitute of common sense; as
to preach unto Birds, to take up Lyce fallen from his garments, and set them on
his garments again, to wallow in the mire, to make to himself a wife of snow,
and embrace her to allay his amorous heat, etc. St. Dominick Patron of the
Dominican Friars preached the croisada against that faithful people, which they
called in scorn Albigenses, and caused above two hundred thousand of them to be
slain. His Legend says in the beginning, that his Mother being near to be
delivered of him, dreamed, that a Dog came forth from her, bearing a burning
torch in his mouth. These are the two Saints whom St. Antonine Archbishop of
Florence compares with Jesus Christ, and finds very little inequality between
them.

One had need to be of an easy belief to be certainly persuaded, that those
whom the Pope canonizeth, and puts in the list of the Saints (assigning unto
them a holy day in the Calendar that they may be prayed to) are Saints indeed,
and enjoying the glory of God. For who gave the Pope that privilege to be
infallible in that judgment, seeing that it is a question of fact, in which
our Adversaries acknowledge, that the Pope may be mistaken and misinformed?
Wherefore also the Cardinal Cajetan in his Treatise of Indulgences to Julius de
Medicis, Cap. 8. Potest intervenire error humanus in canonizatione alicujus
Sancti ut S. Thomas dicit.
acknowlegeth that there may be error in the Canonization. Melchior Canus says
the same in book 5. chap. 5. and that after Thomas Aquinas, as Cajetan says in
the same place. Who knows not how many factions and solicitations are used in
the Court of Rome by Princes and Commonwealths, that a man of their Country
or City may be canonized? So far that the Pope sometimes being overcome with
importunity, is carried away to canonize a man against his will, as the book of
sacred ceremonies does acknowledge. Papa tunc quodammodo cogebatur ad
Canonizandum quendam contra suam opinionem, and propterea protestabatur.
Then (says he) the Pope was in some sort constrained to canonize a man
against his opinion, and therefore made a protestation. By that protestation he
thought to discharge his conscience.

Now let any reasonable man judge, whether the prayer made to a Saint canonized
in that manner can be done in faith, seeing that it is not grounded upon the
word of God, and that our very Adversaries acknowledge it possible, that a man
may be prayed to as a Saint, who is tormented in hell fire. And whereas the
histories of the Popes speak of many Popes whose lives have been most wicked,
and their ends miserable, and that our Adversaries freely confess, that there
may be some Popes damned; think you whether a man condemned to hell can insert
a man in the list of the Saints of Paradise?

The ordinary dawbing to hide this weak place, is, that the Canonization is
made upon the information of the miracles made by him that is canonized. But
Gerson in his Sermon of the IV. houses, teaches that the canonization grounded
upon miracles, stands upon an unsafe bottom. And himself in the Treatise of
examination of doctrines, relates that Pope Gregory the XI. being near his end,
and holding the Sacrament in his hand, protested, that he had been seduced by
deceitful miracles, and led away to make a schism in the Church. Which he said
with a relation to Catherine of Siena, who by miracles and visions had induced
him to leave Avignon, and remove to Rome. Notwithstanding Baron Martyrolog.
Apr. 20.
Pius the II. put that Catherine among the Saints, although she had abused his
predecessor.

The words whereby the Pope canonizeth a Saint, are such. In the authority of
God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of the blessed Apostles, Peter
and Paul, and in our own, We decree and define that N. of good memory is a
Saint, and must be put in the list of the Saints, etc. And observe, that before
the pronouncing of that sentence, the cause is pleaded in the Consistory, and
an Advocate presents himself, who represents the reasons why such a one ought
to be Sainted. The Apostles were not so canonized, nor their disciples: Nor
those old Fathers who are called Saints, as Irenaeus, Cyprian, Basil, Hierom,
Austin. This canonization is an imitation of the Pagan Apotheoses: Wherefore
also the second book of the Sacred Ceremonies, calls the Ceremonies Divorum
nostrorum Apotheoses.
Apotheoses, that is, Deifications, or making of Gods, whereby a man is made
one of the Gods by the authority of men. It happens to some poor Saints, for
whom the dignity of Saints is begged in the Court of Rome, to be cast in their
suit, and they cannot be Saints in heaven, because men on earth were not
favorable to them. Sometimes the degree of Beat. is obtained for them, which
is a middle degree, and an expectation of Saint-ship. By this means Popes will
give their servants to be worshipped by the Nations of Christendom. Which new
Saints are far more honored then the Patriarchs and Prophets. For in the Roman
Church it fares with Saints as with clothes: The newest are the best, and most
esteemed.

CHAP. 6. Whether Saints and Angels ought to be worshipped?
THE Saints whose doctrine has given instruction, and whose life has given
edification to Gods Church, and the Martyrs who have subscribed the doctrine of
the Gospel with their blood, must be honored by the godly, and their memory
must be blessed. The ancient Church had that laudable custom to renew their
memory in the public service. But that honor must not exceed the limits, or
our affection to them degenerate into superstition or idolatry; which is then
more pernicious, when it is insinuated under pretense of piety, and when the
beloved of God are employed to move God to jealousy.

Acts 14. Paul and Barnabas are angry with the inhabitants of Lystra, because
they would transform them into Idols, and defer unto them the service which
they yielded unto their Gods. And no doubt, but that if from the heavenly glory
which they enjoy, they saw, how Temples and Altars are consecrated unto them,
and that they are held to be searchers of hearts, and that salvation is asked
of God by their merits, they would be moved with a great indignation against
their worshippers.

The true honor due unto Saints is, that which the word of God approves; and
that is to imitate their good actions, to obey their holy doctrine, to set them
before us as examples, and never to speak of them but with reverence. But to
make them searchers of the hearts, to yield unto them a religious service, to
bring offerings unto them, to hope for salvation by their merits, and to
believe that their labors and sufferings may be accepted as a satisfaction for
our sins, they are doctrines and practices which the word of God approves not.
We cannot be justly taxed, if we follow the example of the Saints; honoring
St. Peter and St. Paul, as the same Peter and Paul honored Abraham, Moses, and
David: Since then Peter, and Paul did not invocate David, and David did not
invocate Abraham; they that now invocate Peter, resist Peter, pretending to
honor him, and turn away from his example. None of them has required that
service at our hands; and God did not command it.

We have many advantages in this cause: For we maintain Gods cause, asserting,
that the religious invocation, and the knowledge of the hearts, belongs unto
God alone. And sure we are that God is truly Saint, but that all that are
called so, are Saints indeed, it may very well be called in question. We are
sure also, that God has power and goodness enough to do us good without the
help of any creature; and that the Saints are not envious of the honor done
unto God: And that in Gods word there is neither commandment nor example of the
invocation of Saints, as our very Adversaries acknowledge.

1. Here then, if we stand to the judgment of God alone, this question shall
be soon decided. For M. du Perron does freely acknowledge that there is neither
precept nor formal example of the invocation of Saints in holy Scripture: Now
the Holy Scripture is the only book which may be called the word of God.
Neither do our Adversaries propound us any other. Can they show us any other
book which is truly the Word of God?

2. If we take the history of the Church, from the beginning of the world unto
Christ, in all that time, which is four thousand years, our adversaries confess
that there was no invocation of Saints. For how could they be capable to
receive invocation, if all that while their souls were shut up in the Limbus,
which is an underground dark prison, as the Roman Church believes, and did
not enjoy the sight of God? Hence it follows, that in vain M. du Perron labors
to bring Texts of the Old Testament, by him falsified and corrupted, to make
them serve his ends: As when in the second Chapter of the Treatise of the
Invocation of Saints, he alleges Genesis 20.7. where he makes God to speak thus
to Abimelech, Make thine address unto Abraham, and he shall pray for thee, for
he is a Prophet. This Text is falsified. The true Text runs thus, Restore the
man his wife, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee. These words,
Make thine address unto Abraham, are of the Cardinals addition. Besides, that
text speaks of the request of a living man to another living man: But speaks
neither of the Intercession nor of the Invocation of deceased Saints.

3. All that is done without faith is sin, says the Apostle, Romans 14.23.
Especially prayer ought to be made in faith, as the Apostle James teaches us,
Jam. 1.6. Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. Now the prayer addressed unto
the Saints, cannot be made in faith, for faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God, Romans 10.17. Not being then grounded in the Word of God, it
cannot be made in faith. Wherefore we have no promise in Scripture, that God
will hear prayers made to any other but God.

4. 2 King. 2.9. the Prophet Elijah being upon the point of being taken up to
heaven, said to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away
from thee; which was as much as saying, After I am taken up to heaven, there is
no more petitioning to me.

5. If ever any had reason to call upon the blessed Virgin Mary, it was the
Apostles that were of her near kindred, and St. John more then any, who after
the Lords death, received her into his house. For they might say after Mary's
death, We have a good Advocate in heaven, which is Queen of heaven, and is near
akin to us. Yet they never bethought themselves to pray to her, neither did
they recommend to us to pray to her.

6. Observe that the holy Virgin, Luke 1.48. says, All generations shall call
me blessed; but says not, All generations shall worship me. Jesus Christ
says, Come unto me, Matthew. 11. But the Virgin Mary says, Whatsoever he says
unto you, do it, John 2.

7. Cornelius the Centurion, to whom Scripture bears witness, that he was a
devout man, and one that feared God, Act. 10.2. knew well enough that Peter was
no God, and therefore was not to be worshipped as God, yet when he fell down at
his feet and worshipped him, the Apostle rebuked him, saying, Stand up, I my
self also am a man.

8. Rev. 22.9. The Angel chideth St. John, because he fell down to worship him,
saying, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants, worship God. Now he
knew that this Angel was not God, for the same Angel had given him that warning
a little before, Rev. 19.10. but being full of amazement, he would defer some
inferior adoration unto him. Note that the Angel uses a word, whereby he
rejects the adoration of dulia, saying, (...). I am thy fellow in dulia,
Worship God; for it is not convenient to defer the cult of dulia, to him that
owes it unto God.

9. As in the Old Testament, all the Psalms of David, and all the prayers of
the Prophets, are addressed unto God alone, likewise in the New Testament, no
prayers are found, but prayers unto God. Whereupon Bellarmines ingenuity is
notable, in his third Book of the service of the Saints, chap. 9. When the holy
Scriptures were written (says he) it was not yet in fashion to make vows unto
the Saints. That is, the Prophets and Apostles had not yet bethought themselves
of that.

10. It is very considerable, that very often the holy Scripture expresses the
duty of praying to God, by the word of praying only, as acknowledging no other
prayer, Luke 12.1.
but that which is addressed to God. The Apostles say to Christ, Teach us to
pray; and Christ answers, When you pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven.
He knew that he that desires to be taught how to pray, ought not and cannot ask
but to be taught how to pray to God. And in the sixth of Matthew, v. 6. When
thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to
thy Father which sees thee in secret. There he declares, that this word of
praying, in matter of Religion, cannot signify any thing but praying to God.
See also Ephesians. 6.18. and 1 These. 5.17.

11. The Apostle, Romans 10.14. teaches us, that we cannot pray to any but him,
in whom we believe. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
Now the Symbol obliges us to believe in God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, not
in the creature. And Christ says, John 14.1. You believe in God, believe also
in me. And Austin accordingly, Book 18. of the City of God, chap. 54. Non in
Petrum credimus, sed in eum in quem credidit Petrus.
We believe not in Peter, but in him in whom Peter believed. Upon which the
Cardinal says, page 1047. that he will not answer that objection, because he
intends to speak only of the question of the fact, not of the right. He says
also, that Saint Paul speaks of the absolute invocation. Also that we believe
in the Saints, in some degree and proportion; which faith in the Saints, he
calls a relative, and not absolute faith, because that we believe in them as
Ministers of Christ. Now we thought, that the Gospel did fully teach us what
the faith of the Christian is: But here is one, who besides the faith in God,
would oblige us to a relative faith, of which the Gospel speaks not. So the
godly shall have two kinds of faith, although the Apostle speaking of the true
faith of the godly, says, that there is but one God and one faith, Ephesians. 4.5,
6. Besides the impiety, there is abusurdity in that distinction; for every
faith is relative to the thing that one believes, or to the person in whom he
believes: As the sight is relative to the thing visible, so the faith in God,
is relative unto God.

12. The Apostle, Gal. 4.8. representing to the Galatians their former
condition, speaks thus unto them, When ye knew not God, ye did service unto
them which by nature are no gods. He speaks indeed of the gods of the Pagans,
which cannot without impiety be compared with the Saints; but still this stands
true, that the Saints are no gods, and that the Apostle condemns them, that
by nature are no gods. Note that there is in the Greek (...), you yielded
dulia, the service which our adversaries affirm to be due unto Saints; which
service nevertheless, Saint Paul will not have us to yield to them that by
nature are no gods. This made Bellarmine to say in the third Book of the
service of the Saints, chap. 9. that the Saints are Gods by participation.
Thomas 2.2ae. qu. 88. Art. 4. and 5.
Thomas and Cajetan ibid. Navar. Consil. lib. 3. de Voto Consil. 8. Number. 2. and
4.
Cajetan had said the same before him.

13. Satan tempted Christ to worship him, Mat. 4. Who doubts but that Satan
would have been contented that Christ would have worshipped him with an
inferior adoration, or with a relative invocation, as M. du Perron speaks? But
Christ cuts him short, and sends him back to the rule of the Law, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

14. The Apostle, Col. 2.18. rejects the service of the Angels, in these words,
Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping
of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up
by his fleshly mind. The Cardinal to elude that text, has found a new
Exposition, which no body thought upon before. For by the service or
worshipping of Angels, he understands not the service or worship exhibited unto
Angels, but the Jewish worship or Religion, because (says he) the Jews had
received it from the Angels. I presume that this Prelate was biting his nails
many Months, before he could devise such an extravagant Exposition, as to
understand by the service of Angels, the Jewish Religion, because the Angels
intervened in the publishing of the Law. By the same reason, the Gospel may be
called the worship of Angels, because the Angels did announce it, when the
Angel Gabriel announced unto the Virgin Mary the incarnation of the Son of God;
and declared to her his office. And when the Angels announced his birth unto
the Shepherds, Luke 2. and sung, Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace,
toward men good will. The Angels also announced the resurrection of Christ
unto the Apostles, and foretold his second coming, Acts 1.11.

Yet although I affirm, that by the worship of Angels, the worship yielded to
Angels must be understood, yet I freely grant that Paul speaks there to those
that adhered unto the Ceremonies of the Law, and added to them some humane
traditions, as acknowledging themselves unworthy to go directly to God; of
which the Apostle says, that they did it out of a voluntary humility: and that
is the very color which our adversaries put upon their invocation of Saints
and Angels. So Theodoret understood it, and the Council of Laodicea, as
Theodoret says in his Comment upon this place, They that maintained the Law,
induced men to serve Angels, saying, that the Law was given by their
intervention. That vice remained long in Phrygia and Pisidia. Wherefore the
Synod assembled at Laodicea, the capital City of Phrygia, forbad them by an
express order to pray to Angels. And to this day, Oratories of Saint Michael
are still seen among them and their neighbors. Now they gave this counsel
under color of humility, saying, That the God of the Universe is invisible,
incomprehensible and inaccessible; and that therefore they must get Gods favor
by his Angels: And this is that which Saint Paul meant by voluntary humility,
and worshipping of Angels. And the same in the following Chapter, Because they
commanded adoration of Angels, he commands the contrary: and tells them that
they should adorn their deeds and words with the commemoration of Christ our
Lord, and tells them, Give thanks to the Father by him, not by the Angels.
Which Law the Synod of Laodicea following, and desirous to remedy that old
disease, prohibited by a decree their praying to Angels, and leaving out the
Lord Jesus Christ. About these places, the Cardinal toyls very much,
maintaining that both Theodoret, and the Council of Laodicea, speak to those
that prayed to Angels to the exclusion of Christ, and that did not pray to God
at all, but only to the Angels, which is impossible: For if it were so, those
to whom that prohibition is made, should be neither Jews nor Christians, but
mere Pagans, seeing that both Jews and Christians, hold without exception, that
God must be prayed to. Now it is necessary, that those to whom the prohibition
of praying to Angels, is made by the Synod of Laodicea, should be Christians;
for the Synods of Christians, never made any prohibition to the Pagans or Jews
about their Religion. They give no rules but unto Christians, and to the
Churches subject unto them. And I cannot wonder enough at this Prelate, that he
could believe that Theodoret spoke of those that pray not to God at all, seeing
that the first line of that place of Theodoret expresses, that those whom the
Apostle speaks to, were disputing for the observation of the Law. Now the Law
obliges men to pray to God, and offer sacrifices to him. When then Saint Paul
says, that such men retain not the head, and when the Council of Laodicea,
says, that they that call upon Angels have left Christ, they speak so, because
one cannot call upon God by the mediation of another then Christ, without
leaving Christ, although he profess that he honors him: For one cannot never
so little transport the honor due unto God, unto the creature, without falling
from his Covenant. Observe these words of Theodoret, that the Council of
Laodicea prohibits praying to Angels; and that among those Heretics of
Phrygia, yet in his days Oratories to Saint Michael were seen. Yet in our
days such Oratories are seen in the Roman Church: for which cause M. du Perron
alleging that place of Theodoret, has fraudulently omitted that word Page
1057. A fraud of the Cardinal.
of Saint Michael, for fear of offending the Reader. Observe also the language
of those Heretics, the same as that of our Adversaries, that they go to God by
the Angels and Saints, and that his favor is got by their intervention. Thus
the Simonian Heretics said, that (...).
by the [Angelical] principalities and powers, sacrifices ought to be offered
to the Father of the Universe, as Epiphanius relates in the 21. heresy.

Cardinal Baronius deals more plainly then Cardinal du Perron, for in the 60.
year of his Annals. 20.
he makes no difficulty to condemn Theodoret, saying, By these things thou
may see that Theodoret (by his leave) did not well apprehend the sense of
Saint Paul's words.

He should have condemned Tertullian also, who in the 33. chap. of the Book of
Prescriptions says, that Simonianae Magicae disciplina Angelis serviens utique
and ipsa inter idololatrias deputatur.
Simonian Magic which serves Angels, is put among idolatries. And Austin, who
in the Book of Heresies ad Quod vult Deum, puts among Heretics the Angelicks,
Qui in Angelorum cultum fuerunt inclinati. Who have been inclined to the
service of Angels.

15. Finally, since the Church has been many thousands of years without
calling upon the Saints, and the godly have been saved, praying to none but
God, why could not the godly in these days be saved by doing the same? Why
shall the service done to the dead, be necessary in one age, and not in
another? If two persons being afflicted, the one prays to God, the other to
Saint Barbara, which of the two does the better work? None can deny but that he
that prays to God does better, especially seeing that the prayer made to God,
has a promise to be heard; but the prayer made to Saint Barbara has none.

Let the prudent and impartial Reader, compare so many texts of Scripture which
defer unto God alone Religious invocation, and the practice of the Church of
the Old Testament, and that of the time of the Apostles, which by the very
confession of our adversaries, pray to none but God, with the language of the
Popes of the last times, who when they canonize a Saint, command that he be
prayed to. Of which one example will serve, Matthew Paris, in the year of the
Lord, 1173. page 122. says, that in the Council of Westminster, Letters of
Pope Alexander were read in the presence of the Bishops and Barons, by which
Letters the canonization of Thomas of Canterbury, was signified in these words,
We admonish your Universality, and straightly command you in the authority which
we exercise, that you solemnly celebrate every year, the birth day of the
glorious Martyr, Thomas late Archbishop of Canterbury, that is, the day of his
Passion; and that by prayers to him, you endeavor to merit the remission of
your sins. Note that this Thomas is called a Martyr, for dying, not for the
faith of Christ, nor for the doctrine of the Gospel, but for the quarrel
between the King and the Pope, about money matters, and for the collation of
benefices, being killed by some of the Kings servants, who gave him no time,
either to change his mind, or to persevere in his opinion.

CHAP. 7. What was the opinion of the Fathers of the three first ages, and till
the midst of the fourth, about the invocation of Saints and Angels.
THis question among equitable and pious men is superfluous. For after the will
of God is known, in vain should one enquire of the opioion of men. Besides, the
Cardinal did acknowledge before, that even in Austins time, that is 420. years
after the Lords birth, the Church had decided nothing yet about that point,
whether the Saints behold the face of God before the resurrection; which by
consequent draws with it a doubt about the invocation of Saints.

Nevertheless, we owe to the Doctors of the first ages, a just defense against
those that attribute unto them things contrary to the purity of the faith, and
their own intention.

We must know then, that in the three first ages, and above the half of the
fourth, the invocation of Saints was a thing unknown in the Christian Church,
and God alone was invocated. All the testimonies that the Cardinal could gather
from those ages, speak of the intercession of Saints, nothing of the invocation.

In the fourth Book of the History of Eusebius, chap. 15. we have the history
of the Martyrdom of Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, a Disciple of Saint John, near
the time of the Apostles: There it is related, that this holy Martyr being
dead, some by the suggestion of the Jews, desired the Governor of Smyrna that
the body of Polycarpus should not be given to the Christians for fear (said
they) that they should come to worship him. But the Church of Smyrna which set
down this history in writing said upon that. (...).
They know not that we can never leave Christ, who suffered for the salvation
of all them that are saved in all the world, nor serve any other but him. For
as for Jesus Christ who is the Son of God, we worship him. But as for the
Martyrs, we love them deservedly, as the Disciples and followers of the Lord.
This is an excellent testimony, and of the first Christian antiquity.

Ignatius who lived in the 140. year of the Lord, in the Epistle to the
Philadelphians speaks thus, (...).
You Virgins have none but Jesus Christ alone before your eyes in your prayers,
and the Father of Jesus Christ.

Clemens Alexandrinus in the seventh book Stromaton, (...).
Therefore with reason there being but one only truly good, which is God, both
we and the Angels pray to him alone, that of good things he would give us some,
and that some may remain with us.

Irenaeus who writ about the year of the Lord 220. in the second book, Ecclesia
nec inrocationibus Angelicis facit aliquid, nec incantationibus, nec aliqua
prava curiositate, sed munde and pure and manifest, orationes dirigens ad
Dominum, qui omnia fecit, and nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi invocans, etc.
The Church does nothing neither by invocation of Angels, nor by enchantments,
nor by any ill curiosity; but purely, simply and openly she addresseth her
prayers unto God who made all things, and calling upon the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has made Virtues according to men's utility, not to seduce
them.

Tertullian that lived in the same time, in chap. 30. of his Apologeticus, Haec
ab alio orare non possum, quam a quo me scio consecuturum, quoniam and ipse
solus est qui praestat, et ego sum cui impetrare debetur, famulus ejus qui eum
solum observo.
I cannot (says he) ask these things of any but of him, of whom I know that I
shall obtain them, because he is the only that performs them, and I am he for
whom they must be obtained, even his servant that reverence him alone. The same
in the thirty third chapter of the book of Prescriptions calls the service of
Angels idolatry.

Novatianus, whose book of the Trinity is added to the works of Tertullian,
chap. 14. proves the Godhead of Christ by the invocation, which is deferred
unto him. Si homo tantummodo Christus, cur homo in orationibus Mediator
invocatur, cum invocatio hominis ad praestandam salutem inefficax judicetur?
If Christ (says he) is but a man, why is a man invocated as a Mediator,
seeing that the invocation of a man is judged of no efficacy for salvation?

Origin that writ about the year 250. Tom. 8. against Celsus, (...).
We must pray to him alone, who is God above all things. To him also we must
pray, who is the Word, the only Son of God, the first born of all creatures.

And in the fifth Tome disputing against the invocation of Angels. The
knowledge [of Angels] representing unto us their nature, and the condition in
which they are established, (...).
will not permit us to be so bold as to call upon any other but him who is God
above all things, all-sufficient, by our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God. And
in the same book, We hold that they that pray, must not be prayed to: As also
themselves like it better, that we address our prayers to him whom they pray to.

Neither does he only impugn the invocation of Saints, but in some places he
doubts of their intercession, as in his second book and chap. 2. upon the
Epistle to the Romans, Jam vero si etiam extra corpus positi vel sancti qui cum
Christo sunt agunt aliquid and laborant pro nobis ad similitudinem Angelorum,
etc. habeatur and hoc quoque inter occulta Dei, nec chartulae committenda
mysteria.
If the Saints that have put off their bodies and are with Christ, do any
thing, and labor for us like the Angels that exercise the mysteries of their
salvation, etc. Let that also be put among the secret mysteries of God, which
must not be committed to paper. Note these words, If they labor for us; that
M. du Perron may not say, that Origin doubts, whether the deceased Saints do
yet meritorious works. For he speaks not of the labor of the Saints for
themselves, but for us. What the Cardinal answers Origin, will be seen in the
following chapter.

Athanasius especially insisteth upon this point, and thereby fights against
the Arrians, who prayed to Christ, and yet said that he was a creature. And he
maintains, that if he be created, he must not be invocated. (...)
In the third Oration against the Arrians he speaks thus; That we may not fall
into the folly of the Arrians and Grecians who serve the creature instead of
God the Creator of all things. There is in the Greek (...), that yield dulia
unto the creature, rejecting those expressly that yield the cult of dulia unto
the creature, and condemning those who taking Christ for a creature, yet
yielded dulia unto him.

In the same Oration, (...), etc.
To God alone it belongs to be worshipped: and the Angels themselves know so
much. For although they excel in glory, some of them being above the others,
yet they are all creatures, and are none of those that are worshipped, but of
those that worship the Lord. And in the fourth Oration, It is manifest, that
the Patriarch Jacob in his prayer joined none with God, but him only who is the
Word, whom for this cause he called Angel, because it is he alone who
manifests the Father unto us.

By that chiefly he proves the Godhead of Christ, because he must be invocated
and adored. (...), etc. (...).
Though the Arrians (says he) should burst Jesus Christ ought not to be
worshipped, if in any respect he had been a creature. But now because he is not
a creature, but is engendered of the very substance of the Father who is
worshipped, and by nature is Son of God, therefore is he worshipped. the
Arrians had a broad gate open to escape by answering, We do not worship Christ
with any sovereign adoration, nor with a cult of latria, but with an inferior
kind of worship. But that distinction was not yet invented, because it was a
constant opinion among all Christians, that none must be invocated but God.

Among the works of that Father by a notorious falsification a book was
inserted of the Virgin Mother of God, where she is invocated and called our
Lady and Queen. It is a book much of the style of Dionysius the Author of the
celestial Hierarchy, from whom it borrows the terms of Thearchia and
Hierarchia, and the nine orders of Angels, and he makes ridiculous clinches
between (...) and (...). The Author falsely says that Salathiel and his son
Josedec have been High Priests since the captivity of Babylon. The same says,
that in God there are three hypostases, which is contrary to the opinion of
Athanasius, who acknowledges but one hypostasis in God, because he holds that
hypostasis signifies essence, not person. Editionis Commelianae p. 450. and
719. (...).
That may be seen in the Epistle to the Antiochians, and in the Epistle to the
Africans, where he says, hypostasis is essence, and signifies nothing else. In
effect, that book is full of absurdities, and has nothing of Athanasius.
Bellarmin himself in the book of Ecclesiastical writers, and Baronius, an. 48.
acknowledges that falsification.

The Canon of Laodicea, Can. 35. (...).
Christians must not leave the Church of God, and go and call upon Angels, and
make assemblies, which are forbidden things. And if any be found giving
themselves to that secret idolatry, let him be accursed, because he has
forsaken the Lord Jesus Christ, and has applied himself to idolatry. This
Canon is manifestly made against some Christians (for Synods make no
prohibitions to Pagans or Jews) who besides common Congregations had secret
conventicles, in which they called upon the Angels: And this is that, which the
Council calls leaving the Church of God, and leaving Christ. Of which Canon,
and the interpretation which Theodoret gives to it, it was spoken in the
precedent chapter.

Lactantius in the second book of divine institutions, chap. 17. Angels have
nothing else to do but to obey. Nec est in Angelis nisi parendi necessitas.
Itaque nullum sibi honorem tribui volunt, quorum bonor in Deo est. Et cap. 18.
Qui supplicant mortuis, rationem hominum non tenent.
Therefore they will not have any honor bestowed upon them: For their honor
is in God. Again, let us worship nothing, and let us serve nothing, but the
only Godhead of our Maker and Father.

All these testimonies are taken from the Fathers, that lived in the three
first Ages after Christ, and till half of the fourth. In all that time no trace
is found of the invocation of Saints. In vain M. du Perron answers that those
Fathers speak of the absolute adoration due to God alone, not of the relative
adoration which is deferred unto Saints and Angels: For he ought to bring some
testimony out of their writings, that speak of that relative adoration or
invocation; or of that religious service which our Adversaries call dulia. But
of that not one word was spoken in so many Ages. That distinction was forged a
long time after. We have showed already that all adoration is relative, and
that the invocation and adoration which is deferred unto God, is relative unto
God.

The Cardinal in the fourteenth chapter of the Treatise of the Invocation of
Saints, promises to prove that even before the four first Councils, that is,
in the three first ages, the invocation of Saints was in use. But he abuses
the Reader, for well nigh all the texts which he brings are from Authors that
have written a long time after the first Council. Those by whom he begins, are
Basil and Gregory Nazianzen, who wrote about the year of the Lord 375. both
which lived in Cappadocia, where that superstition first sprung in all
likelihood, and thence spread abroad. This is a notorious fraud, to promise in
the title of the Chapter, to show the general practice of the invocation of
Saints used in the Church before the four first Councils, but in that chapter
to bring none but Authors that have written since the first Council. It is
true, that among a multitude of testimonies of the posteriour Ages he alleges
some of the three first Ages. But those texts speak not of the invocation, but
only of the intercession of Saints.

These testimonies then the Cardinal alleges of the three first Ages. Page
1008.
He alleges Gregory Nazianzen, who in the Oration upon Cyprian says, that
St. Justina solicited to wantonness by the magical arts of Cyprian, before he
was converted to the Christian faith, had recourse to the intercession of the
Virgin Mary. But as that narrative is fabulous and injurious against Cyprian,
so is Gr^gories belief, that in Cyprians time the Saints were invocated. He
that in one point gives fables for histories, will not stick to do the like in
another. Baronius in his Martyrology upon Sept. 26. speaks of another Cyprian
that was of Antioch, and was martyrized at Nicomedia. But what he says of him,
he draws out of Legends, which have little authority. Besides, this does not
excuse Gregory Nazianzen, who relates this of Cyprian of Carthage.

The Cardinal alleges also Eusebius, who in the twelfth book of the
Evangelical preparation, chap. 1. says, that Plato had got among the Hebrews
his opinion, that the souls of the deceased take care of humane things, and
that the Hebrews hold, that Jeremiah was seen praying for the people after his
decease. But though we should receive Plato among the Prophets, and the things
related of Jeremiah in the Maccabees as true, yet that place is unfit to prove,
that the Saints must be prayed to. That example, like the other, may be used to
prove that the Saints pray for us, not that we ought to pray to them. The same
I say of the words of Origin upon the thirty second chapter of Numbers, Hom.
26. where he says, Who doubts but that every one of the Holy Fathers helps us
by his prayers? The same also may be said of all the testimonies of Origin and
Cyprian, which M. du Perron alleges after, page 1010. who all speak of the
intercession of Saints, not of the invocation to be deferred unto them.

Wherefore in page 1009. being pressed by the truth, he pleads guilty, and says,
that in the Authors that lived nearer the Apostles times, no footsteps are
found of that custom of calling upon the Saints. And in vain he alleges, that
most of their writings are lost. For we have the works of Justin, Ignatius,
Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Arnobius,
Lactantius, Athanasius, Eusebius and others, who both in number and bulk are
more then sufficient to show us the belief of the ancient Church.

Certainly if the writings of the Fathers were the sovereign rule of our faith,
there would be no reason why we should receive a doctrine, not received in the
three first ages, and which began to spring in the end of the fourth.

We cannot pass by the Cardinals notorious falsification in the same place, Chapter
14. p. 1000.
where he alleges Eusebius. He makes Eusebius to say, that Plato taught, that
virtuous men must be honored, and that their monuments must be venerated or
adored. That's false. Eusebius never attributed that doctrine to Plato, and the
first chapter of the twelfth book of the Evangelical preparation which M. du
Perron quoteth in the Margin, speaks not a word of that. Indeed Eusebius chap.
3. alleges the book of Maccabees, saying that Jeremiah after his death was
seen praying for the people, as taking care of men that are on earth; but he
speaks not of worshipping the monuments of virtuous men, as the Cardinal says,
who not understanding Greek, has translated (...), humane things. For our part
we would not deny, that the Saints are praying for Gods people in general: but
the question is, Whether they pray for every particular man; and whether they
understand their prayers.

The place that follows, which he alleges out of Eusebius, speaks no more
then the other of the invocation of Martyrs, but of prayers unto God by their
sepulchers, and of the honor deferred unto their memory. In the same place he
alleges Eusebius again, in the sixth Book of his History, chap. 5. where
Saint Potamina speaks thus to one of the guards that led her to execution, and
defended her against the fury of the people, (...).
That after her departure she would pray to her Lord, and that he would shortly
pay him the recompense of that he had done for her. The Cardinal having but
little Greek, thus translateth that place, That presently after her death, she
would pray to God for him, and obtain for him grace and pardon from the Lord.
He trusted (it seems) some other man's interpretation, whom he employed to
understand Greek for him. That passage indeed may prove that Potamiana
believed, that the Saints deceased, pray for the living whom they have known on
earth, but proves not that the Saints must be invocated. And that guard, called
Basilides, being turned Christian a little after, and a Martyr also, did not
pray to Potamiana, though he believed that he had been assisted by her
intercession.

Bellarmine in the 3. Book of the service of the Saints, chap. 9. alleges.
verumtamen.
Eusebius, Book 13. of Evangelical preparation, chap. 7. Honoring the
Champions of true piety as Gods friends, and drawing near to their monuments,
we make vows unto them as to holy men, by whose intercession we profess that we
get no little help toward God. But that place is altogether false. Eusebius
says only, Eusebii verba sunt, (...).
That the custom was to stand by their tombs, and to pray by them, and to
honor the blessed souls. Bellarmine adds these words of his own, We make vows
unto them, and profess that we get no little help by their intercession.

CHAP. 8. A Vindication of Origin upon the point of the invocation of one only
God, against the accusations of Cardinal du Perron.
THe Cardinal bearing himself for judge of antiquity, deals very unworthily
with many ancient Doctors, because they are not favorable enough unto the
Roman Church. It is usual with him to call Socrates and Sozomenus Novatians, to
derogate from the authority of their history, even in things that concern not
at all the doctrine of Novatus. He revileth Eusebius, and calls him an Arrian,
although Socrates, Sozomenus, and Theodoret clear him of that accusation, as we
have Before Book 3. chapter 2.
proved. The reason of that hatred, is, because that excellent Author being the
only Historian of the three first ages of the Church, speaks no otherwise of
the Bishop of Rome, then of another Bishop, and gives him no pre-eminence: and
because he condemns images as a Pagan custom, and calls very often the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, the figure of Christ's body. But the Father whom he
hates above all is Origin, not for the causes, for which he has been condemned
by the ancient Church, but for saying that the thing that we receive in the
holy Communion, as for the matter, goes to the draught, and that it is a
symbolicall and figurative body. Also because he condemns images, and
rejects them from the service of God. Also because in all his writings, which
are two great volumes, he never speaks of the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome,
but calls Paul the greatest of all the Apostles. And because he fights with so
much stoutness against the invocation of Angels and creatures, and teaches
that prayers must be addressed to none but God.

The Cardinal chap. 13. of the 5. Book, labors to defend himself against a
testimony of Origin alleged by his Majesty of great Britain in these words,
God alone was worshipped, God alone was invocated through his only Son,
mediator between God and men, alone, only, most only. To which he could have
added these Texts of the fifth Tome against Celsus, (...).
That science which represents unto us the nature of Angels, and that for which
every one of them is ordained, will not give us leave to put our trust, or
address our prayers to any other, but him who is God over all things, who is
sufficient for all things, by the Son of God our Savior, who is the Word, the
Wisdom and the Truth. And in the same Book he maintains against Celsus, that
the Jews did not adore the Angels of heaven, (...).
because (says he) they that did so, did it against the Law. And shortly
after, speaking of the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, of whom he speaks as
of animate creatures, and Angelical Spirits (which was the opinion of many
Ancients, of Austin among the rest) (...).
We judge (says he) that we must not pray to those that pray, since they
rather would send us to God whom they pray to, then to bring us down unto them,
and divide our virtue from God to themselves. And in the same place, (...)
We worship not those that worship, nor Moses, nor those that came after him,
and prophesied from God: And in the same Book, speaking of Moses and the
Prophets, he says, that (...)*
they studied to pray to the only Sovereign god. Again, (...).
We must rather worship God, who is only announced by the Angels, then his
Heralds and Angels.

The eighth and last Tome of Origin against Celsus, is full of such sentences.
For he answers Celsus, who blamed the Christians for adoring none but God
alone through Jesus Christ: (...), etc.
We serve one only God, and his only Son, his Word, and his image by prayers
and honors, according to our power. And there again, (...), etc.
We must pray to God alone, who is above all things. We must also pray to his
only Son.

This taken out of the same Book will serve for all. (...), etc.
We ought to make the only Sovereign God propitious unto us, and pray to him
that he be favorable to us, seeking to get his love by piety and by all
virtue. If Celsus will make some others propitious unto him after the Sovereign
God, let him learn, that as the shadow is moved after the bodies motion, so
when one has made the Sovereign God propitious unto him, hence it follows that
he has all the beloved Angels and the [blessed] souls and spirits propitious
unto him.

The Cardinal answers two things; The one, that Origens authority is not an
authentical Warrant for the decisions of Religion, seeing that in the same Book
he destroys the Godhead of Christ. The other, that Books written against the
Pagans, are not fit to teach the exact belief and practice of antiquity.

I answer, that in this point the authority of Origin is nothing inferior to
any of the Fathers. For Origin having in his life time been honored as an
incomparable man, and praised by Saint Gregory the maker of miracles (who lived
in his time) by an express Book, has also after his death, won by his writings
the admiration of most men. Ambrose and Hierom borrow from him, and imitate his
allegories and intepretations of Scripture. Eusebius has written an Apology
for him, and spent most part of the sixth Book of his history about his praise.
Ruffinus also, Priest of Aquileia, has written a Book for his vindication.

But Hierom, in his old age, being fallen out with Ruffinus and John of
Jerusalem, great admirers of Origin, that he might have an occasion of
invectives against them, began to write against Origin, and to mark his
errors: Being angry that Ruffinus said that Hierom was an Origenist as well as
he, and that if he was an Origenist, he had learned it of Hierom.

In the same time lived Epiphanius Bishop of Salamin in Cyprus, who also was at
odds with John of Jerusalem. That John accused Epiphanius, that he was an
Anthropomorphite; and Epiphanius accused John, that he was an Origenist. This
was the cause, why Epiphanius leaving out the Anthropomorphites in his
Catalogue of Heretics, put Origens in that list; describing him as a monster
and a plague in the Church. And after an exact examination of his errors, he
charge him to have burnt incense unto idols in his old age; which yet Baron.
An. 253.. 17. and 20.
Baronius affirms to be a calumny, and clears him of that imputation.

The truth is, that Origin had extravagant opinions and many errors, and that
by his Allegories he has altered the purity of Scripture. But it must be
acknowledged also, that never was a man more narrowly, and with more animosity,
examined by posterity. Which is very considerable. For if there had been a just
subject of reproving Origin, because he did absolutely condemn images, and
believed that God alone ought to be invocated, and that the bread of the holy
Communion, is bread still after the consecration; we may be sure that
Epiphanius and Hierom, who have bent all their wits to pick faults in the
doctrine of Origin, would not have forgotten to condemn him upon these points.
It will not be sound, that any of those ancients that writ against him, found
fault with him about the point of images, Note.
or about real presence, or about the invocation of creatures. So that the
silence of his enemies upon those points, is a manifest approbation of his
doctrine. The same I say of Austin, of Theodoret, and of Philastrius, who have
made an enumeration of Origens errors. It is so far then that these sentences
for being Origens should have less authority, that rather because they are
Origens, we have the consent and approbation of all antiquity.

To weaken the authority of Origens Books against Celsus, Cardinal du Perron
says, that in those Books Origin denies the Godhead of Christ. Yet in the
first Tome of those Books these words are found, (...).
The Mages [or Wise men] presented unto Christ significative gifts, gold as to
a King, myrrh as to him that was to die, and Frankincense as to him that was
God. And a little after he calls him a God superior to Angels, Savior of
mankind. And in the same Book, (...), etc.
We believe Jesus himself saying concerning his Godhead, I am the way, the
truth and the life. And there again (...).
He was properly the Son of God, God, the Word, the Power and the Wisdom of
God, he that is called Christ. And in the second Tome, (...).
Celsus is silent concerning those things which concern the Godhead of Jesus.
And in the third Tome he calls Christ (...).
the Son of God, and God that came with an humane soul and body. And in the
fourth Tome he calls Christ (...), he that is the Word it self, the Wisdom it
self, and the Righteousness it self. Titles not proper to any but the Sovereign
God. It is true, that in the same Books some places are found, where he makes
the Son inferior unto the Father, and that because Christ said, The Father is
greater then I. But it must not be found strange, that the Fathers that were
before the time of Arrius, have spoken of this matter in hard and improper
terms, and with less perspicuity and certainty. For before Arrius; that
question was not well cleared: Neither is there any reason, why Origin should
have harder dealing then the other Fathers of the former ages; as Justin.
Dialog. cum Tryphone. page 2^9
Justin Martyr, who affirms in his Dialogue against Tryphon, that whenever
it is said in the Old Testament, that God descended or ascended, that cannot be
proper to the Father, but must be understood of the Son, because that is
repugnant to the nature of the Father, who is every where, and is unmovable:
As if the nature of the Father were another then that of the Son, or as if the
Father alone were infinite, and not the Son. So Divines will bear with
Epiphanius, who says Epiphanius in Ancoratu.
that these words; My Father is greater then I, are true even in respect of the
divine nature of Christ. The Council of Antioch assembled against Paulus
Samosatenus, rejects the word (...), or Consubstantial. Yet we give a
favorable interpretation to their sentence.

The same equity we use with Clem. Alex. l. 2. Stromat. p. 173.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who puts in the Godhead a fourth hypostasis. For we
consider the time in which he writ. We bear also in Iren. l. 4* c. 1.
Irenaeus that which might be ill taken, his saying that none is called God in
Scripture, but the Father and the Son, and such as he has adopted; making no
mention of the Holy Ghost: Of whose Godhead he never speaks. Thus in the
eighth chapter of his fifth book, three times he presses, that we should
believe in the Father and in the Son, saying nothing of the Holy Ghost. Hilary
himself, though posteriour in time unto Arrius, and exercised in the
controversies of the Arrians, how improperly (to say no more) does he speak of
the nature of Christ? In the Treatise upon Psalm. 138. he says, that in Christ
Non confundenda persona divinitatis and corporis est.
we must no confound the person of the Godhead with that of the body; as though
the person of his Godhead were another from that of his manhood. The same
Father in many places denies that Christ suffered any pain in his body, and
holds that it was a show of passion and pain, not a real pain. If any spoke now
as Chrysostom did in the third Homily upon the first chapter to the Hebrews,
should be held a Nestorian. (...). and paulo post (...).
The Apostle (says he) appeaseth the Jews, showing that there are [in Christ]
two persons, a God and a man. And in the same place, There are two persons in
Christ of different hypostasis.

Truly I dare affirm, that the books of Origin against Celsus are an excellent
work, and that all Antiquity affords not a book made for the defense of
Christian Religion, comparable to it, whether it be for various learning, or
solidity, or elegancy. Neither the Apologeticks of Justin and Tertullian, nor
the exhortation of Clemens Alexandrinus to the Gentiles, nor his Paedagogue:
Nor even Austins books of the City of God, are comparable at all to these books
of Origin.

The Cardinals second answer to that testimony of Origin is, that it is not out
of the books written against the Pagans, that we can or ought to learn the
belief or practice of Antiquity; because disputing against the Pagans, they
speak not their sense, but what they are constrained to say. And that they
discovered as little as they could of the Christian practice: as Hierom says
in his book to Pammachius against Jovinian. If that be true, why do our
Adversaries, and Cardinal du Perron among the rest allege frequently
testimonies out of the Apologeticks of Justin and Tertullian, and out of
Lactantius, and out of Austin of the City of God? For they are books written
against the Pagans. But those Fathers (if one may believe our Cardinal) speak
against their sense, and dissemble their belief. Then the same (by that reason)
may be said of the writings of the Fathers against the Manicheans, the
Marcionites, the Arrians, and the Donatists; Which writings make up at least
two thirds of the works of the Fathers. In effect the Cardinal by that shift
revileth the Fathers, and uses them like Atheists, charging them with
notorious hypocrisy, by his saying that they speak against their own sense,
and disguise their belief, altering their doctrine in the points of faith
according to the persons they had to do with, speaking now one thing, now
another, so that there is nothing certain in their doctrine.

To give some color to his exception, he alleges the text of the Mass, where
the Priest says, Command that our sacrifice be carried by the hands of thy
Holy Angel to thy Heavenly Altar. Truly, though there were nothing amiss in
that prayer, yet it is nothing to the purpose; for it is not a prayer to
Angels, but to God, that he command the Angel. But that prayer is most evil and
injurious against Christ. For whereas in the Mass by that sacrifice the body of
Christ is understood, is it not an evident impiety to beseech God, that his
Angel take Christ to carry him up to heaven, and present him unto God? as
though Christ had need of the intervention of Angels to be presented to his
Father: or as though he caused himself to be carried by Angels, now that he
has attained the height of his glory.

But the superlative absurdity lies, in that the Priest having prayed that the
Angel may carry the consecrated Host to heaven, falls to it bodily, and eats it
up immediately after that prayer, to prevent the Angel, as fearing lest the
Angel carry the Host away. Having called for the Angel, he should in manners
stay a little for him. But perhaps the cause why the Angel never yet carried
the host away, is, that the Priest never gives him time enough for it.

The Cardinal also to fence himself against Origens blows, says that when
Origin denies, that any but God ought to be invocated and adored, he
understands if of the invocation and adoration which Celsus and other Pagans
bestowed upon their false Gods, that is, the sovereign and absolute invocation
and adoration of Latria, not the subaltern and relative adoration and
invocation. But the Cardinal is deceived if he think that the Pagans adored all
their Gods with a sovereign adoration, and that they Horat. Carm. l. 1. Od. 12.
Vnde nil majus generatur ipso, Nec viget quicquam simile aut secundum; Proximos
illi tamen occupavit Pallas honores.
worshipped Mercury or the Nymphs, or the household Gods, and those whom they
called Deos minorum gentium, with the like adoration as Jupiter; for they
prayed to them as to Servants and Messengers of the Sovereign God. Wherefore
Celsus speaking of the adoration of many Gods, could not mean the sovereign
adoration only. Besides, it is an unreasonable conceit, to imagine an adoration
which is not relative. For the sovereign worship is relative to him that is
worshipped, even to God. This Prelat has but an unlucky hand in handling the
terms of Philosophy.

As for Origin, it is certain, that he speaks of the sovereign adoration, for
he knew none other. And as for invocation, he says absolutely and without
exception, that none must be prayed to, but God alone: Of relative, or
inferior adoration and invocation, he speaks neither there nor any where else.
For as for that clause which is found in the version of the Homilies upon
Ezekiel; Receive, O Angel, the man converted from his ancient error, (if these
Homilies be of Origin) that clause is but a rhetorical Apostrophe, whereby
Orators in their Homilies or Orations use to address their speech unto absent
persons, as if they were present, and to the dead, as if they were yet alive.
Note, that the place which the Cardinal alleges out of Origin speaks only of
Angels, not of deceased Saints, of whom it is a question, especially in this
controversy. And that the words which he takes out of the eighth book against
Celsus speak not of the invocation of Angels, but of their intercession. Now
our difference is only about the invocation. That place deserves a chapter
apart, because the Cardinal does strangely falsify it.

CHAP. 9. A place of Origens eighth book against Celsus falsified by Cardinal
du Perron.
TO prove by Origin that Angels ought to be invocated (for as for the
invocation of Saints, he brings nothing at all for it) Book 1. c. 13. p. 984.
He makes a flourish with a place of Origin in book 8. against Celsus, which he
alleges in these words, When a man has God propitious, thence it results
that he has also all the Angels, Souls and Spirits belonging to God for his
friends. For they acknowledge those, that are worthy of the heavenly favor and
Godhead; yea and labor to get Gods good will for those that will serve him,
and jointly pray with us: So that we all that serve him make bold to say, that
unto men of good will, infinite thousands of holy Angels freely join
themselves, and interced^ for our mortal kind. The Reader may observe, that the
question being, whether Angels and Saints ought to be prayed to? The Cardinal
to prove that, brings a text which says that the Angels intercede for us; a
thing about which we dispute not. That is not the question. Observe also, that
the Cardinal has clipped that place of Origin, and cut off the head of it by a
notorious malice. Origin says, We must make the Sovereign God alone
propitious, and beseech him to be favorable unto us, making him propitious by
piety and by all virtue. But if [Celsus] will make others after God propitious
unto him, let him learn, that as the shadow is moved after the bodies motion,
likewise when one has obtained the favor* of the Sovereign God, thence it
follows, that one has also the favor of all the beloved Angels, and of the
souls and Spirits that are his. Out of all that discourse the Cardinal makes
use only of the two last lines, intending thereby to prove the invocation or
intercession of the Angels and Saints. But the lines that go next before, show
that by these very words which he alleges, Origin intends to prove that to
pray to Angels is a superfluous thing, since by praying to God alone, and
getting his favor, we have by consequent all the Angels favorable unto us.

To that clipping, he adds a depravation of that place full of falsehood and
foul dealing. This is the true place translated word by word, For they know
them that are worthy of Gods favor, (...).
and are not only propitious to them that are worthy, but even help those that
will serve the God who is above all things, and make him propitious, and pray
with them, and petition with them. So that we dare say that to the men who with
choice propound to themselves that which is best, and pray to God, millions of
sacred powers join with their prayers, not called upon. Besides many
corruptions of the Greek words, which show that this Prelat had little skill in
the Greek tongue, there is this notable falsification, that he has left out
these words, that the Angels pray for us, (...) non invocati, not being
invocated or called upon for help. For these words resisted the Cardinals
purpose, which was to prove the invocation of Saints out of Origin. And whether
out of malice or ignorance, instead of (...) he put in the Margin (...), which
signifies nothing. But in his French he has left it out quite, putting
instead of not being called upon, the word volontairement, that is, voluntarily
or freely. The other faults, as translating (...), men of good will, are faults
of petty Grammar-schollers, and proceed out of ignorance in Greek: But in the
omission of the word (...), the fraud is evident.

CHAP. 10. Reasons why Hierom said that the Fathers writing against the Pagans,
often writ against their own sense.
HIerom among many virtues, had this defect, that when he writ against one that
displeased him, the vehemence of choler would often carry him away beyond
limits, and made him come out with things that got him blame, which afterward
he sought to mollify and dawb with some interpretation. This Doctor who in
some places Hier. Apol. ad Pammachium, Tom. 2. Virginitatem in coelum fero non
quia habeam, sed quia magis miror quod non habeo.
confesses that he had not kept his virginity, Epist. ad Eustochium de
custodia virginitatis. Pallebant ora jejuniis and men's desideriis aestuabat, in
frigido corpore and ante hominem suum jam c^rne praemortua sola libidinum
incendia bulliebant, etc.
and freely acknowledges that in the midst of his fasts and austerities, he
burnt with incontinence, yet has been so excessive in commending virginity, as
to blame marriage as an evil thing, displeasing unto God, and a hinderance to
salvation. Upon such discourses the most part of the two books against Jovinian
is spent. These are some of his expressions, in the first book, It is good for
a man (says St. Paul) not to touch a woman; Si bonum est mulierem non tangere,
malum e^go est tangere.
If it be good not to touch a woman, it is then evil to touch a woman; For
nothing is contrary to good but evil. Now St. Paul speaks of marriage. And a
little after Jubet idem Apostolus ut semper oremus. Si semper orandum nunquam
ergo conjugio serviendum.
The Apostle will have us to pray continually: If we must pray continually, we
must never serve marriage. In the same book he personates Christ speaking that
to his Apostles, Recte sentitis quod non expediat homini ad coelorum regna
tendenti accipere uxorem.
You do well to believe that it is not expedient for a man tending toward the
kingdom of heaven, to marry. In the same place, by them that made themselves
Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven, he understands those that abstain from
marriage. Then he adds, Si castrati mercedem habent regni coelorum, ergo qui
non se castraverunt, locum* non possunt accipere castratorum.
If they that made themselves Eunuchs, have the salary of the kingdom of
heaven, they that made not themselves Eunuchs, cannot take place among the
Eunuchs. Again Nuptiae replent terram, Virginitas Paradisum.
Marriage replenisheth the earth, Virginity replenisheth Paradise. In the same
place he observes, that upon every day of the creation God saw that all that
he had done was very good, but only upon the second day, because that number of
two represented marriage. And that all the unclean beasts entered into the Ark
by couples. And that Moses before he drew near God, untyed his shoe-strings,
that is, the bond of marriage. And that when Joshua came to Jordan, the waters
of marriage, which had been flowing under the Law, were drained. And that the
Angel, Prince of the Militia, came to meet Joshua, holding a sword to cut the
bond of marriage. And that Moses who was married, was buried near Phegor, which
signifies ignominy: But that Joshua who was not married, was buried in the
mountain of Ephraim: Whence he concludes thus against marriage, Contemnimus
Phegor and omnem ignominiam ejus, scintes quod qui in carne* sunt Deo placere
non possunt.
We despise Phegor and all his ignominy, knowing that they that are in the
flesh cannot please God. He adds, that Moses was lamented in his death: But
Joshua was not lamented, as he that was to attain unto life: Nuptiae enim
finiuntur in morte, virginitas post mortem incipil coronari.
For (says he) marriage ends in death, but virginity begins to be crowned
after death. If one believes him, Moses, because he was married, could not
attain unto life. He says that the Apostle John was a Virgin, and therefore
that his Gospel goes far above other Gospels, and that he flies aloft like an
Eagle: Exposuit virginitas quod nuptiae scire non poterant.
Virginity (says he) has expounded that which married persons could not know:
acknowledging by the way, that St. Matthew, Saint Mark, and St. Luke were
married, and therefore he has a lower esteem of them. He adds, that St. Paul
says indeed, that a woman shall be saved by bearing of children, yet upon
condition that her children shall persevere in virginity: But Paul says, If
she abide in the faith, and in charity, and sanctification, with modesty, not
if her children abide in virginity. Thus that Father plays with Scripture,
and corrupts it with great licentiousness. And a little after he says, that
Puto quod and nuptiarum finis mors sit, fructus autem sanctificationis qui vel
ad virginitatem vel ad continentiam pertinet vita pensatur aeterna.
The fruit of matrimony is death, but the fruit of sanctification which
belongs to virginity, or continence, is rewarded with eternal life. In the
same place, he turns these sentences of Scripture against Matrimony, Walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit, And the carnal mind is enmity against
God. And Qui in carne sunt Deo placere non possunt, arbitror eos qui serviunt
officio conjugali quod prudentiam carnis diligunt and in carne sunt.
they that are in the flesh cannot please God. For (says he) I believe that
they that serve to the duty of marriage, love the carnal mind, and that they
are in the flesh. Wherefore also he calls married persons Vasa in contumeliam,
Vessels to dishonor or shame. And says, that a woman that marries the second
time, must have no part in the alms of the Church, and must be deprived of the
Communion of the body of Christ.

These books being published, were but ill received by many, as made to the
disgrace of marriage instituted by God, and in so many places commended in his
word. Of which being advertised by Pammachius, he directed an Apology to him to
mollify the hardness of those expressions, saying that he never intended to
disgrace marriage nor married persons, which nevertheless in that very Apology
he continues to call vessels to dishonor, and maintains that it is ill done
to touch a woman.

Among the excuses which he brings for the harsh language which he had given to
matrimony, he says there are two ways of writing, the one gymnastical the
other dogmatical; that is, the one that is done for exercise only, the other
doctrinal, and plainly setting forth the true doctrine, without contestation.
He says that he had written against Jovinian in the first way; and that such a
manner of disputing is loose, acknowledging that his custom is to say one thing
and do another, to show bread and hold a stone, that is, to use sly tricks and
dissembling. Then he adds the words alleged by the Cardinal, Origin,
Methodius, Eusebius, Apollinaris, have written many thousands of lines against
Celsus and Porphyry. Consider what their arguments are, and how slippery the
questions, whereby they go about to overthrow that which the spirit of the
Devil has woven. Et quia interdum coguntur loqui non quod sentiunt sed quod
necesse est.
And because sometimes they are forced to say, not what they believe, but that
which is necessary; they contradict that which the Gentiles say. By these words
Cardinal du Perron would persuade us that Origin when he said so many times
that none but God ought to be invocated, spoke against his own sense.

But all that we have said before of Hierom, and what shift he was put to when
he said this, shows, that he is not to be believed, and that he does unjustly
put that disgrace upon the Ancients, that they spoke against their belief.
Hierom having reviled matrimony, and wrested Scripture by a licentiousness
hardly to be paralelled, and seeing himself justly blamed for it, he says for
excuse, that he used legerdemain, and dissembling in his words. Then to hide
himself in the crowd, he covers himself with the examples of Origin and
others, who (says he) in their books against the Pagans are constrained to
disguise their belief, and speak against their sense. A thing which a good man
should never do, choosing rather to dye, then to use hypocrisy in such a
sacred thing, and to defend the truth with lying. As Job was saying chap. 13.
v. 7. Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? God having
no need of our true words to maintain his glory, should he stand in need of our
lies to defend his cause? Must the heavenly truth borrow the Devils weapons?
Must we lie to please the God of truth?

But here is worse, for Hierom did not content himself to involve the Fathers
more ancient then himself in his fault, but he draws the Apostle Paul into
the same crime, speaking of him as of a crafty companion, and a dissembler.
Paulum Apostolum proseram quem quotiescunque lego, videor mihi non audire verba
sed tonitrua. Legite epistolas ejus, and maxim ad Romanos, ad Galatas, ad
Ephesius in quibus totus in certamine positus est, and vide^itis cum in
testimoniis quae sum^t de veteri Testamento, quam artifex, quam prudens quam
dissimulator sit ejus quod agit Videntur quidem verba simplicia and quasi
innocentis hominis and rusticani, and qui nec facere nec declinare noverit
insidias; sed quocunque respexeris fulmina: sunt. Haeret in causa, capit omne
quod tetigerit, tergum vertit ut superet, fugam simulat ut occidat.
I will bring (says he) the Apostle Paul for an example, whom whenever I
hear, it seems to me, that I hear not words, but thunders. Read his Epistles,
especially those that are written to the Romans, to the Galatians, and to the
Ephesians, in which he is altogether employed in disputing; and you shall see
how artificial he is, how crafty in the texts which he brings out of the Old
Testament: how prudent, how dissembling of those things which he tends to. They
seem to be plain words, and of an innocent and rude man, that knows neither how
to lay wiles, nor how to avoid them. But which way soever you look, they are
thunderbolts. He stands stiff to the cause: He lays hold of all that he
touches. He turns his back to overcome. He makes a show to fly, that he may
kill. Can a godly admirer of this holy Apostle, that excellent organ of Gods
spirit, hear him so foully abused, and not be moved with a just anger? Was it
not enough for Hierom to profess openly, that in his books against Jovinian he
had spoken otherwise then he thought, and to cover himself with the example of
other Fathers, whom he makes fellows of his disembling, without inwraping Paul
also in the same guilt? Must he under a shadow of praises, charge him with
craft and dissembling, saying that he is a counterfeit, that turns his back
that he may overcome, and flies that he may kill? Shall we wonder now if the
Cardinal who defends himself with such examples, and covers himself with
Hieroms authority, makes no conscience to use fraud, and speak against his
sense? Austin before us complained of Hierom about this. For in his Epistles to
Hierom he reproves him, because in his Comment upon the Epistle to the
Galatians he undertook the defense of untruth, and would make the Apostle Paul
a liar, as if the Apostle had used dissembling and officious lies in that
Epistle. I have read (says he) some writings which go for yours, upon the
Epistles of the Apostles. When I would have expounded one of them, which is to
the Galatians, that place came to my hands, where you say that the Apostle St.
Peter was converted [by St. Paul] from his pernicious dissembling. I confess
unto you that I am very sorry that such a man as your self, or any other (if
another has writ it) should undertake the defense of untruth, till the reasons
that move me, be confuted, if yet they may be confuted. For this seems to me a
most pernicious belief, that any untruth can be found in the holy Scriptures;
That is, that those men by whom that Scripture was delivered and written unto
us, spoke lies in their writings, etc. For if in a book of such eminent
authority, an officious lie be acknowledged, no part of those books shall
remain, that may not be turned which way soever every man will, etc. Hierom was
offended at this, and taking Austins reprehension in ill part, answered him,
that he [Austin] would take upon him to be wise; and that being younger, he
ought not to provoke an old man, as Dares did Entellus: And that bos lassus
fortius figit pedem, that is, a weary Ox sets his foot more steadily. Austins
mildness put an end to that difference, neither of them altering his opinion.
Yet Austin had the truth on his side. I wonder why he did not call upon Hierom
about many other expressions of his, that speak of the Apostle with contempt,
and blame him openly. As in the Epistle to Salvina, where he says, that the
Apostle giving leave to wanton Widows to marry, had given them, praecepta non
bona and justificationes pessimas, Ill precepts and most wicked justifications.
And in the questions to Algasia, qu. 10. where expounding the ninth chapter to
the Romans, in which it is spoken of election and reprobation, he sath, that
St. Paul going about to clear that matter, had rather entangled it. Is it with
modesty, that in the first book against Jovinian he asks the Apostle, O Paul
cur veretrum gestas? How falsely and unjustly does he rebuke Paul, as if he had
made a false relation, Act. 17. of the Inscription to the unknown God: saying
in his Comment upon the Epistle to Titus, that the inscription of the Altar was
not such as Paul affirms, to the unknown God, but to the Gods of Asia,
Africa, and Europe, Gods unknown and strangers. And upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians, This man that speaks incongruities, and cannot clear an entangled
speech. And upon the Epistle to Titus, It was not humbly, but truly that St.
Paul said, that he was ignorant in words. The same he says in the
fore-alleadged question to Algasia. And upon the Epistle to the Galatians,
Apostolus Galatis, quos stultos dixerat, factus est stultus. The Apostle having
called the Galatians, fools, himself was made a fool unto them.

All this will show that the Cardinal is like those flies that sit only upon
scabs and ulcers, for he seeks that which is vicious in the Fathers, and
adorneth himself with their ordure.

CHAP. 11. Of the opinion of those that condemn not invocation of Saints, but
think it unnecessary.
THere are some who seeing that God in his word commands not the invocation of
Saints, and that under the Old Testament, and many Ages after the Apostles,
neither example nor trace is found of any adoration or invocation of religious
service deferred unto the creatures, take a middle way; saying, that one may
content himself to pray to God alone by Jesus Christ, and let the invocation of
Saints alone, so that he condemn not them that call upon them, but join with
the public order of the Church meekly, and without contestation, every one
doing in private what seems him good.

They that speak thus, forge to themselves a religion apart, and directly
oppose the Roman Church, which obliges every particular person to call upon
Saints. It is the decision of Pope Innocent the third in the ninth chapter of
the third book of the mysteries of the Mass, Neceessarium nobis est in via
sanctorum suffragium ut meritis eorum and precibus divinae protectionis
muniamur auxilio.
The suffrage of Saints is necessary to us while we are in the way, that by
their merits and prayers we may be fenced with the divine protection.

We have showed before how that after the Pope has canonized a Saint, he gives
a command to all people to invocate him, and address their prayers unto him.
From which command, who so will exempt himself, disobeyeth him that calls
himself Head of the Church, and boasts that he cannot err in the faith.
Besides, the invocation of Saints is inserted in the public service of the
Roman Church, and makes a part of the most solemn Masses, as the Mass of Easter
Eve where the Letanies of Saints are said; Which prayers oblige the people to
say Amen, either with the mouth or with the heart, unto all that the Priest
says.

Should the Priests or Bishops be obliged to pray to the Saints, and the people
exempted from that obligation? Or should the people be obliged to pray to the
Saints in public, not in private?

Truly if it be lawful for one to dispense himself from joining with the
Priest when he prays to the Saints in the Mass, it will be lawful for him
also to reject that prayer in the Canon of the Mass, whereby the Priest asks
the grace of God by the merits of the Saints, and to despise the satisfactions
of the Saints, which the Pope distributeth by his Indulgences.

And whereas the first ground of the Roman Church is not the Holy Scripture,
but the authority of the Roman Church; who so professes the Roman Religion,
and yet dispenses himself in a point ruled and established by the Roman
Church; believes that the Roman Church can err, and makes himself Judge of
that Church, and having no more the authority of the Church for a foundation,
and for an infallible rule, and together not grounding himself upon Scripture,
he has no more ground for his religion but his fancy and his own will.

CHAP. 12. The opinion of the Fathers about invocation of Saints, from the year
of the Lord 365. unto the IV. Council.
THis question is ended already, since the Cardinal confesses that in Austins
time, who dyed in the year 430. or thereabout it was a thing yet dubious, and
not decided whether the Saints enjoy heavenly glory before the resurrection;
Which doubt makes (of necessity) the invocation of Saints dubious. We have
seen also that Hierom who was a disciple of Gregory Nazianzen, believed that
the Saints hear not what we say to them, and have no knowledge of humane
things: And that Austin says the same in many places: Also that Gregory
Nazianzen, who of all the Fathers is the first that called upon the deceased
Saints, makes a doubt whether those whom he called upon, heard him. For these
causes it is unnecessary to examine all the testimonies of the Fathers of the
latter Ages, of which the Cardinal is pouring a thick hail upon us, since the
former Ages are contrary to that doctrine, and the posteriour Ages speak of it
with so much uncertainty.

It is also to be noted, that although since the year 375. some private
persons, especially in Cappadocia, were carried away by that error, yet the
invocation of Saints was not therefore received in the public service.

In the Fathers of the fourth and fifth ages many places are found contrary to
the invocation of Saints. Ambrose in the Oration upon the death of Theodosius,
says, Tu solus Domine invocandus es, and tu rogandus.
Thou alone O Lord must be invocated and prayed to. Which must be taken as a
correction of that he had said in the first Tome in the book of Widows, where
he says, that we must pray to Angels and Martyrs. For when he writ that book
of Widows, he was but a new Christian: It was but three years after his
Baptism. But his Oration upon Theodosius was made long after, and a little
before his death. For Theodosius dyed in the year of the Lord 395. Ambrose
having already continued Bishop of Milan about fifteen years.

Himself in the third book of the Holy Ghost, chap. 12. speaks thus, Maria erat
Templum Dei, non Deus Templi. Ergo Deus ille solus adorandus qui operabatur in
Templo.
Mary was the Temple of God, but she was not God. Wherefore that God alone must
be adored, who wrought in that Temple. And a little before, Neque adorandum
quenquam praeter Deum legimus, quia scriptum est, Dominum Deum adorabis and ei
soli servies.
We read not that any must be adored but God. For it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. There or no where he
should have used the distinction of dulia and latria, and of superior and
inferior religious worship, that the Virgin Mary should not be excluded from
all adoration: But he knew no such distinction.

Among the works of Ambrose there is a Comment upon the Epistle to the Romans,
of which Comment the Cardinal goes about to invalid the authority, but with
weak proofs. But it is all one to us who is the Author of that Comment, since
our Adversaries have put it among Ambrose his works, and make use of it. There
the Author, upon the first chapter to the Romans, disputing against the Pagans
who by the creatures, and by the stars especially, pretended to go to God, as
they go to the King by his Officers and Governors calls that Solent pudorem
passi neglecti Dei misera uti excusatione, dicentes per istos posse iri ad Deum
sicut per Comites pervenitur ad Regem.
a miserable excuse. Then he adds Nam and ideo ad Regem per Tribunos aut
Comites itur quia homo utique est Rex. and nescit quibus debeat Remp. credere.
Ad Deum autem quem utique nihil latet (omnium enim merita novit) promerendum,
sussragatore non opus est sed mente devota. Ubicunque enim talis locutus fuerit
ei, respondebit illi.
For this cause they go to the King by his Colonels and Governors, because the
King is a man, and knows not to whom he ought to commit the government of the
Commonwealth. But to get Gods favor to whom nothing is hidden (for he knows
that which all men deserve) there is no need of any that help you with his
suffrage, but of a devout spirit, for wheresoever such a man shall speak to
God, God will answer him. There is in the Latin, suffragatore non opus est, to
which word the Cardinal gives an absurd interpretation, saying that it
signifies a Counselor. Every one that has some taste of the Latin tongue
will smile at this, knowing that this word was never taken in that sense. The
votes of every Roman Citizen in the comitia or City meetings were called
suffragia; and he who helped or favored any with his vote, was called his
suffragatour. Now it is clear, that the Author of this book speaks of Colonels
and Governors or Comites, which are used as Intercessors, not as Counselors.

In the same Father in the eighty fifth Epistle, which is the last, it is
spoken of the bodies of St. Gernasius, and St. Protasius which were found. Of
these the Author of the book speaks, as of the Patrons of the Church and City
where they rested. But besides that in that Epistle there is not a word of
invocation of Saints, it is evident that this Epistle is supposititious, and
written long after Ambrose's time. For it is said in the same place, that these
bodies were transported in Basilicam Ambrosianam, that is, as they speak in our
days, into the Church of St. Ambrose. Du Perron p. 1022.
Or if by Basilica Ambrosiana some Church built by Ambrose is understood, it is
certain that Ambrose would never have called it so. In Ambrose his life, and a
long time after, there was no Church bearing the name of St. Ambrose. The ninty
first Sermon is of the same Author that writ that Epistle, and no less
supposititious, as many other Sermons and Books attributed to Saint Ambrose,
for that holy man's works are strangely falsified.

We have brought before some places of Chrysostom, in which he says that the
souls of the deceased Saints do not yet enjoy the heavenly felicity, and shall
not receive the crown before the resurrection. A certain proof that he did not
call upon the Saints, since he doubted of their happy state.

The same Father in the fourth Sermon of penitence speaks thus, When we have a
suit to a man, we must address our selves first to the Porters, and solicit
the Parasites, (...), etc.
and flatterers, and take a long way about. But with God there is no such
thing; For he is entreated without an intercessor, without money, and without
expense, he enclineth to the petition: It is sufficient to pray to him with the
heart, and to offer tears to him, etc.

The same (...):
God is always near hand. If thou will petition to a man, Thou ask what he
does? They say unto thee, he is asleep, he is busy. A servant answers thee
nothing. With God there is no such thing. Wheresoever you go and call, he
hears. There is neither business, nor intercessor, nor servant that stop thy
way. Say only Have mercy upon me, and presently God comes near.

In the same place (...). Homil. de dimiss. Chanan. Tom. 5. edit. Savil. p. 195.
See the Philosophy of that woman, She prays not to James, she is not a
supplicant to John, she applies not her self to Peter, but she breaks thorough
the crowd. I need no intercessor (says she) but taking penitence for mine
advocate, I come to the very spring, because for that is he come down, for that
has he taken flesh, that I also may speak with him, etc. I need no
intercessor, have mercy upon me.

The same upon the first chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Hom. 3, (...).
Why do you gape after Angels? They are servants to the son of God, and are
sent to diverse places for our sakes.

The same Chrysostom upon Genesis 19. Hom. 44. speaking of the Canaanitish woman,
to which the intercession of the Apostles availed nothing, and which made her
address unto Christ himself. We were constrained (says he) to bring this whole
story, (...).
that we might learn that we speed not so well praying by others, as when we
pray our selves; so that we aproach with zeal, and with an erected mind. Behold
how this woman having the Disciples interceding for her, sped not the better
for that, until her own self persevering with patience, drew the benignity of
the Master. Those Saints of whose intercession he speaks are the living, not
the dead Saints.

Himself upon Matthew. 15. Hom. 52. Consider how the Apostles being turned back,
and having not prevailed, she obtained it, so powerful is obstinacy in prayer.
For God delights more to be prayed to for our necessities by our selves that
are guilty, then by others that pray for us.

But he is most express especially in the eighteenth Homily upon the Epistle to
the Romans, (...), etc.
Unto whom shall thou fly? Whom will thou call upon to fight for thy cause,
and help thee? Shall it be to Abraham? But he shall not hear thee: Shall it be
to these Virgins? But they also shall impart none of their oil unto thee. Shall
thou call upon thy Father or thy Grandfather? But none of them, how holy
soever, has the power to alter that judgment. These things being considered,
worship and pray to him alone, who has the power to blot out thine obligation,
and quench that flame.

And in another place Chrysostom. sermon in Phil. 18. de profectu Evang. Tom. 5.
Edit. Savil. page 416. (...).
Thou have no need of intercessors with God, nor of much running about, nor of
flattering others. But though thou be alone and without a Patron, by praying to
God by thy self, thou shall obtain [thy request] altogether. He uses not to
grant so, being called upon for us by others, as being entreated by our selves,
though we be filled with a thousand adversities. And the same words he repeats
six or seven times in that Homily.

I will add one testimony again of that Father in the ninth Homily upon the
Epistle to the Colossians, where he says that the Devil envying the honor we
have to address our selves, has brought in the service of the Angels. (...);
For this cause (says he) the Devil envying us has brought in Angels. Such
are the enchantments [of Devils:] Though it were an Angel, though it were an
Archangel, though they were Cherubims, Do not suffer it. For neither will
those powers receive [that honor:] but will reject it, when they see their
Master dishonored thereby. I have honored thee (says God) and have said
call, upon me, and do thou dishonor him?

After so many express declarations, it is hard to believe that this holy man
called upon Saints and Angels: seeing that he shows in other places his not
believing that the deceased do yet enjoy the glory of God. But some Organ of
Satan the Father of lying has thrust in some false writings that commend the
invocation of Saints among this Fathers works. Such is Chrysostoms Liturgy; a
piece so evidently false, that in it there is (...), etc.
mention of Chrysostom among the deceased Saints. There also another prayer is
found ill suiting with that, set down in these words, We offer unto thee this
reasonable sacrifice for our Ancestors, who are resting in the faith, for the
Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. and even for the Virgin Mary: for
all which, our Adversaries hold that one ought not to pray. I easily believe
that Chrysostom framed a Liturgy. But it is of that as of Calepins Dictionary,
which suffers a perpetual addition, and yet retains still its first name.

In the same Fathers works, there is one false piece inserted, of such gross
and evident falsehood, that it can hardly deceive. It is in the end of the
twenty sixth Homily upon the second Epistle to the Corinthians, where it is
said, that the Emperor himself comes to the sepulchers of the Saints, and
kisseth them, and laying down pride, beseeches them to be his helpers before
God: So that he that wears the crown prays to a tentmaker and to a
fisherman, both of them dead, that they would be his Advocates toward God. If
the curious Reader will take the pains to consult the book, and to read the
three last pages of that Homily, he shall find that besides the diversity of
the style, and the doctrine (contrary to that of Chrysostom) full of absurdity
and ignorance, there is no connection at all with the precedent discourse, and
nothing common with the matter in hand, like stones thrown at random, which
stuck there by chance. That place which I affirm to be false, begins at the top
of the nine hundred twenty eighth page of Commelins Edition, with these words,
(...), etc. And in the Latin Sic enim etiam idolorum cultus. In the lines
before Chrysostom exhorts the godly to suffer for Christ, saying that God
will by sufferings bring us to heavenly glory. Then begins this absurd
discourse abruptly. For thus Idolatry got strength, by too much admiring men,
as when the Roman Senate decreed that Alexander should be the thirteenth God.
For they had the power to make Gods by their suffrage, and to put them in the
list of the Gods. For when all the things done by Christ, were announced at
Rome, he that governed the Nation of the Jews, sent to Rome to ask counsel,
whether it pleased them to make Christ God also. Which they refused, being
angry and incensed, because without expecting their decree, the power of the
crucifix shining every where, had drawn all the world to the veneration of the
same. Has any man so little freedom of judgment left, as not to see the
silliness of that discourse, which hangs not upon that which went before, and
is stuffed with absurdities unworthy of so great a man? For who ever heard that
by the decree of the Roman Senate King Alexander was put among the Gods? or that
he had a Temple at Rome, and religious service deferred unto him? or that a
Grecian scarce known at Rome, but by hearsay in his life time, should be put
among the Gods by the Romans many ages after his death? But what can be more
absurd, then to say that Alexander was made the thirteenth God by the Senate? As
though the Senate did keep a set number of Gods, and each God in his order. But
who is that Prince or Governor of the Jewish Nation, who informed the Senate
of the virtues of Jesus Christ, and required that he should be put among the
Gods? It could not be Pilate, for in that place it is said, that the power of
Christ had in that time drawn all the earth to his obedience. And it could be
none else but Pilate, for when the Gospel began to spread over the world, the
Nation of the Jews had neither Governor nor Prince, seeing that they were
fugitive and scattered over all the earth; And the Emperor and Senate were so
far from deliberating whether they should make Christ a God, that they
persecuted the Christians with all their power. The rest of the discourse is
filled with the like absurdities: As when the Author proves the resurrection
of the dead, because Alexander never thought of it: And his affirming that none
can show Alexanders sepulcher, and that no body knows where he lies: seeing
that it is a common thing in the books of Historiographers, that the body and
tomb of Alexander were in Alexandria of Egypt. By that Quintus Curtius ended
his History, and Suetonius in the life of Octavius Augustus says the same.

Of the like stuff is that which he adds, that the Emperor Constantine after
his death, is a porter of the Fisher-mens Temple. Whence he infers, that the
enemies of Christian Religion, must learn that Fishermen shall have a greater
dignity then Emperors in the day of the resurrection, seeing that Emperors in
their sepulchers are in the place of servants, and Fishermen in the place of
Masters. Can any thing be more remote from the wit and learning of Chrysostom,
then that ridiculous piece of work, which is contrary to so many true works of
that holy man? Who doubts but that many the like pieces of base metal were put
among the writings of the Fathers, and go for true metal, because the
falsehood is not easy to be known? For we have the mos part of their books from
the hands of our Adversaries, out of the manuscripts of Friars, and out of
their Libraries.

In the sixth Homily upon the first chapter of Matthew, he says, that we are
much sooner heard by our prayers, then by the intercession of others: And he
proves it by the example of the Canaanitish woman, and of the repenting Thief
crucified with Christ, and of the Adulteress, who made their address unto
Christ without any man's intercession. Then he adds, And this we say, not
because we ought not to call upon the Saints. But there it is clear that he
speaks of the living Saints, not of the deceased, for he commends the
Canaanitish woman for not imploring the intercession of the Apostles, who were
living. But as for the deceased Saints, Chrysostom in Hom. 18. upon the Epistle
to the Romans says, that they hear not our prayers.

Bellarmin in the fourth chapter of the book of Relics falsely alleges
Chrysostoms Homily upon Juventius and Maximus, making him say Tumulos martyrum
adoremus. Let us adore the sepulchers of the Martyrs. There is in the Greek
(...).
Let us touch their tomb, and embrace their relics with confidence. Of
Adoration he speaks not at all: and the confidence that he speaks of, is
confidence ^n God.

I deny not but that in the same time that error of the invocation of Saints
began to creep into some Churches, in Cappadocia especially, where that
superstition seems to have sprung first. That is seen in Basils writings, who
about the year 375. in the Homily of the forty Martyrs, says, that the people
had their recourse unto them: Which is a place falsified in all the versions of
our Adversaries; for they say ad hos confugiat and hos or^^, instead of ad hos
confugit and hos orat. For Basil says only that which was done in some place
of Cappadocia, not that which ought to be done.

At the same time, and in the same Country Gregory Nazianzen was writing. In
whose books prayers are extant to St. Basil, and St. Athanasius. But we have
seen also that he speaks to deceased Saints, doubting whether they hear what he
says to them, and whether they have any knowledge of things done here below.
But the same Athanasius whom In the Oration to Athanasius he speaks dubiously,
saying (...) ut puto.
he prays to, had powerfully impugned the invocation of Saints, as we have
proved it by many of his expressions. To which these must be added, which are
found in the fourth Oration against the Arrians, where he condemns those who
in their prayers join the Angels, or some other creature with God. Page 259.
(...). etc. (...).
There is none (says he) that would ask by prayers to receive something of the
Father, and of the Angels, or of any other creature. None would say, God and
the Angel give thee. But he shall ask of the Father and the Son, because they
are but one. And a little after, David did not call for his deliverance upon
any other but God. In our days we hear nothing else among the Romanists but
praying to God, and his Mother, asking of God and St. Rock: Such speeches would
have been very odious among the Ancients.

Some places in St. Austin seem to assert the invocation of Saints. In the book
of the Spirit and of the Soul, there is a prayer to the Saints. But that book
is supposititious. For in it Boethius is alleged, who was not born when Austin
dyed. The book of heremitical life speaks of the service of the Virgin Mary,
and calls her the Queen of heaven. But that book also is not of Austin, for it
speaks of the rule of St. Benedict, which was made about fourscore years after
Austins death.

In chap. 24. of the book of Meditations, which is in the ninth Tome of Austin,
there is a prayer to the Saints. But that book is spurious. Posidonius who writ
Austins life, has made a Catalogue of his works, where that book is not found.
The style of it is far more concise then that of Austin, and has many
barbarisms, as chap. 4. Deus praestabilis super malitiam: and chap. 12.
Honorifico te pro scire and posse. And in the prayer to the Saints, he calls
the Saints festivos, that is, pleasant and merry. Wherefore Bellarmin in the
book of Ecclesiastical Writers, put these Meditations among the uncertain
books, and dares not father them upon Austin. These visibly false pieces make
us doubt of the truth of some others. For if these marks of falsehood were not
found in these books, they would go for good and lawful.

The Cardinal begins his Treatise of ^nvocation of Saints by a text of Austin,
which he sets in the front of his book as most pregnant. The Christian people
(says Austin in book 20. against Faustus Manichean, chap. 21.) celebrate by a
religious solemnity the memory of Martyrs, to be associated to their merits.

That place may be employed for the commemoration of Martyrs, to show that they
pray for us, but not at all to show that they must be prayed to. He speaks of
the memory of Martyrs, and of their imitation, and of the intercession whereby
they pray for us, but not at all of the invocacion, which is or should be
deferred unto them. So much is evident in the following words, which the
Cardinal according to his custom, to clip the tongue of the Fathers, would not
allege. For Austin having said, that no offering was made to Peter, or Paul,
or Cyprian, he adds, Colimus Martyrs eo cultu dilectionis and societatis quo
and in hac vita coluntur homines sancti Dei. We honor the Martyrs with the
same service of love and society as the Saints of God are honored in this
life. This must be observed. For none calls upon a Saint, or deferreth a
religious service unto him while he is in this life. Austin says indeed, that
this service of love and society is yielded unto Martyrs with more certainty
and affection. But he says that it is the same kind of honor and reverence.

We have brought many testimonies out of Austins books, some showing that he
held that the Saints see not our actions, some that he believed not that they
enjoy as yet the heavenly glory.

In the twenty second book of the City of God, chap. 10. after he has said
that no Temples are built unto Martyrs, that no Altars are erected unto them,
and that no sacrifices are offered unto them; he adds that in the public
service, suo loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a sacerdote qui sacrificat
invocantur. They are named in their place and rank, yet the Priest that
sacrifices does not invocate them. The Roman Church does the contrary; for in
some Masses the Letany is said, in which a long list of Saints is invocated,
especially the Mass of the Saturday before Easter. Also Temples are edified and
consecrated unto Saints. In great Cities you shall see a multitude of Churches,
that bear the name of the Saints, in whose honor they were built, as that of
St. Nicasius, St. Anthony, St. Gervas, etc. Altars likewise are dedicated and
consecrated unto Saints, whose relics are under the table of the Altar. That
is expressly set down in the Roman Pontifical, in the chapter of the dedication
or consecration of Churches, where it is constituted, that on the day of the
dedication, the Bishop shall put the relics under the Altar with three grains
of frankincense, and put in a note, with these words. MDCXI die N. mensis N.
Ego N. Episcopus N. consecravi Ecclesiam and Altar hoc in honorem sancti N.
and reliquias sanctorum* Martyrum N. and N. in eo inclusi, etc.
In the year 1611. upon such a day of the month. I N. Bishop of N, have
consecrated thi^ Church and Altar to the honor of such or such a Saint, and
have enclosed in it the relics of such or such Martyrs, and have this day
given a year of true Indulgence unto all the faithful [servants] of Christ,
and upon the anniversary day of the consecration, forty days of indulgence
unto all that visit the same. These are new coined fopperies, of which no trace
is found in all Antiquity. The Ancient Church was so far from invocating the
Sains at the Altar, that they did not suffer that Christ should be expressly
invocated there. The twenty third Canon of the third Council of Carthage, held
in the year 399. is express upon that, Cum ad Altar assistitur, semper ad
Patrem dirigatur Oration.
When one stands by the Altar, let his prayer be always directed to the Father.

The same Austin in the one hundred and fourteenth chapter of his Manual, Non
nisi a Domino deo petere d^bemus quicquid speramus nos vel been operaturos vel
probonis operibus adepturos.
We must ask of none but God alone, the good which we hope to do, or that which
we hope to attain unto by our good works.

The same in the book of the quantity of the soul, Deus solus ei colendus est
qui solus ejus est Author. Homo autem quislibet alius quanquam sapientissimus
and perfectissimus, etc.
God alone must be served by the soul, for he alone is the Creator of the same.
But every man, how wise and perfect soever he be, and generally every glorified
rational creature Amanda tantummodo and imitanda est.
must be only loved and imitated. Mark these words must be only loved and
imitated, for to yield unto the Saints a religious service, which they now call
dulia, and to invocate them, is more then loving and imitating them.

The same in the last chapter of the book of true Religion, Let us not apply
our Religion, to yield service unto the dead. For if they have led a holy life,
we have no such opinion of them, that they seek such an honor. But they will
have us to serve him, by whose illumination they rejoice that we are fellows of
their merit. Honorandi sunt propter imitationem non adorandi propter religionem.
They must then be honored for imitation, not worshipped for Religion.

Himself in the book of heresies, ad Quod vult Deum, puts the Angelicks among
the heretics: And the heresy that he charge them with, is, that they were
addicted to the service of Angels.

And in chap. 10. of the confessions, chap. 42. He speaks thus unto God, Quem
invenirem qui me reconciliaret tibi? An eundum mihi fuit ad Angelos? qua prece?
quibus sacramentis? Multi conantes ad te redire, neque per seipsos valentes,
sicut audio, tentaverunt haec, and incidereunt in desiderium curiosarum
visionum and digni habiti sunt illusionibus.
Whom could I find that should make my peace with thee? Should I have gone to
the Angels? By what prayers? By what Sacraments? Many endeavoring to return
unto thee, and not being able to do it of themselves, have (as I hear) tried
those ways, and are fallen into a desire of curious visions, and were thought
worthy to be deceived with illusions.

In chap. 5. and 6. he shows that the true sacrifices are the inward, even
those of a contrite and humbled heart, also praises and prayers; and so
defines the sacrifice, That it is every kind of good work whereby we adhere
unto God, and tend unto blessedness. Whence he infers in the seventh chapter
Nolunt nos sibi sacrificare sed ei cujus and ipsi nobiscum sacrificium esse
noverunt.
that we must not offer sacrifices unto Angels, and that themselves will have
no such service as a sacrifice: for hence it follows, that they will not be
invocated, since invocation is a sacrifice. And in the sixteenth chapter,
Angeli hunc omnem cultum uni Deo creatori omnium deberi dicunt.
The Angels say, that all that service is due to one God only. And in chap. 17.
In Lege unus Deus Deorum religione sacrorum jussus est coli.
In the Law it is commanded to serve the only God of Gods with a religious
service. And in the twenty sixth chapter, Number igitur Angelos, quorum
ministerium est declarare voluntatem Patris, credendum est velle nos subjici
nisi ei cujus nobis enunciant voluntatem.
Is it credible that the Angels whose ministry it is to declare the will of
the Father, will have us to subject our selves to any but to him, whose will
they announce?

Epiphanius in the heresy of the Collyridians, which is the seventy ninth,
does severely rebuke some women that offered Cakes unto the Virgin Mary calling
her Queen of heaven, the same title which the idolatrous Jews gave to an Idol
(as we read Jer. 44.) and which the Roman Church gives to the Virgin Mary. The
Cardinal, page 1017. says that those women worshipped the Virgin Mary with the
adoration of latria, which is the honor due to God alone, and offered her
sacrifices, which the Roman Church does not. Although it be not like, that
Christians ever believed that a woman whom they knew to have been both born and
dead, was the sovereign God, or equal unto God. Nevertheless supposing a thing
so unlike to be true, yet Epiphanius chiding those women, takes thence occasion
to say such things as evidently condemn that which is done in these days in
the Roman Church: for by teaching how, and how far it is lawful to honor the
holy Virgin, he condemns all them that transgress those limits. These are his
words, (...), etc. (...). etc.
Certainly the body of Mary was holy, but she was not God: Certainly the Virgin
was a Virgin, and honorable; but she was not given to be worshipped, but she
worshippeth him that was begotten of her flesh. And a little after, Let Mary be
honored, but let the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost be worshipped.
Let no body adore Mary, I say not a woman, but not a man neither. Unto God that
mystery is due, the Angels themselves are not capable of that honor; placing
the Angels above the holy Virgin. Yea, he goes so far, that to repress that
abuse, he speaks of the holy Virgin in terms which border upon contempt. (...);
etc. (...).
If (says he) God permits not the very Angels to be worshipped, h^w much
less should he have permitted, that such an honor should have been deferred to
Anne's daughter, which was given by Joakim to Anne, but was not otherwise
begotten, but after the nature of men? He does especially condemn that title o^
Queen of heaven. (...).
Let Jeremiah (says he) repress those simple women. Let them trouble the earth
no more, Let them say no more, We honor the Queen of heaven.

As for Hierom, we have brought many very express testimonies out of his books,
whereby he declares his opinion, that the Saints, neither hear nor see humane
things.

In his fourth book upon the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 14. he speaks thus, Quod si
in aliquo fiducia est, in solo Deo confidamus: Maledictus enim homo qui spem
habet in homine, quamvis sancti sint, quamvis Prophetae.
If there be confidence [to be put] in any* let us put our confidence in God,
for cursed is the man that puts his trust in man, though they be Saints, though
they be Prophets. And in the Comment upon the Proverbs, which is put among his
works, lib. 1. cap. 2. Nullum invocare id est in nos orando vocare, nisi unum
Deu^ debemus.
We ought not to invocate, that is, call any toward us by prayers but God
alone.

Vigilantius accused some superstitious persons, who in his time worshipped the
Martyrs and their relics. Against him Hierom writes thus, according to his
wonted meekness, Thou mad-headed fellow, who ever worshipped the Martyrs? who
ever believed that a man was God? And in his Epistle to Riparius, Nos autem non
dico Martyrum reliquias, sed ne Solemn quidem and Lunam, non Angelos and
Archangelos, etc. omne nomen quod nominatur in praesenti saeculo and in futuro
colimus and adoramus.
As for us, we neither serve nor worship, I say not the relics of the Martyrs,
but not the Sun himself, nor the Moon, nor the Angels, and Archangels, nor the
Cherubims and Seraphims, nor any name which is named in this present age, and
in that which is to come. For fear that we should rather serve the creature
then the Creator, who is blessed for evermore. It is observable, that according
to Hieroms opinion, if the Martyrs and their relics were to be adored, the Sun
much rather ought to be adored, which nevertheless the Roman Church worshippeth
not, but adoreth the bones and relics of the Saints, with a furious devotion.

There is a place of Hierom toward the end of the Epitaph of Paula, which the
Cardinal has never done alleging. Where he speaks thus to Paula, Vale O
Paula, and cultoris tui extremam senectutem orationibus juva. Fides and opera
tua te Christo consociant. Praesens facilius quod postulas impetrabis.
Fare well Paula! help with thy prayers the extreme old age of thine honourer.
Thy faith and thy works associate thee with Christ. Being present thou shall
more easily obtain what thou ask. But it is easy to see that it is a
rhetorical Apostrophe, whereby he speaks to Paula, and commends himself to her,
as if she were living still, and near death, for we bid not them farewell that
are already in Paradise, but them that are near their departure, and these
words in the future, thou shall obtain what thou ask, show that he speaks of
the prayer which Paula was not yet in case to make, but which she should make
afterward.

M. du Perron in chap. 4. of the Treatise of the invocation of Saints,
falsifies a place of Gregory Nazianzen in the funeral Oration upon Basil, and
he makes Gregory to speak thus to Basil. But thou, O divine head, look upon us
yet from heaven, and command that Satan's sting which was given us to afflict us
may be removed. There is in the Greek (...), etc.
Stop by thine intercession that thorn in the flesh, which was given us by God.
He gives not to Basil the power of commanding, as the Cardinal translateth.

We must also remember, that this Gregory was the first of the Fathers, in
whose writings some prayers to the Saints are found, yet mingled with doubting
whether the Saints hear them, as we showed before. Now he writ about the year
of the Lord 380.

The Cardinal musters up with great noise, testimonies out of Theodoret in the
book of the affections of the Grecians, and out of Gregory of Nyssa in the
Oration upon the Martyr Theodorus, and out of Cyrillus in his mystagogical
Catecheses, and some verses of Prudentius and Paulinus. I might answer, that it
is doubtful whether that book be Theodorets, seeing that Photius in his
Library, and Nicephorus in the Ecclesiastical history, book 14. chap. 54.
making the enumeration of the works of Theodoret, speak not of that book.

I might say also, that the loose and lank style of the Oration upon the Martyr
Theodorus, differs very much from that of Gregory of Nyssa, which is nervous
and elaborate; and that the narrative of the martyrdom of Theodorus is
manifestly fabulous. There it is said, that this Theodorus was Jobs
countryman, that is, an Arabian, or Idumean, and was a common soldier in
Dioclesians time. Being accused of being a Christian, he answers with words
of contempt, comparing the Goddess which the Judges worshipped, to a Hare or a
Sow. That was enough to send him to the execution, in a time when whole Cities
were extermined for religion, and thousands of people were massacred without
any form of justice. Yet the Judges flatter him, and send him back, and allow
him time to think upon it. He instead of withdrawing himself, sets the Temple
of the mother of Gods on fire. Being brought back to the judgment seat, The
Judges instead of punishing him for a crime, among the Pagans unpardonable,
give him fair words, and promise that common soldier to make him an High
Priest. He upon that, falls to loud laughter, and begins to abuse the
Emperors, who took upon them the title and the purple of High Priests. The
Angels sing melodiously with him in prison, and make processions with torches
over all the Town. All that looks like a fable, and has much of the style of
Legends.

I could say also that the five mystagogical Catecheses, ascribed to Cyrillus
of Jerusalem, are none of his. Their style is far more concise then that of the
eighteen other Catecheses. In the first Catechesis the Author disswadeth the
people from frequenting the Hippodrom; but there was no Hippodrom in Jerusalem.
In the whole Roman Empire there was none but in the capital Cities of the
Empire, as Rome, Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, and some few Towns where
the Roman Legions wintered. In the same place he dehorteth the people from
beholding the hunting and killing of beasts in the Amphitheatre. But there was
no Amphitheatre at Jerusalem.

I could say also that Poets are no good Judges in points of faith, that they
allow much license to themselves, and that if they were not liars, they should
not be Poets. But let us grant that all these books are true and none spurious,
and that these Poets have used no fiction. Yet these Authors were men subject
to fail, and though we had no word of God, which is the only rule of our faith,
yet the Fathers of the three first Ages, and of the greatest part of the
fourth, are of contrary opinion, and those Fathers that came since contradict
one another, and speak doubtfully, and will unsay what they have said, as we
have fully proved.

I will add to that I said before, an observation upon a place of Epiphanius,
haeres. 75. which the Cardinal corrupts with a notorious depravation. He
makes Epiphanius to say, that in the commemoration which we make of the dead,
we mention the just, to distinguish them from Christ. And these just he will
have to be those Saints that are invocated and desired to pray for us; Which is
not done unto Christ, for the Roman Church prays not to Christ to pray for
us; Their Letany of the Saints says, Sancte Petre ora pro nobis, Sancte
Gregori ora pro nobis: But to Christ it says, Christ audi nos. Fili Redemptor
miserere nobis, as devesting him of the Office of intercessor making request
for us. The Jesuit Salmeron says this plainly in the eighth Dispute upon the
second chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy,. deinde non dicunt Christ ora
pro nobis, ne videantur cum Nestorio duas in Christo constituere personas.
The Catholics say not, Christ pray for us, lest they should seem to put two
persons in Christ, as Nestorius does. Again, Invocamus eum ut Deum and non ut
hominem.
We invocate Christ as God, not as man: that is, as Judge, not as Mediator.
For the Roman Church holds that he is not Mediator, as he is man.

But to return to the Cardinal, I say that he is mistaken, if he think that by
those just, Epiphanius understands the Saints, that are invocated, for he
speaks of the just and faithful which are prayed for, as it appears by these
words which follow, (...), the prayer made for them does them good. And that
which M. du Perron presupposes in this place is false, that in the time of
Epiphanius the Saints were invocated in the public service.

I will conclude by the confessions of our Adversaries. Martin Perez, a famous
Doctor among them, speaks thus, Martin. Perez. part. 3. Consid. 7. de cultu
Sanctorum. Quod ante Cornelium Martyrem nulla extat mentio (quod ego viderim)
invocationis and intercessionis sanctorum in causa forte fuit modestia and
humilitas Apostolica. Quid enim dicerent qui eos haec dicentes audirent nisi
quod de se magna pollicerentur, and se quasi Deos facerent.
That before the Martyr Cornelius no mention is found of the invocation and
intercession of Saints (at least for any thing that I could see) perhaps the
humility and modesty of the Apostles has been the cause of it. For what might
have been the conceit of those that heard them say so much, (namely that the
Saints must be invocated) but that they did promise great things of themselves,
and made almost Gods of themselves? Then he adds, Ibid. Eos intentos fuisse
praedicationi Evangelii and aliarum rerum quae magis ad substantiam salutis
attinebant.
They were diligently employed about the preaching of the Gospel, and about
other things which concern more the substance of salvation. This Cornelius dyed
the 250. year of the Lord. Wherefore this Doctor might have added 125. or 130.
years more. For we have showed that before the year of the Lord 375. no trace
of the invocation of Saints is found in the Fathers. Which M. du Perron has
freely acknowledged.

The Jesuit Salmeron in the seventh Dispute upon 1 Timothy 2. Sect. Sed cum.
finding no abettours in Scripture for the invocation of Saints, defends
himself thus, Seeing that before Christ's coming, the entry into heaven was not
yet open, and the godly were detained in the Limbus, and were not perfect in
holiness or felicity; hence it comes that few testimonies of just truth are
found. The Gospels also describe the life and passion of Christ, and because in
that time they were not yet happy, therefore nothing express to that purpose is
found, as also nothing about that is found in Paul's Epistles, nor in the
Canonical Epistles, which have been written for other ends. Only he goes about
to prove by the Revelation, that the Saints pray for us: A thing which we do
not deny.

In the same place, Sect. Nec obstat.
In the Old Law, and in the New Testament no command is found of calling upon
the Saints.

The Jesuit Peter Cotton in the first book of the Catholic institution, chap.
16. As for a command of praying and invocating the Saints, the Church never
taught that there was any, but as far as we are all commanded to obey the
Church. He acknowledges that God did not command the invocation of Saints, but
that the Roman Church commands it, which must be obeyed. But God has not
commanded us to obey the Roman Church more then the Greek or Syrian. And these
words, Tell it unto the Church, etc. Matthew 18. speak not of the judgment of
the Universal Church about the doctrine: but of the authority of the Pastors of
a particular Church, to compound quarrels between two brothers.

CHAP. 13. What honor is due to Angels and deceased Saints, and of the worship
of dulia and latria.
THE ordinary distinctions of our Adversaries in this point are, that the
Saints are Mediators of intercession, not of redemption; and that unto them we
must not defer the worship of latria, which they affirm to belong unto God
alone; but that they must be worshipped with the worship of dulia, which is an
inferior worship, and a relative religion, as the Cardinal calls it. In all
his Treatise of the Invocation of Saints, he deferreth no other service of
religion to the Saints, but to beseech them that they would pray for us;
Wherein he seems to be ashamed of the belief of his Church, which goes far
beyond that: For they ask salvation of God, not only by the intercession of the
Saints, but also by their merits. It is the ordinary prayer in the Mass, Quorum
meritis precibusque rogamus ut in omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur auxilio.
where the Priest asks Gods help and protection by the prayers and merits of
the Saints, as if the Saints by their good works had merited salvation for us.
And which is more, the Roman Church believes that the sufferings of the Saints
are satisfactory for others, and that the Pope lays up the overplus of their
satisfactions and labors unto the Churches Treasure (whereof himself keeps the
keys,) and distributes it into others by his Indulgences. Being thus made to
pay for us, they are made in some sort our Redeemers, as Non erit absurdum si
sancti viri redemptores nostri aliquo modo, id est, secundum aliquid, non
simpliciter, and largo modo, non in rigore verborum, esse dicantur.
Bellarmin does acknowledge it in the fourth chapter of the first book of
Indulgences. Wherefore they that pray to the Saints, content not themselves to
beseech them to pray for us, but they ask of them to be healed from sicknesses.
Vows and offerings are made unto them, to obtain of them the success of some
voyage, or important business. The Hymn of the Virgin Mary which is commonly
and publicly used, has these words, Maria matter gratiae, Matter misericordiae,
Tu nos ab host protege, Et hora mortis suscipe.
Mary Mother of grace, Mother of mercy, be thou our protection against the
enemy, and receive us in the hour of death. That is not praying, that she pray
for us.

The Offices attributed to the Saints testify the same. For one that believes
that the Saints do us no other good, but to pray for us, will not address
himself to St. Nicholas, rather then to another Saint, to have a good wind upon
the Sea, seeing that any other Saint might ask that of God as well as he. But
they believe that St. Nicholas can appease the Sea, and give a happy
navigation. And the title of Queen of heaven, attributed to the Virgin Mary,
ascribes to her the power of commanding which is much more then praying for us*
The Ancients recommended the reading of the Psalms unto the people. And Hierom
in the Epistle to Laeta, advises her to make her daughter Paula to read them.
But now instead of the Psalms, they give to simple women the Hours of the
Virgin Mary, of which no mention is made in Antiquity. Then the adoration of
the relics of the Saints is performed with so much fervor by the people, that
the service done to God, is cold in comparison. Of which Ludovicus Vives
complains in his Annotations upon book 8. of the City of God, chap. 27. Multi
Christiani in re bona plerumque peccant quod Divos Divasque non aliter
venerantur quam Deum: Nec video in multis quod sit discrimen inter eorum
opinionem de sanctis and id quod Gentiles putabant de suis Diis.
Many Christians do often sin in a good thing, venerating Saints of both sexes,
no otherwise then they serve God himself. Neither do I see in many of them,
what difference there is between their opinion concerning the Saints, and that
which the Pagans held of their Gods. It is clear, that they that vow themselves
unto Saints, or make unto them vows and promises to make pilgrimages to their
shrines, or to pay them offerings, do more then to pray to the Saints, that
they would pray to God for them.

Then to come to that title of Mediators of intercession, which is given to
the Saints, the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 2.5. acknowledges but one Mediator
between God and men, (...).
There is one God, and one Meditour between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
If upon the word Mediator it is lawful to make distinctions between one
Mediator of Redemption, and the other of Intercession, one may use the same
license upon the name of God, and so make many Gods. But that distinction of
two sorts of Mediator, ought to be found in the word of God, not forged in
ones brains: And it is forged without reason: For we call him a Mediator of
intercession, that receives our requests, and presents them unto God. To do so
much, he must hear our prayers, and know our heart: Which we have showed to be
impossible unto the deceased Saints.

Some petty Sophists will have it translated, there is one God, not there is
one only God, as the French Geneva Bible has it; and there is one Mediator,
not there is one only Mediator. But that man is deeply ignorant, that knows
not that (...) in Greek and unus in Latin signify unicus, one only, and not
many. The French version of the Doctors of Lovain, approved by the Jesuits,
expound it so, 1 Timothy 3.2. there is in the vulgar version Oportet Episcopum
esse unius uxoris virum: The Lovain Doctors expound, Il faut que l' Euesque
soit mari dune seule femme, The Bishop must be the husband of one only wife.
And 1 Cor. 12.11. There is in the vulgar version, Haec omnia operatur unus
atque idem spiritus, where the same Doctors translate (...).
One only and the same spirit does all these things. And Ephesians. 4.5. these words
unum corpus, unus Spiritus, unus Dominus, una fides, unum baptisma, are thus
translated in the same version. There is but one body, and one Spirit, There is
but one Lord, one faith, one Baptism: We may then translate here in the same
manner, There is but one God, and but one Mediator.

The words of the Apostle are very considerable, for he says, there is one
only God, and one only Mediator betwteen God and men. This word between
shows evidently that he speaks of a Mediator of intercession. For it would
be improperly spoken to say, that Christ is Redeemer between God and men. Yet
that one might not think that Christ intercedeth only by prayer for us toward
his Father, the Apostle adds, that he gave himself a ransom for all.

Which two sorts of being a Mediator toward God, who so will seriously
consider, shall find that in Christ they are one and the same thing: For even
in this Christ intercedes for us that he satisfies for us, and that God in
consideration of his death receives us to mercy, and accepts our prayers. So
much we learn of St. John, 1 John 2.1. and 2. We have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, This word Advocate is as good as a
Mediator of intercession. But that one may know wherein that intercession
consists, he adds, And he is the propitiation for our sins: Then his
mediation of intercession consists in his being the propitiation for our
sins, which is the mediation of redemption.

The Mosaiel Law brings us to that; For under the Law the High Priest, a figure
of Christ, was typically a Mediator both of intercession and redemption, and
there was no other ordinary Mediator of intercession.

The whole Gospel brings us to that; Christ says John 14. I am the way, the
truth and the life; None comes to the Father, but by me. And Romans 5.17. They
shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. It is the privilege of children, that
they need no Mediator to speak to their Father. Having the Son of God for our
Mediator of intercession (for St. Paul says, Romans 8.34. that he makes
intercession for us) we have no need of any other recommendation with God.
Though thou should be the unworthiest man of the world, yet when God calls
thee, thou must go straight to him: Now God calls us, saying, Come unto me all
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matthew. 11.28. Call
upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, Psalm. 50.15.

It will not serve to say, that God in his word, will have the living to pray
for one another, and that God sends Jobs friends to his intercession to obtain
their pardon: For the prayer of the living for us, has nothing common with the
invocation of the deceased Saints. When we commend our selves to the prayers of
our friends, we yield no religious service to them, and bow not the knee before
them in the Church: We acknowledge them not as searchers of hearts, or
Mediators between God and men; And that prayer is a mutual and reciprocal
office between us, which is not between us and the Saints. In a word God
commanded us to pray for one another, but commanded us not to pray to the
Saints. To them who instead of addressing themselves to the living, call upon
the dead, the reprehension of Isaiah belongs; whereby* he rebukes those that
go Isa. 8.19
for the living to the dead.

Some texts are found in Scripture, where God declares that he bestows some
grace upon his Church, or upon some private persons in consideration of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, etc. But the Church did not therefore call upon
Abraham, or Isaac, etc. Neither must we believe, that God granted these graces
by reason of Abraham's merits, but in consideration of his promise, and of his
Covenant contracted with Abraham or David, as it is said, 2 Chronicles. 21.7. The
Lord because of the Covenant which he had made with David, would not destroy
the house of David. See Luke 1.55. and 72, and 73. and Deuteronomy. 7.8 So Austin in
the book of questions upon Exodus in the one hundred and fifty question. God
said that he accomplished that which he had sworn unto their Fathers; Thereby
showing that he does it, because he promised it to those righteous Fathers; not
because these were worthy of it.

That Father is very pregnant upon that matter in the twenty second Treatise
upon John. It is that which thy Savior says, Non est quo eas nisi ad me, non
est qua eas nisi per me.
Thou know not whither to go but to me, thou can not go but by me. We must
then neither go to the Saints, nor by the Saints: And in the last chapter of
the ninth book of the City of God, Medios non esse ad immortalitatem
beatudinemque perducendis mortalibus.
Knowing that these immortal and blessed persons, who yet are made and created,
are not means to bring mortal men to immortality and blessedness. And in the
eighth chapter of the second book against the Epistle of Parmenian, Homines
omnes Christiani invicem se commendant orationibus suis. Pro quo autem nullus
interpellat, sed ipse pro omnibus, hic unus verusque Mediator est, etc. Nam si
esset Mediator Paulus, essent utique and caeteri coapostoli ejus, etc.
All Christians recommend themselves mutually unto God by their prayers, but he
for whom no body prays, but who prays for all, he is the only and true
Mediator. And a little after, If Paul were Mediator, so should also the other
Apostles be. And St. Paul himself had been mistaken when he said, that there
was but one God, and one Mediator. Note, that he speaks formally of a
Mediator of intercession, without speaking of redemption, for he is disputing
against Parmenian, who had called the Bishop the Mediator between God and men.
And upon Psalm. 108. Oration quae non sit per Christum, non solum non potest
delere peccatum sed etiam ipsa fit peccatum.
The prayer which is not made by Jesus Christ, not only cannot blot out sin,
but it self also is sin. See also Austins first Treatise upon the first Epistle
of St. John.

It remains that we say something of that distinction of dulia and latria. The
Cardinal says, that latria belongs to God alone. He leaves then dulia to the
Saints. They are Greek words which the people understand not. And that
distinction is used by Austin in book 20. against Faustus Manichean, chapter 21.
and in the questions upon Genesis, book 1. chapter 61.

But now they take that distinction in another sense then that of Austin. For
these two words both latria and dulia are sometimes taken in a religious sense,
and signify a religious service: sometimes in a civil sense, and signify that
civil service, honor and obedience which we owe to our superiors on earth, to
which Gods ordinance has subjected us. The word latria is taken in a civil
sense, Deuteronomy. 28.48. (...), Thou shall serve [or do latria] to thine enemies.
And so in Phocylides Phocyl. (...).
(...) signifies serving the time. Whence also (...) signifies a
maidservant. On the contrary dulia signifies often the service that is due to
God alone. As 1 Samuel 7.3. (...), Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve
him [or render dulia to him] only. And Judge. 2.7. (...), and the people yielded
dulia unto the Lord, that is, they served the Lord. And Romans 12.11. (...);
yielding dulia to the Lord, that is, serving the Lord. And Matthew. 6.24. (...),
You cannot do dulia, or service unto God, and unto Mammon. See Acts 20.19. Romans
7.25. Ephesians. 6.7. Col. 3.14. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. By all these it appears, that the word
Dulia which our Adversaries reserve for the service, which is done to the
Saints, is the word used in Scripture, for the service and adoration which is
due unto God.

The Apostle Gal. 4.8. representing to the Galatians their condition, before
they were converted unto God, tells them (...). Ye did dulia, or service to
them, which by nature are no Gods. Where although he speaks of the Gods of the
Pagans, yet by speaking thus, he gives it for a rule, that dulia must be
yielded to none but God.

Suidas an excellent Greek Grammarian expounds thus the word Latria, (...),
latria is a dulia or service for wages, making latria to be a kind of dulia.

The Arrians worshipping Christ, whom yet they said to be a created God, were
called Idolaters by the Orthodox Christians. They might have used that shift to
say, We worship Christ with the service of dulia only, but as for latria we
reserve it to the sovereign God. But that distinction in matter of divine
service and adoration was not yet invented. For as the ancient Church had but
one sort of religion, they had also but one sort of adoration and religious
service.

Austin from whom that distinction is borrowed, is clear on our side: For he
calls dulia, the service done to God. In the book of questions upon Exodus, qu.
94. Dulia debetur Deo tanquam Domino, Latria vero non nisi Deo tanquam Deo.
Dulia (says he) is due unto God, as to our Master, and latria is due unto
God, as to our God. But when dulia is taken for a civil service, or for a
reverence or subjection of a servant to his Master without a religious service,
August. Qu. 66. in Leviticum. Servire hominibus [servitute] qua servi serviu^t,
quod non (...), Scriptura non prohibet.
then Austin holds that dulia is deferred unto living men, and to Masters to
whom we owe honor, as also to the deceased Saints whose memory we honor. But
he says not, that this dulia consists in the invocation of the Saints, or in
deferring any religious service unto them. Besides, if that distinction must
have place, it must be taken from the Greek Authors, not from Austin, who in
many places confesses his little knowledge of the Greek tongue: As in the
second book against the letters of Petilianus, chap. 38. Ego quidem Graecae
linguae perparum assecutus sum and prope nihil.
I have (says he) got very little skill in the Greek tongue, and almost none
at all.

Theodoret in the Epitome of the divine doctrines in the chapter of the Holy
Ghost, proves that the Holy Ghost is not a creature, because dulia is deferred
unto him. Christ (says he) having abolished the adoration of the creature, did
not command again that a created nature should be adored. (...).
For it would be one of the most absurd things of the world, to draw men away
from them that are no Gods, and to bring them to yield dulia to the creature.

Yea whosoever has some reasonable measure of knowledge in the Greek tongue,
knows that dulia is a greater service then latria; For latria is a service of
reverence and obedience, but dulia imports a subjection of slaves.

As for that relative religion which is deferred unto the Saints by the
Cardinal, besides the impiety of forging two Religions in the Christian
Religion, the one absolute, the other relative; there is want of common sense
in it, for the religion toward God is also relative, and relates unto God. Let
any equitable person judge whether the people worshipping the Virgin Mary, and
the Saints, and their relics, understand these distinctions of latria, dulia,
and hyperdulia, which are dust cast into the eyes of the ignorant multitude to
blind them. For what is the reason that those Gentlemen will not speak to the
people in their mothers tongue.

CHAP. 14. Of the Legends of Saints.
THE ancient Church made an anniversary commemoration of the sufferings of
Martyrs. That laudable custom gave occasion to the compiling of the Legends of
Saints, which is stuffed with ridiculous fables. Of which when his Majesty of
Great Britain complains, Page 972.
M. du Perron instead of excusing these Legends, does expatiate his eloquence
upon the praise of the ancient Lessons of the Martyrs, which lessons were in
nothing like to the Legends of the Roman Church. He was not bold enough to
excuse those Legends so superlative in absurdity. Only he says that the Roman
Church believes not those lessons with a Theological faith, like the
Scripture. For who can bear with the Legends that say, that St. Macarius did
penance six months together, for killing a gnat? That St. Mary the Egyptian
having no money to pay the Watermens fare, offered to pay it with her body?
That St. Francis preached unto the Birds, took up Lice fallen from his garment,
and made to himself a wife of snow? That an Ass worshipped the Host presented
to him by St. Anthony of Padua? And that Bees built a Chapel of wax to that
Host? And a thousand of the like course fables wherewith the windows and walls
of Churches are painted all over, and which have been for many ages, and are
still the subject of Sermons. These tales are so unsavory, that L. 11. c. 6.
Dolenter dico potius quam contumeliose: multo hon^stius a Laer, ^o vitas
Philosophorum scriptas quam a Christianis vitus sanctorum.
Melchior Canus, a Spanish Bishop says, that the lives of Philosophers were
written with more gravity by Diogenes Laertius, then the lives of Saints by the
Christians.

The Cardinal slideth smoothly upon this foul matter, and chooses rather not to
answer, then to undertake the defense of suh a gross abuse.

But that it may appear that we are not they only that complain of this abuse,
let us hear how Cassander a famous Doctor among our Adversaries, expostulates
about it. Some men of great note have affirmed that the promise of Ahasuerus to
Hester to give her the half of his kingdom was fulfilled in Mary, to which God
(say they) has transferred the half of his kingdom, which is made up of
justice and mercy, having retained the one half for himself. Hence come these
titles commonly given to the Virgin, of Queen of heaven, Mother of mercy, our
life, our hope, etc. What shall I say, that a whole Psalter is found, from
which the name of God was put out, and the Virgins name put in the place? Yea,
they are come so far, that Christ who now reigns in heaven, is subjected unto
his Mother, as it is sung in some Churches. Ora patrem, jube natum:
Again,
O felix puerpera,
Nostra pians scelera,
Jure Matris impera
Redemptori
that is, Pray to the Father, command the Son:
Again,
O bessed Mother,
Which do expiate our crimes,
Command by right of Mother,
our Redeemer.


Observe by the way the language of this Cardinal, who will have us to believe
those Legends with a faith not theological. He gave us above an absolute faith,
and a relative faith: Now he coyneth a Theological faith, and a faith not
Theological, whereby one believes without Theology, that is without religion,
and without thinking of God. But the Apostle tells us, that there is but one
faith. Ephesians. 4.5.

CHAP. 15. Of the Psalter attributed to Saint Bonaventure.
HIS Majesty of Great Britain could not dissemble the injury done unto God by
a Psalter made at the imitation of David's Psalms, where the name of God is
taken away, and the name of the Virgin put in his place. The 131. Psalm begins
thus, Memento Domina David, and omnium invocantium nomen tuum.
O our Lady remember David, and all that call upon thy name. As if David had
called upon the Virgin Mary. In Psalm. 109. The Lord said unto our Lady, sit
thou at my right hand, etc. In Psalm. 90. (which with us is the 91.) instead of
the first words, He that dwells in the secret place of the most high, they
have put, He that dwells in the secret place of the Mother of God, etc. And
in the one hundred twenty ninth Psalm, Out of the depths I have cried unto thee
our Lady, Lady hear my voice.

Page 974.
M. du Perron answers three things; first that St. Bonaventure is not the
Author of that Psalter: Yet Bellarmin in his Apology against his Majesty,
acknowledges that Psalter to be of Bonaventure, as indeed it never had any
other title: An. 1601. a Paris chez Claude Chappelet. rue S. Jaques a la
Licorne.
Of late it was printed at Paris with that name, and translated into French,
with approbation of the Sorbon.

In the seond place he says, that the Church is not obliged to answer for all
that private persons do. But because he sees this Psalter to be universally
recieved and approved in the Roman Church, and that Cardinal Bellarmin has
written in the defense of the same, Page 975.
he excuses it, and says, that the transporting of the Psalms to the Virgin,
may have a sense conformable to many places of Scripture, where God ascribes
unto his Saints, that which is said of him.

I answer, that Scripture expounds it self whenever it speaks so, either in
the same place, or somewhere else, so that one cannot be deceived in it.
Christ's disciples are called by himself the light of the world, Matthew. 5. But
he teaches us why they are so called, saying of John the Baptist, He was not
the light, but he was come to bear witness unto the light, John 1. David, Psalm.
82. says unto the Judges and Magistrates, I have said you are Gods: But in the
same place he says, but you shall dye like men. Such expositions are not found
in that Psalter of Bonaventure. Besides, God speaks as it pleases him, and we
may speak after him. But hence it follows not, that by our own authority
without any warrant from the word of God, we may transport unto the creature
the prayers which are addressed unto God in his word. And our Adversaries
acknowledge that David's Psalms are a service of Latria, and a sovereign
adoration, which David presented unto God, and which by consequent is
incommunicable unto the creature. Who could abide him that would transport the
Lords Prayer unto the creature: saying, Our Lady which art in heaven, Hallowed
be thy name, etc.

The like Psalter divided into fifteen Questions was printed at Paris, with
approbation of the Faculty of Divinity, in the year 1601. and many times since,
sold by Nicholas du Fosse in St. James street at the sign of the golden plate.
Rue S. Jaques au raze d'or.
There the Virgin is called the inventrix of grace, the first cause of our
salvation, who has made the King of heaven in love with her, and she that must
in the day of judgment moderate the sentence of the Judge. She is called in
the Hours, Rosaries, and Letanies, the Mother of mercy, the Lady of the world,
the gate of Paradise. And a Hymn, which is sung upon All Saints day, says that
Christ redemptor gentium, Conserva tuos famulos, Beatae semper Virginis,
Placatus sanctis precibus.
she appeaseth the wrath of Christ.

How abominable are the words of Gabriel Biel in the eight lesson upon the
Canon of the Mass, where he says that God has divided his Kingdom equally
with the Virgin Mary, having reserved justice to himself, and left mercy unto
her. And those of the Jesuit Barrad. in Concordiam Evangel. Tom. 1. l. 6. cap.
11. Fortassis Domine ne tuae coelesti Curia veniret in dubium cui potius
occurreret, tibi Domino suo an ipsi Domina suae.
Barradius who (after Anselmus) makes this question unto Christ, why, when he
went up to heaven, he did not carry up his Mother with him? And he frames this
answer for Christ; Perhaps, Lord, thou did fear, lest the Court of heaven
should doubt which of the two they should first meet, either thee as their
Lord, or her as their Lady.

Such also are the words of Martinus Perezius, Martin. Perez. par. 3. Consil.
7. de cultu Sanctorum.
that the Blessed Virgin being ascended up on high, gave gifts unto men.

And those of the Jesuit Salmeron, who in the seventh disputation upon the
second chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy, upon the question, Sect. Si
autem.
whether it b^ better done to pray to God by Christ alone, or to pray to him by
the Saints! answers, Oration fusa per sanctos melior est. The prayer made by
the Saints is the best.

In the same place Qui diceret, Pater noster, ad sanctorum honorem been faceret.
he approves, saying, Our Father which art in heaven, in the honor of the
Saints: As also the Council of Trent, in the chapter of prayer approves those
that say before the image of St. Barbara, Our Father which art in heaven.

The ordinary excuse is, that the Virgin Mary is called the Mother of mercy,
she that has bruised the Serpents head, the gate of Paradise, and the like
expressions, because she bore him in her womb who is the cause of our
salvation, who has bruised the Serpents head, and who has opened unto us the
gate of Paradise. If that excuse be good, by the same reason one may say, that
the Holy Virgin is dead for our redemption, because she has born him who is
dead for our demption. By the same reason Sara may be called Isaac, because she
bore Isaac: and Eve may be called Abel, because she bore Abel.

These men play with religion, and believe not what themselves say.

Second Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. OF IMAGES.
CHAP. I. Of Gods Images.
HOly Scripture teaches us, that God made man in his image and likeness. Men
would do as much for God, making God after their image and likeness; changing
the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man,
says the Apostle, Romans 1.23. They would represent in stone, and wood, and
colors, an infinite and incomprehensible spirit, not only in Churches, but in
the signs of Taverns; with less reason then if they represented an Angel in the
shape of a Mouse, or Alexander the great in the form of a pumpion. For between
these things, though most unequal, there is some proportion: But between God
who is infinite, and the figure of a man, there is no proportion: As the
Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 40.18.
To whom will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him?

The wisest among the Pagans have acknowledged so much. Lib. 1. Stromaton.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and De Civitate Dei, Lib. 4. cap. 31. Dicit Varro
antiquos Romanos plusquam annos 170. Deos sine simulachro coluisse. Quod si
(inquit) adhuc mansisset, castius Dii observarentur. Cujus sententiae suae
testem adhibet inter caetera etiam gentem Judaeam. Nec dubitat eum locum ita
concludere, ut dicat qui primi simulachra Deorum populis posuerunt eos
civitatibus suis and metum dempsisse and errorem addidisse.
Austin allege Varro the most learned of the Romans, who affirms that the
Ancient Romans for the space of 170. years served the Gods without images, and
that if that custom had remained, the Gods should be honored with more purity.
Of which opinion of his, he brings, among other things, the Jewish Nation for a
witness, and makes no difficulty to make this conclusion, That they that first
gave unto the people the images of the Gods, had taken the fear [of God] away,
and had increased error in their Cities; prudently esteeming, that the silly
use of images might easily bring the contempt of the Gods. Clem. Alex.
protreptico.
Clemens adds that Numa had expressly prohibited images, and that the Romans
had no other image of Mars but a spear. Origin in the 7. book against Celsus
says the same of the Persians and Lydians, and of many other Nations. Initio
libri (...).
Lucian in the Book of the Syrian Goddess, says, that in old time the Temples
of the Egyptians were without images. And Herodotus in the first Book, says
that the Persians have neither statues nor temples. Bardesanes says that among
the Seres, Indians, and Bactrians, they yield no service unto statues, as
Eusebius relates in the sixth Book of Evangelical preparation, chap 10. Strabo
in the sixteenth Book of Geography, says that Moses forbad the Jews to make
images of any thing. Cornelius Tacitus in the Book of the manners of the
Germans, says that Nec cohibent parietibus Deos nec in ullam humani oris
speciem assimilare ex magnitudine coelestium arbitrantur.
the Germans do not shut up the gods within walls, and think it not convenient
unto the greatness of the heavenly, to represent them with any likeness of
humane face.

Upon this we have Gods commandment very express, Deuteronomy. 5.8. even according to
the vulgar version, the only authorized by the Council of Trent, Non facies
tibi sculptile nec similitudinem omnium quae sunt in coelo, etc. And according
to the French version of the Doctors of Lovaine, Tu ne feras representation
taillee ne semblance, etc.
approved by the Jesuits, Thou shall not make to thy self a graven
representation, or any likeness of that which is in heaven above, nor of that
which is in earth beneath. These Doctors forced by the truth, have
acknowledged, that if Idol signify the representation of a thing which is not
(as our Adversaries will have it) they must not translate, Thou shall not make
a graven idol, for that precept prohibits to make a representation of things
that are, not of those that are not. And after they have been cavilling about
the words of image and idol, yet the word of likeness which is added, takes
away all difficulty. And that one may not doubt of the sense of this precept,
God himself expounds it in the fourth Chapter of the same Book, in the
fifteenth verse. The foresaid version of our Adversaries justifies so much,
You did not see any likeness on the day that the Lord your God spoke to you in
Horeb, from the midst of the fire; lest that perhaps, being deceived, you make
to your selves a graven resemblance, the image of male or female. Whereupon it
will be good to hear the Exposition which Theodoret gives to this commandment
in his Questions upon Deuteronomy, in the first Question, (...).
God says that, teaching them not to make any image, neither to go about to
make any image of God, seeing that they had never seen the likeness of the
Original. And a little after, He teaches them to make no image of the
invisible God. Eusebius extends himself much upon that, in the third Book of
Evangelicall preparation, chap. 10. (...), etc. (...).
How could one (says he) frame an image for God? for what likeness has the
humane body with the divine mind? Nay I think not that man's body is any thing
like his spirit, since his spirit is incorporeal, uncompounded, and without
parts. And a little after, Who would be so mad as to affirm that a statue made
after the likeness of man, can bear the form and the image of the Sovereign God?

That error of effigiating God, is not very ancient in the Roman Church. For
Baronius upon the year 726. of his Annals, relates an Epistle of Pope Gregory
the II. where the said Pope says, Cur tandem Patrem Domini Jesu non oculis
subjicimus ac pingimus? Quoniam quis sit non novimus Deique natura spectanti
proponi non potest ac pingi.
that in the Church God is not represented before men's eyes, and that the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is not drawn in colors, because Gods nature
cannot be painted out, or put in sight. But Baronius corrects that Popes
saying, and puts in the margent, that the Churches practice is otherwise now,
and that the Church thought it good to set pictures of God in Churches.

Nicephorus a new Author, for he writ about the year of Christ 1300. speaks
thus in the 18. book, chap. 53. The Armenian Heretics make the image of God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is a most absurd thing. Long before him,
Origin in the seventh book against Celsus was saying, (...).
We hold not any statues to be images of God: for we do not represent the
figure of God, who is invisible and incorporeal.

Here, as in many other points, the Fathers are wanting to our Adversaries, as
well as the Word of God. Instead of proofs, they bring excuses only, and say
that Scripture ascribes unto God hands and feet, eyes and mouth. As good as
saying, Since Scripture speaking of God uses metaphors, let us make statues.
Since Scripture speaks of God in figurate speeches, let us make the figure of
God in wood and stone: This is not speaking as men, or to men. They say also,
that God appeared unto Daniel in man's shape. But Gods actions are not rules of
Religion, but his commandments. God does what he pleases, but we must do what
he commands. Wherefore neither Daniel, nor the Church of his time, or since
his time, ever made any image of God in consequence of that apparition. It is a
new invention, of which the Romanists bethought themselves some fifteen hundred
years after Daniel.

It is to no purpose to say, that by the images of God they pretend not to
represent his essence; for no more can they with pictures represent a man's
being, no not the being of a worm: And that excuse does not dispense them from
Gods commandment, which no doubt but the Roman Church would have razed out of
the Bible, if the Hebrew Originals and the Greek Version had been in their
power, since they have put it out of the Hours and Offices which are put in the
peoples hands. For as for the Bible, it is a Book which they are forbidden to
read, as we have showed.

The shape in which they represent God the Father, is that of a Pope. They put
a Papal mantle about him, and a triple Crown upon his head, whereby the end
appears for which that abuse was coined; it is plain, that it is not to
honor God, but to honor the Pope; That the people seeing God Almighty set out
in that dress, may imagine some Godhead in the Pope. Some may be found stupid
enough to have a better opinion of God, because of his Papal attire.

CHAP. 2. Of the images of Saints.
THe same commandment of God, which forbids making any graven image, or any
likeness of things that are in heaven above, and in the earth beneath; forbids
us also to make images of creatures for a Religious use, or for the service of
God. The first table of the Law, contains the rules of Gods service: Whosoever then
for Gods service, and for a Religious use makes images of creatures, goes
against this commandment of God, Thou shall not make unto thee any graven
image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth
beneath, or in the waters under the earth; Thou shall not bow down thy self to
them, nor serve them. There God forbids two things, the one to make images for
the use of Religion; the other to bow down before them, and defer unto them a
Religious service. The same prohibition is repeated, and more expressly set
down, Levit. 26.1. Ye shall make you no idols, nor graven image, neither rear
you up a standing image; neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your
Land, to bow down unto it, for I am the Lord your God.

Vasquez lib. 2. de Adoratione Imaginum. Disput. 3. cap. 4. and Disp. 4. c. 3.
and in 3am partem Thomae Qu. 25. Disp. 104. c. 2.
Vasquez one of the prime Jesuits pressed with the evidence of the words of the
Law of God, which forbid not only to worship images, but even to make any for
the use of Religon, makes a free acknowledgement, that by this Precept God does
absolutely forbid to make any images, and to make any use of them. But he says
that the Church is not bound to keep that commandment, and that the said
prohibition is made in particular to the people of the Jews, because they were
more given to idolatry then any other Nation.

But it is an act of the highest rashness, to give unto God an intention which
he did not declare. The whole moral Law, contained in the two Tables (excepting
only part of the fourth Commandment touching the Sabbath) is nothing else, but
the Law of nature, to which all men are naturally obliged, as Irenaeus teaches
in the fourth Book, chap. 3. Wherefore also Tertullian in the Book of Idolatry,
chap. 5. and Cyprian in the third Book to Quirinus, chap. 59. allege this
Precept as made to the Christians no less then to the Jews. We learn, Col.
2.16. that Christians are no more obliged to observe Sabbaths. But as for the
Precept of making no image, to defer unto them a Religious service, we see not
that Christ or his Apostles, made any alteration in it.

It is false, that the Jews were more prone to idolatry then their neighbors,
by whom they were seduced to the service of idols, or then the Egyptians that
worshipped Onions and Beasts. And who would affirm that those Nations did not
sin against that Precept?

Or if that Commandment is only for those Nations that are most given to
idolatry, then the Jews after their return from the captivity of Babylon were
no more subject to that Precept, for ever since that time they had images in
execration. And by that reason the Roman Church shall be more subject to that
Precept then any other Church, because that Church is come to that excess of
idolatry, that they speak unto wood, and that the Doctors teach that images
must be adored with the service of latria, as we shall see hereafter.

Also if that Precept was made only for the Jews, it will follow, that when a
Jew turned Christian in the time of Christ and his Apostles, he shoke off the
yoke of that Precept, and that the Law had but nine Commandments for him.

That the Church of the Old Testament believed, that by this Precept they were
forbidden all use of images in Religion, it is evident, because there was no
image of any of the Patriarcks or Prophets, or of any Angel in the Temple, and
in the Synagogues. For the Cherubims set over the Ark, were no images of
certain Angels, but Symbols and Characters of the Angelical Office, such as the
pictures of Virtues and Vices. Besides, they were put out of the peoples sight,
so that there was no fear that the people should abuse them to idolatry. Thus
the brazen Serpent was not an image of Jesus Christ; but the saving virtue
which God set forth in that Serpent, for the healing of persons bitten by the
Serpents, was a figure of the saving virtue of Christ toward the souls
infected by the ancient Serpent, the Devil. Also God had commanded the making
of that brazen Serpent, and of those Cherubims, but he did not command the
setting up of Saints images in Temples, much less did he command that they
should be worshipped. Then the Cherubims were not images of any particular
Angel, and were not named by any proper name. Our adversaries would not suffer
in their Churches an image without a name, and the representation of an unknown
Saint.

The Jews since the captivity of Babylon, have been most Religious observers of
this Precept. Neither threatenings nor tortures could make them bow to idolatry.
Some few private men excepted, who in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes turned
Pagans. The Jews had images in such execration, that being become subject unto
the Romans, they could not so much as suffer the Roman Eagles in their
Country. In Christ's time, King Herod being fallen sick of the sickness, of which
he dyed, the Jews beat down all the Eagles which Herod had set up; that Joseph.
lib. 17. Antiq. c. 8.
Eagle among others, which was over the great gate of the Temple. The same
people raised a sedition against Pilate, because he had brought to Jerusalem
the images of the Emperor, which were joined with the military standards; For
(says Josephus) Joseph. Origin. lib. 18. c. 4. (...).
the Law has forbidden us to make images. And Pilate moved with compassion
toward that people, which held out their throats, to be slain rather then to
live and see images, commanded them to be carried away. The same Author
observes that Vitellius Governor of Syria, made his Army to pass about Judea,
not through it, for fear that the sight of those Eagles and of Caesar's images
should offend the people; which could not suffer those images, not only to be
set up in Towns, but not so much as to pass through the Country. Wherefore
also Josephus, who was a Pharisee, and professed an exact observation of the
Law, reproves Solomon for putting brazen bulls under the molten Sea in the
Temple, and Lions upon the stairs of his Throne, Joseph. lib. 18. c. 7. and
Antiq. l. 8. c. 2. (...).
for (says he) it was not lawful to do those things.

Tertullians words are worthy of an especial notice, in the fourth Book against
Marcion, chap. 22. Quomodo Petrus Heliam, and Mosem cognovisset nisi in
spiritu? Neque enim imagines eorum vel statuas populus habuisset lege
prohibente.
How could Peter know Elijah and Moses, but in the Spirit? For the people could
not have their images and statues, seeing that the Law of God prohibits them.
Baronius An. 31. Sect. 74. maintains that the woman whom Christ had healed of
her bloody flux, which set up an image unto Christ, was not Martha, Cum non
liceret ullo pacto Judaeis simulachrum cujusvis quavis occasion formare.
For (says he) it was not permitted to the Jews to make images of any person,
or for any occasion whatsoever.

That hatred of images passed from the Jewish Church to the Christian, by the
means of the Apostles and their disciples. So far that not only they were not
permitted to yield a Religious service unto images, but they were not permitted
to have them. So that the trades of Picture-drawers and Statuaries were
unlawful among the primitive Christians. Whereby the Fable about our Lady of
Lauretta, and other images which are said to have been drawn by Saint Luke,
appears to be a fable indeed. For Saint Luke being a Jew, it was not lawful
for him to exercise the Trade of Painting. And no more would the Christians
have suffered it then the Jews.

Page 18. (...), etc.
Clemens Alexandrinus in the exhortatory Oration to the Gentiles, speaks thus,
We are openly forbidden to exercise that deceitful Trade, etc. The same says,
that God has prohibited the making of any image or statue, Lib. 5. Stromaton.
(...).
for (says he) that disparageth the venerable Majesty of God. Justin Martyr in
the Dialogue against Tryphon says the same; (...).
Was it not God that commanded by Moses not to make any image at all, nor any
likeness of the things that are in heaven above, or in the earth beneath?

Hermogenes, against whom Tertullian writ, maintained that second marriages
were lawful, and he was a Painter by his Trade. For these two reasons
Tertullian inveigheth against him, and thus he handles him in the very
beginning of his Book, Praeterea pingit licite, nubit assidue, legem Dei in
libidinem defendit, in artem contemnit, bis falsarius, and cauterio and stylo.
Hermogenes gives to himself the License of Painting and of Marrying
continually. He defends the Law of God in favor of lasciviousness, and
despises it in favor of his Trade, being twice a false man, by his pencill
and by his style. Himself in the Book of idolatry, chap. 3. Artifices statuarum
and imaginum and omnis generis similitudinis diabolus saeculo intulit.
The Devil has brought the makers of Statues and Images, and all kinds of
representations into the world. And in chap. 4. God adding, Thou shall not make
any likeness of the things that are in heaven, or in the earth, or in the sea,
Toto mundo ejusmodi artibus interdixit.
has interdicted those trades over all the world unto his servants.

In those Texts, and in many more, he does not only condemn the service of
Pagan idols, but he maintains that it is not allowed by Gods Law to make any
picture or representation, and condemns the trades of Painter and Statuary,
as forbidden in Gods Law.

In the time of the Apostles Simon Magus did rise; Whose Disciples made images
both of him, and of his wife Selene, and worshipped them, as Imaginem Simonis
habent Simoniani factam ad figuram Jovis, and Selenae in figuram Minervae.
Irenaeus says in his first Book, chap. 20. and Austin in the Book of
Heresies, chap. 1.

Shortly after came the Carpocratians, otherwise called Gnostics, of whom the
same Irenaeus in the same Book speaks thus, Etiam imagines quasdam depictas,
quasdam autem de reliqua materia fabricatas habent, dicentes formam Christi
factam a Pilato.
They have some painted images, some also made with other matter, saying that
it is the figure of Christ made by Pilate. And Austin in the Book of Heresies,
chap. 7. They say that a certain Marcellina was of the sect of Carpocrates, and
served the images of Jesus, and Paul, and Pythagoras, worshipping them, and
burning incense to them. Epiphanius in the Heresy of the Carpocratians says
the same, Sect. 6.

About the year of Christ, 132. the Emperor Adrian willing to gratify the
Christians, caused Temples without images to be built for them in several
Cities; which Temples since that time were called Adrians Temples. Alexander
Severus would do the same, but he was dissuaded from it. These are the words of
Lampridius in the life of Alexander Severus, Alexander Christo templum facere
voluit; eumque inter Deos recipere, Quod and Adrianus cogitasse fertur qui
templa in omnibus civitatibus sine simulacris jusserat fieri, quae hodie
idcirco, quia non habent numina, dicuntur Adriani.
Alexander would make a Temple unto Christ, and receive him among the Gods.
Which also Adrian thought to have done, as it is reported of him: Who had
commanded that in all towns, Temples without images should be made; which
Temples for that reason are called Adrians Temples, because there are no Gods
in them. A certain proof that Christians in that age had no imagss, since
thereby their Temples were discerned from other Temples. Of those Temples that
bore (...).
Adrians name, mention is made by Epiphanius in the Heresy of the Ebionites,
and in that of Arrius, where he says that in Alexandria there was a Church
called Caesareana, which before had been a Temple of Adrian, and since had been
a place for wrestling and bodily exercise under the Emperor Licinius.

Origin in the seventh Book against Celsus, answers to Celsus, who objected
unto Christians, that (...).
they could not abide to see either Altars or Statues; and says that
Christians abstained from those things because it is said, Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God, and serve him alone, and thou shall make unto thee neither image
nor likeness of things that are in heaven. And in the eighth Book, (...).
Celsus says that we avoid the setting up of Altars, and Images, and Temples.
To which Origin answers, (...).
True images, and that which is fit to consecrate unto God, are not images made
by sordid Tradesmen, but those that are enlightened by Gods Word, and are
formed within us, which are Virtues.

Thus in the Dialogue of Minutius Felix, the Pagan Octavius asks Cur nullas
aras habent templa nulla, nulla nota simulacra?
Why Christians have no Altars, no Temples, no Images that appear? And in the
same place Quod simulacrum Deo fingam, cum si recte existimes sit Dei homo ipse
simulacrum?
What image shall I make unto God, seeing that man is the image of God?

Lactantius came soon after, who in the first Book of his institutions, says
that Hi daemones sunt qui fingere imagines and simulacra docuerunt, qui ut
hominum mentes a cultu very Dei averterent, fictos mortuorum Regum vultus and
ornatos exquisita pulchritudine statui consecrarique fecerunt.
Devils have taught to make images and statues, and that to turn men away from
the service of the true God, they caused faces of dead Kings well adorned and
set out with excellent beauty to be set up and consecrated. And in chap. 18. It
is a perverse and ill beseeming thing that the image of man be served by the
image of God. And in chap. 19. It is a thing without doubt, that there is no
Religion where there is an image.

For these causes the Eliberin Council about the year 300. of Christ, made this
order in the 36. Canon, Placuit in Ecclesiis picturas esse non debere, ne quod
colitur aut adoratur in parietibus pingatur.
It is decreed that there must be no pictures in Churches, lest that the thing
which is served and adored be painted on the walls. At which Canon the famous
Melchior Canus is chafing, and it is good sport to see how he is storming about
it, saying, Melch. Canus loc. Theol. l. 5. cap. 4. Non imprudenter modo verum
etiam impie a Concilio Eliberino lata est lex de tollendis imaginibus.
The law of taking images away was established by the Eliberin Council, not
only imprudently, but impiously also. Observe these words of the Council, It is
decreed that there must be no pictures in Churches, that one may not say that
the Council permits images and pictures, that may be removed from place to
place, and that the Fathers of the Council forbid only the drawing of pictures
upon walls, as the Jesuit Vasquez esteems in the second book of the
adoration, Disp. 5. cap. 6. Sixtus Senensis in the fifth book of his Library,
in the 247. Annotation, acknowledges that this Council has absolutely
prohibited Non est dubium quin religio nulla sit ubicunque simulacrum est.
the images in Churches: But he excuses it, saying, that this Council has
done it, because they had found no better remedy against idolatry, then to
prohibit images; which is a notable confession.

In the time of that Council, that excellent man Eusebius of Cesarea lived, of
whom all the Fathers that followed are Disciples and Prentices. In the seventh
Book of his Ecclesiastical History, chap. 18. speaking of Christ's statue in the
City of Cesarea Philippi, (...).
set up by a Pagan woman whom Christ had healed of a bloody flux, says, that
it is no wonder that Gentiles, that had received some benefit from the Lord did
such things. As we have seen also the images of his Apostles Peter and Paul,
and of Christ himself, preserved in pictures of colors, seeing that the
ancients did constantly use by an heathenish custom so to honor those whom
they held for their Saviors. Note that he says, that making images is an
heathenish custom, and by consequent, not received in the Christian Church.

The same Eusebius being desired by the Empress Constantia to send her Christ's
picture, answers, as not understanding what image she meant: Whether she
would have the immutable image of Christ, which is his Divine nature, or the
image and form of a servant, which he took for us. And he says, that neither
the one nor the other way, the image of Christ can be represented with dead and
inanimate colors, and by a shadowed picture. This is related more at large in
the seventh Universal Council assembled at Constantinople, in the year of
Christ, 754.

Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, (...).
We care not to represent the carnal faces of Saints with colors in pictures,
for we have no need of that, but to imitate their conversation with virtue.
That testimony with many more, is found in the second Council of Nice.

Soon after those three famous men came, Epiphanius, Ambrose and Hierom. The
first of them is alleged by the second Council of Nice, in these words,
Estote memores dilectissimi filii, ne in Ecclesiam imagines inferatis, neque in
Sanctorum coemeteriis eas statuatis. Sed perpetuo circumferte Deum in cordibus
vestris. Quinetaim neque in domo communi tolerentur.
Be mindful, dear children, that you bring no images into the Churches, and
that you set up none in the burying places of the Saints; but bear God in your
hearts continually: Yea let them not be suffered in your ordinary houses.

The same Epiphanius passing through a Borough of Palestina, called Anablata,
and seeing at the Church door a painted vail hanging, where the image of Christ
or some Saint was represented, he did that which himself relateh in an Epistle
of his to John of Jerusalem, Inveni ibi velum pendens in foribus ejusdem
Ecclesiae tinctum atque depictum, and habens imaginem quasi Christi vel Sancti
cujusdam, non enim satis memini cujus imago fuerit, cum ergo hoc vidissem in
Ecclesia Christi, contra authoritatem Scripturarum, hominis pendere imaginem,
scidi illud and magis dedi consilium custodibus ejusdem loci ut pauperem
mortuum eo obvolverent, etc. That Epistle is found among Hierom 's Epistle, and
was translated by Hierom.
I found (says he) a painted vail hanging at the Church door, having the image
as it were of Christ, or of some Saint, for I remember not very well whose
image it was. I then seeing a man's image hanging in Christ's Church, against the
authority of Scripture, tore that vail, and gave counsel to the keepers of the
place, that they should rather make it a winding sheet for the corpse of some
poor man. And a little after he desires the same John, that for the future a
prohibition should be made against hanging such vails in the Church of Christ,
as are contrary to Religion.

Sixtus Senensis in the fifth book of his Library, in the 247. Annotation,
says that Epiphanius did that to prevent abuse.

Vasquez in the second Book of Adoration, Disput. 5. cap. 4.
says that Epiphanius tore that vail, because the image painted in it, was the
image of some profane man. But Epiphanius declares the contrary, saying that
it was the image of Christ, or of some Saint. Alfonsus de Castro a Franciscan
Friar, deals more roundly, for he puts Epiphanius among the destroyers of
images, who are declared Heretics by the judgment of the Church of Rome.

The same Father in the 79. Heresy, which is that of the Collyridians, speaks
thus, (...).
The Devil always insinuating into men's minds with the pretense of
righteousness, deifying the mortal nature of man before the eyes of men, has
represented images made after the humane shape by several trades. They that are
worshipped are dead, but their statues which never had life, are brought to be
worshipped. He speaks against the Collyridians, who had images of the Virgin
Mary, and made offerings of cakes unto her; which he calls idolatry.

What Hierom's opinion was about images, he showed it sufficiently by the pains
he took to translate the forementioned Epistle of Epiphanius into Latin. Upon
the first of Daniel he speaks thus, Deos coli imaginem adorari dicunt, quod
utrumque servis Dei non convenit.
They say that they serve the Gods, but adore their images, neither of which is
fit for Gods servants to do.

And so Ambrose, Ambros. Epist. ad Valentinianum Imperatorem. Non vult se Deus
in lapidibus coli.
God will not be served in stones; so he calls images or statues.

Austin is excellent and pregnant upon this subject: In the first Book of the
manners of the Catholic Church, he complains of the creeping in of that
superstition among some in Africa. I know Novi multos esse sepulchrorum and
picturarum adoratores, multos qui super mortuos luxuriosissime bibunt.
(says he) that many are worshippers of tombs and pictures: I know that many
will drink with excess over the dead.

And in the first Book of the consent of the Evangelists, chap. 10. Sic omnino
errare merentur qui Christum and Apostolos ejus non in sanctis codicibus sed in
pictis parietibus quaesierunt.
So they deserve to fall into error, that would seek Christ and his Apostles,
not in the holy Scriptures, but on painted walls.

And in the 119. Epistle to Januarius, Non quia non habet imaginem Deus, sed
quia nulla ejus imago coli debet, nisi illa quae hoc est quod est ipse.
We must not serve any image of God, but that image which is that which himself
is; meaning Christ, who is one God with him.

The same upon the 113. Psalm. in the second Sermon, speaking of that which is
said in the Psalm, that the images of the Gentiles have eyes and see not,
says, that the Church indeed has vessels, but it may not be said of them that
they have eyes and see not. Then he adds, Illa causa est maxima impietatis
insanae quod plus valet in affectibus miserorum similis viventi forma quae sibi
efficit supplicari, quam quod jam manifestum est non esse viventem ut debeat a
vivente contemni. Plus enim valent simulacra ad curvandam infelicem animam,
quod os habent oculos, etc. quam ad corrigendam quod non loquentur non
videbunt, etc.
The principal cause of that frantic impiety is, that the figure like to a
living man, which makes the people to bow the knee to it, has more strength
over the affections of miserable men, then the evident certainty that it is not
living, is powerful to make it contemned by the living. For images have more
force to bow a miserable soul, because they have a mouth, eyes, ears, nostrils,
hands and feet; then they have to correct her, because they speak not, they see
not, they hear not, and smell not. How ill would it have become Austin to
upbraid the Pagans, that their images have eyes and ears without either seeing
or hearing, if Christians had had images, of which the Pagans could have said
as much? Can any deny but that one may say of the images of the Saints, that
which David says of the images of Pagans, They have eyes and see not, they
have a mouth and speak not: But Austin found nothing in the Christian Church,
that the Pagans might object unto him, but the vessels of the Church, as the
tables, cups, plates, books: of which Austin says, that one needs not fear
that they be abused to idolatry, because they have neither eyes nor ears, nor
any likeness of humane shape.

The same Doctor in the 49. Epistle to Deo gratias, Et idola quidem omni sensu
carere quis dubitat? Verumtamen cum his locantur sedibus honorabili sublimitate
ut a precantibus immolantibusque attendantur, ipsa similitudine animatorum
membrorum atque sensuum quamvis insensata atque exanima afficiunt infirmos
animos, ut vivere ac spirare videantur accedente praesertim veneratione
multitudinis.
Who makes a doubt (says he) that idols are destitute of sense? Yet when they
are set up in such places, in an honorable height, that they may be looked upon
by those that pray and sacrifice; by the resemblance of animate members and
senses, though they have neither soul nor sense, they work upon the souls of
the infirm, so that it seems to them that they are both living and breathing,
especially when one sees the multitude to yield veneration unto them.
Particularly, of the images of God the Father, who is represented sitting in a
chair, he speaks thus in the seventh Chapter of the Book of the Faith, and of
the Symbol, Tale simulacrum Deo nefas est in templo collocare. It is not lawful
for a Christian to set up such an image in the Church: For (says he) it is
falling into the sacrilege of those whom the Apostle has in execration, who
have changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into the likeness of a
corruptible man.

The second Council of Nice alleges a testimony of Theodorus Bishop of
Ancyra, who lived in the 400. year of Christ, Sanctorum formas and species in
materialibus coloribus formari minime decorum putamus. Horum autem virtutes
quae per scripta traditae sunt veluti vinas quasdam imagines reficere subinde
oportet. Ex his enim ad similium imitationem and zelum pervenire possumus.
Dicant enim nobis qui illas erigunt statuas quaenam utilitas ex illis ad se
redit? An quod qualiscunque recordatio eos habet ex tali speciali
contemplatione? Sed manifestum est quod vana sit ejusmodi contemplatio and
diaboli deceptionis inventum.
We hold it not convenient (says he) to form images of Saints with material
colors, but to refresh from time to time, the virtues that are written of
them, as so many lively images: For thereby we may attain to their imitation.
Let those men that set up images to the Saints, tell us, what utility arises
unto themselves out of that? Is it only to get some indifferent remembrance of
them by such a special contemplation? But it is manifest that such a
contemplation is vain, and an invention of Satan's deceit.

In these places it is considerable, that the Fathers spoke not only against
the images of the Pagans, but also against the images of God and the Saints;
and that many of them absolutely condemn the trades of Painters and Statuaries,
as unlawful and wicked; and that the things which they say of the images of the
Pagans, may also be fitted unto the images of the Saints; when they say that
the images of the Pagans have no sense, that they have eyes and see not, that
they have ears and hear not, that being set up in high places, they bow the
minds of the ignorant and draw reverence; That they are great puppets, as
Lactantius says in the second Book of his Institutions, chap. 4. As in effect,
images are men's puppets, just as puppets are childrens idols. The same Fathers
deride the custom of the Pagans, who clothed their images, burnt incense unto
them, and set them out with various attires, tools and weapons. Thus Lactantius
in the fore-alleadged place, Ergo his ludicris ornatis and grandibus puppis,
and unguenta and thura, and odores inferunt.
Then to these great puppets well adorned, they offer sweet perfumes, incense
and odours. Arnobius in the seventh book, despises that custom of burning
incense before images of the Gods. Si temporibus priscis neque homines neque
Dii hujus thuris expetivere materiam, comprobatur and hodie illud frustra
inaniterque praestari quod neque antiquitas necessarium credidit, and sine
ullis novitas rationibus appetivit, etc. Habent Dii nares quibus ducant aerios
spiritus, ut penetrare illas possint nidorum differentium qualitates?
If in the ancient times (says he) neither men nor Gods desired that drug of
incense, it follows that nowadayes also the same is vainly and unreasonably
done, which Antiquity believed not to be necessary, and the modern age has
desired without reason, etc. And in the same place he asks, Whether the gods
have nostrils to draw in the respiration of the air, and to smell the
difference of odours. And as for the equipage of images, the same Author makes
a sport with the key of Janus, and with the horns of Jupiter Ammon. With what
countenance could chese Authors have reproached the Pagans with such things, if
in the Christian Churches there had been images with clothes, shifted according
to the several Holy Days, and with incense burning before them? Or if the
Christians had had then Saint Peter's image with a key like Janus? Or the image
of Moses with horns like Juppiter Ammon? Or that of St. George with a spear
like Mars? Or that of St. Eustach, with a stag like Diana? Or that of St. Paul,
with a sword? Or of Saint Laurence, with a Gridiron? Had not the Pagans had
just matter of recrimination and reproaching the Christians, that the images of
their Saints, set up in Churches and Churchyards, had no more sense then the
images of their gods? that they had eyes and saw not? that they were set up in
eminent places? that incense was burnt to them? and that they had several and
various attires bestowed upon them? Which yet they do not, and never use that
recrimination against the Christians.

Here truth is so strong, that it draws many confessions from our Adversaries.
George Cassander, a Divine of Collen, in his consultation, in the Chapter De
Imaginibus and simulachris, thus begins the Chapter, Ad imagines vero Sanctorum
quod attinet certum est initio praedicati Evangelii aliquanto tempore inter
Christianos, praesertim in Ecclesiis, imaginum usum non fuisse, ut ex Clemente
and Arnobio patet.
As for the images of the Saints, it is certain that in the beginning of the
preaching of the Gospel, for some space of time, images were not in use among
Christians, especially in Churches, as it appears by Clemens and Arnobius. And
a little after, Truly it is manifest by Austin, that in his time the use of
images was not in Churches; especially by that which he writ upon the 113.
Psalm.

If the first Christians had no images, and suffered none in the Church, what
would they have said of those that not only have their Churches full of images
of Saints of both sexes, some of them wantonly set out, and some that never
were in the world; but also bestow upon them a religious service, kiss them,
and worship them?

The second Council of Nice held in the year 788. commands above thirty times
the adoration of images. These words are found in the second Action, We hold
that the images of the impolluted Virgin Mother of God, and of the glorious
Angels, and of all the Saints, ought to be adored and saluted. And if any has
another sense; and doubts about the adoration of the venerable images, our holy
and venerable Synod, does anathematize him. And that none may take the word
adoring for a veneration only, the same Council in the fourth Action speaks
thus, All those that confess that they venerate images, and yet refuse to adore
them, are reproved by Father Anastasius as hypocrites. In the same Action it is
said that images are of the same price as the Gospel. And that major est imago
quam oration. The image is greater then the word.

Then lived Pope Adrian, who writing to Tharasius Patriarch of Constantinople,
President of that Council, says to him, Imagines omnium Sanctorum Beatitas
vestra colere and adorare pergat.
Let your blessedness continue to serve and adore the images of all the Saints.
Yea he writ a book purposely for the defense of that abominable Council, which
was condemned a little after by the Council of Franckford held under Charles the
Great, as Ado testifies in his Chronicle, and Hinckmar in the book of the
fifty five chapters, chap. 20. Where also he says that in his youth Tempore
Caroli Magni Imperatoris jussione Apostolicae sedis generalis est Synodus in
Francia convocante praefato Imperatore celebrata and secundum Scripturarum
tramitem traditionem que majorum ipsa Graecorum pseudo-Synodus destructa and
penitus abdicata. De cujus destructione non modicum volumen quod in palatio
adolescentulus legi ab eodem Imperatore per quosdam Episcopos missum.
he read a book written against that false Synod (for he calls it so) sent by
the Emperor Charles the Great unto the Pope, which is the book of Charles the
Great against images remaining to this day. These two witnesses Ado and
Hinckmar are of the same age as the Synod of Franckford, and speak of things
that happened in their time.

Under Lewis the Meek, son to Charles the Great, another Synod was assembled at
Paris against images. Of which we have all the Acts well preserved* in the
beginning of his reign Claud. Bishop of Turin broke all the images he found in
his Bishopric, strongly opposing the Bishop of Rome, who stood for the
adoration of images; yea, and he writ a book agianst Images. The Pope durst not
do any thing against him, because he was maintained by the Emperors authority,
who then had the chief rule in Italy.

Zonoras Annal. l. 3. Cedrenus Ammonius Monachus Hist. Franc. lib. 5. cap. 27.
Sigebertus An. 755.
A little before, a Council of three hundred thirty eight Bishops had been
assembled at Constantinople, where images were condemned. Of that Council we
have the fragments in the second Council of Nice.

Bellarmin in the second book of Images, chap. 22. says, that a Council of
Mentz charge Preachers carefully to admonish the people to beware of
worshipping images. Which is also the Counsel that Pope Gregory the first gave
to Serenus Bishop of Marseille, who had broken the Images of Marseille. For
whereas he approved not that violence, yet he praises him for hindering the
people to adore them. Now it is not like, that any of that people was so
besotted with the love of images, as to bestow a sovereign adoration upon them.
For so he had adored the images of the Saints with a higher adoration then the
Saints themselves.

Upon this Austin is pregnant, Epist. 119. chap. 11. Prohibetur coli aliqua in
figmentis hominum Dei similitudo; Non quia non habet imaginem Deus sed quia
nulla imago ejus coli debet nisi quae hoc est quod ipse.
It is forbidden in the Law to serve any image of God made by men. Not because
God has no image, but because no image of God must be served, but that which
is the same as himself, meaning Christ.

But in the end God angry with the hardness of men, suffered the worshippers of
images to prevail. About which the Popes did powerfully labor. For taking away
the holy Scripture from the people, they had need to give them something
instead of it; Depriving them of instruction, they must give them recreation,
and amuse their eyes with pictures, statues, and variety of ceremonies. All is
full of images in the Roman Church; There you shall see a people made of
stones, and the people that have soul and life are kneeling before the people
that have none. Man who is the image of God, adoreth the images of men, whereas
these images, if they had knowledge, would rather worship man. The very
image-makers worship their own work. And the evil is gone so far, that most
part of the Romish Doctors assert, that images must be adored with the same
adoration as the thing represented; and that the image of the Crucifix must be
adored with the worship of latria, that is, with the sovereign adoration which
is due unto God. Thomas the head and the chief ornament of the School. Thom.
Sum. part. 3. qu. 25. Art 3. Sequitur quod eadem reverentia exhibeatur
imaginibus Christi and ipsi Christo. Cum ergo Christus adoretur adoratione
latriae, consequens est quod ejus imago sit adoratione latriae adoranda.
It follows (says he) that the same reverence is given unto the image of
Christ, as unto Christ himself: Seeing then that Christ is adored with the
adoration of latria, it follows that his image must be adored with the
adoration of latria. And Azorius, Joh. Azor. Instit. Moral. Tom. 1. lib. 9.
cap. 6. Constans est Theologorum sententia imaginem eodem honor and cultu
ho^orari and coli quo colitur id cujus est imago.
This is a constant opinion among Divines, that the image is honored and
served with the same honor and service, that the thing whereof it is an image
is served. And Gabriel Biel in the forty ninth lesson upon the Canon of the
Mass, Si fuerint imagines Christi, adorantur eadem specie qua Christus, id est,
adoratione latriae. Si beatissimae Virginis, hyperduliae, etc.
If they be images of Christ, they are adored with the same kind of adoration
as Christ, that is, with the adoration of latria. If they be images of the most
blessed Virgin Mary, they are worshipped with the service of hyperdulia: If of
St. Peter or some other Saint, of dulia.

The Jesuit Vasquez in the third book of the adoration, Vasquez lib. 3. de
Adorat. Imaginum Disp. 4. cap. 4. Res inanima jure naturae adorari potest.
shows at large that this is the belief of the Doctors, of whom he alleges
above thirty. To which multitude he joyneth himself, and it is no wonder that
he will have images to be adored with the service of latria, seeing he
maintains that inanimate things may be lawfully worshipped with the worship
of latria, as heaven and earth, Idem l. 3. Disp. 1. c. 2.
and a beam of light in which the Devil lies hidden; yea, even a straw. The
Jesuit Gretzer affirms the same in the book of the Cross, chap. 57.

Cardinal Bellarmin in chap. 21. of the book of images, will have images
adored, not only because of that which they represent, but because of
themselves, Imagines Christi and sanctorum venerandae sunt, non solum per
accidens vel improprie, sed etiam per se and proprie, ita ut ipsae terminent
venerationem ut inse considerantur, and non solum ut vicem gerunt exemplaris.
Images (says he) must be served in themselves, and properly. And in the same
chapter he lays this for a fundamental maxim, That the images of Christ and
of the Saints must be venerated, not only by accident, and improperly, but in
themselves and properly, so that the veneration is terminated in the image,
considered in it self, and not only in that it represents.

And in the Roman Church they speak with images, as if they understood; and
such things are said unto them, as cannot be said to the thing represented by
the image. Such is the prayer said to that holy cloth upon which the face of
Christ is printed, Salve sancta facies nostri Redemptoris, Impressa panniculo
nivei splendoris, Data Veronicae in signum amoris. Salve vultus Domini imago
beata, etc. Hail holy face of our Redeemer, printed upon a snow-bright cloth,
Given to Veronica in sign of love: Hail thou face of the Lord, blessed image,
etc. Thus also they speak to the wood of the cross, Ave lignum triumphale.
I salute thee triumphal wood, etc. It cannot be said, that by a figure which
is called Metonymia, by the image of Christ, Christ himself is understood,
seeing that in that prayer the image of the face of Christ is expressly
distinguished from Christ, for they pray to that painted face, Deduc nos O
felix figura ad videndum faciem quae est Christi pura.
that it make them see the true face of Christ. Can there be a greater
absurdity then to speak to an inanimate thing that understands not? They say of
Diogenes, that he would beg alms of statues to accustom himself to be denied:
For indeed whosoever comes to pray to an image, must come resolved to obtain
nothing,

Here I know not which are worse troubled to justify their doctrine, they that
will have the image worshipped with the same adoration as the thing represented
by the image, or they that will have it worshipped with an inferior adoration.
For the first, that are worshipping a wooden crucifix with the same adoration
as Christ, and with a sovereign adoration, which they call latria, they are
idolaters in the highest degree, since they put the creature and the creator in
the same rank. And they are condemned by the second Council of Nice in the
first, third and sixth Action, where it is expressly said, that images ought not
be adored with the service of latria. But if (as they say) the adoration of the
image is relative, and respective to another thing, it cannot be worshipped
with the same adoration as God.

On the other side, they that will have the adoration of the image to be an
inferior, and another kind of adoration, plunge themselves into insoluble
difficulties. For they call the adoration deferred unto creatures dulia. If
then the images of Saints must be adored with a lesser adoration then the
Saints, then that adoration is lesser then dulia, and there is no name as yet
found for it. And whereas the word dulia signifies the service yielded unto
one, as to a Master (as Austin says in the book of Questions upon Exodus, qu.
94. Dulia is due unto God, as unto him that is Master) if we must defer an
adoration of dulia unto images, we must say that images are our Masters or
Mistresses.

And since the Dulia due to God, must be of another and greater nature then
that which our Adversaries defer unto Saints, and that of the Saints greater
then that which is deferred unto their images; behold three sorts of different
dulia: To which if you add the dulia which is deferred unto the images of God
and of Christ, which must be greater then that which is deferred unto the
images of Saints; We shall have four sorts of dulia, which neither the people,
nor the very Doctors are able to discern. So that they must come to th^s that
God, and a wooden crucifix, and the image of St. Francis, are equally
worshipped with Dulia, and that the same service is yielded unto them.

Especially in the adoration of the image of the Cross, the error is palpable.
For in the Roman Church upon Passion-Sunday, they speak thus to the image of
the wood of the Cross, O Crux ave spes unica, Hoc passionis tempore. Auge pus
justitiam. Reisque dona veniam.
I salute thee O Cross our only hope, In this time of the passion, Increase
righteousness to the godly, and give pardon to the guilty. And that it may not
be said that by a Metonymy that which is spoken to the image of the Cross must
be understood as said unto Christ, such things are added as cannot be said unto
Christ, Sola dignata fuisti far saecli pretium. Crux fidelis inter omnes
arbor una nobilis.
Thou have been alone worthy to bear the price of the world. And a little
after, Thou faithful Cross, the only noble among trees. And in another hymn,
Beata cujus brachiis Saecli pependit pretium.
Thou blessed Cross, out of whose arms the price of the world did hang. Can one
without impiety speak unto wood, and call it our hope and ask of it increase of
grace, and remission of sins?

This is such a gross abuse, that many of our Adversaries complain of it; and
wish it amended with moderation. Cassander in his consultation in the chapter
of images. It is too evident (says he) that the service of images is too much
increased, and that too much [licence] was granted to the affection, or rather
superstition of the people. So that it seems that our men are not at all behind
the Pagans as for the sovereign adoration which they were wont to yield unto
their images. Wherefore the most prudent of the Catholic Church have long ago
desired that some moderation were used about it, and that the current of the
superstition were stopped. Whereupon he alleges William Durand, John Billet a
Divine of Paris, Gerson, and Gabriel Biel; and complains of the ignorant
simplicity of the people that worship handsome images with more devotion then
the ugly, and the new then the old, and those that are clad and well adorned
then the naked and ill in clothes; and vow pilgrimages to certain Churches in
consideration of certain images that are there, believing that they have more
virtue and holiness, then other images of the same Saint which are in other
places. He says also, that they that should correct that abuse feed the people
in it, that themselves may be fed. Then he makes this ingenuous conclusion,
that Christ in the day of judgment will not tell them, What you have done unto
these images you have done it unto me, but What you have done unto these little
ones, that is, these poor ones, you have done it unto me; Silently taxing the
stupidity of those that clothe images, and leave the poor naked: Persons, whose
superstition choaketh their charity, and who are cruel, because they are
devout.

Herein their folly is evident, that if the image of our Lady lies down upon
the Churches floor, no body worships it: But if it stand, and is set up in a
high place, it receives many salutations and bowings: Also that in the same
Church you may see the image of the Trinity dusty and neglected, and that of
the Virgin Mary curiously attired. The images of that good Virgin are a
thousand times richer in clothes, then ever she was in her life time. Those
ornaments are given to her images which her self despised. Silver images are
made for the Apostles, who in their life time said, Gold and Silver I have
none. Acts 3.6. When a Prince dies, the images of Saints are clad in mourning,
while these Saints are in the highest degree of joy. Near the image of a Saint
they set that of a Dog or a Hog: And those beasts have equal part of the
incense, and of the light of Tapers.

CHAP. 3. Reasons of the Adversaries for the adoration of images.
THE falsehood of this doctrine which commands the adoration of images, appears
by the reasons that are brought for it; They say that Jacob worshipped the end
of Joseph's staff. That grounded upon a text of Heb. 11. falsified in the
version of the Roman Church, Jacob adoravit fastigium virgae ejus. But there is
in the Greek, (...), He worshipped upon the end of his staff. So the second
Council of Nice alleges that text in the second Action, and Austin in the
book of questions upon Genesis, quest. 162. Hierom in the Hebrew traditions
upon Genesis confuteth that version, Some in vain would make us believe that
Jacob worshipped the end of Joseph's staff, but it is quite otherwise in the
Hebrew.

With the like untruth Cardinal du Perron affirms, that Joshuah worshipped
the Ark, Jos. 7.6. For in that text it is written, that Joshuah fell to the
earth upon his face, before the Ark of the Lord. And so Psalm. 99.5. Worship at
his footstool. It is one thing to bow down before the Ark, and another thing to
bow down to the Ark. It is one thing to worship his footstool, another thing to
worship at his footstool.

They that say, that the honor deferred to the images of God and his Saints
returns unto God and his Saints, thereby allege their own reason, not the
word of God. They should have enquired before, whether God will be so honored,
and should have told us how they are sure that the Saints accept of that
service; For all adoration must be made in faith: now faith is founded upon the
word of God. Besides I think not that the Saints are the warmer, when their
images are well clad, or that they see better when wax-lights are burning
before them, or that they are the richer by the offerings given to their
images, but taken by the Priests. Or that Christ is more honored, when one
speaks to a face painted in a cloth. Hail thou holy face of the Redeemer,
painted on a white cloth, O blessed image, etc. A King would take it for an
abuse offered to his person, if one spoke to his picture.

It is false, that the contempt of the image reflects always upon him that is
represented by the image. For the false coin that bears the Kings image is
broken and melted in obedience to the King. Had the King forbidden, that any
should erect to him a statue, he that should break statues made for him against
his will, should not despise the King, but obey his command. Epiphanius and
Serenus Bishop of Marseille had no intention to despise Christ and the Saints,
when they brake their images. And if the Saints must not be adored, much less
their images of wood and stone.

The texts of Scripture, which the second Council of Nice uses for the
adoration of images, are these in the sixth Action: Show me thy face, and let
me hear thy voice, Cant. 2. And, as we have heard, so we have seen, Psalm. 48.
And in the second Action there is an Epistle of Adrian Bishop of Rome, whereby
he approves images, because God made man after his image. He alleges also
Psalm. 27. Thy face Lord will I seek. And Psalm. 4. Lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us, instead of which the vulgar says, Signatum est super nos
lumen vultus tui. Whence he infers, Quam ob causam historias imaginum
illorum honoro and palam adoro, falsely ascribing that sentence unto Basil, For
this cause I honor and publicly adore the stories of their images. The same
Pope made a Book in the defense of the second Council of Nice, where speaking
of the Fathers of that Council, he praises them for saying, that despisers of
images have laid the candle under the bushel. It must be a very ill cause that
is put to such ridiculous proofs.

CHAP. 4. That the excuses and reasons which our Adversaries bring for the
defense of their Images, are the same which the Pagans alleged against the
ancient Christians.
THe Holy Scripture calling idolatry adultery shows that it is no more lawful
to use idolatry toward Saints, then toward Devils; for a wife is as disloyal
by prostituting her self to her husbands friends, as to his enemies. If those
Saints that are glorified with God, had a clear knowledge of things done below,
they would be angry with those that transform them into idols, and cloth them
with perfections belonging to none but God. And Paul and Barnabas, who tore
their garments when the Lycaonians would offer them sacrifices; if they saw the
men of our age, consecrating Altars and Temples unto them, acknowledging them
as searchers of the hearts, and choosing them for their Patrons and Mediators;
no doubt but they would be no less offended at such an abomination, as they
were then: For the more they love God, the more are they jealous of his honor.
Yea, I say, that as poisons are more active in the most delicate meats, so the
more the memory of the Saints is sacred and venerable, the more is the idolatry
pernicious which creeps under the name of true Saints, and turns the helps to
piety, into stumbling blocks. This has been Satan's work for many ages, and is
now still. For when he saw the Pagan idols beaten down by the preaching of the
Gospel, and Jupiter, Apollo and Mercury out of credit, he endeavored to raise
idolatry again under a more specious title, and to make use even of Christian
Religion, which is a sworn enemy to idols, to set up idols: Under a pretense of
honoring God in his Saints, he has sought to dishonor God by his Saints;
transporting unto them part of that honor which belongs unto God alone;
attributing unto them the virtue of seeing all things, and knowing men's hearts,
and the power of hearing our prayers; to that end, setting up statues unto them
in the Church, deferring a Religious service unto them, and worshipping their
images.

Now as when two sick persons fallen into the like symptoms, use the same
remedies, we judge they are both sick of the same sickness: Likewise when we
see Christians deferring the same honors to their images, and with the same
gestures as the Pagans did to theirs, burning wax-lights and incense before
them, kissing them, giving them changes of raiment, and honoring them with
most devotion that are best in clothes; and when they are taxed of such a gross
abuse, cloaking their actions with the same reasons and excuses which the
Pagans used; then I say, we may and ought to say assuredly, that the sickness
is the same, and that both are smitten with the like spirit of stumbling.

By the controversies of the ancient Christians with the Pagans, and some
idolatrous Christians, it is evident, that as the faithful Christians used the
same reasons as we do, saying that God forbids in his Law to make any image or
likeness of things that are in heaven above, and that God will be adored alone,
and that God who is an infinite Spirit, cannot be represented by images, and
that the Church of Israel had not any image of Saints, or Patriarcks, or
Prophets in the Temple; likewise the answers of the Pagans and of the
idolatrous Christians were the very same which the Roman Church of our age
uses.

They would say, that they were not so stupid as to believe that these images
were Gods, or that they had sense; but that by the image, they adored him that
was represented in the image. And that images were Scriptures unto the
ignorant, and were the Books of idiots. Also that Moses set up an image in the
Wilderness, which was the brazen Serpent.

Thus Origin in the seventh Book against the Pagan Celsus, (...).
Celsus says that he holds not those statues to be Gods, but things
consecrated unto the Gods. And the Pagans answer thus to Arnobius, Arnob. lib.
6. Erras, inquitis, and lab^ris, nam neque nos era neque auri argentique
materias neque alias quibus signa confiunt eas esse per se Deo^ and religeosa
decernimus numina: sed eos in his colimus cosque veneramur, quos dedicatio
refert sacra.
Thou errest and failest, for we hold neither brass, nor gold, nor silver, nor
other materials of the images to be Gods of their nature, or divinities to
which a Religious service is due. But in these images we serve the Gods, and
venerate those whom the sacred dedication represents unto us. Thus also in the
Preface of the fourth Book of Eusebius of Evangelical preparation. Eusebius
says that (...).
it is an evident thing to the very Pagans, that the inanimate statues are no
Gods. And the Pagans make the same answer, in the second Book of Lactantius,
chap. 2. Non ipsa (inquiunt) timemus sed eos ad quorum imaginem ficta and
quorum nominbus consecrata sunt.
We fear not these things (say they) but those after whose image they are made
and to whose names they are consecrated. And Austin upon the 113. Psalm,
personateth an idolater, speaking thus, Nec simulacrum nec daemonem colo, sed
per effigiem corporalem ejus rei signum intueor quam colere debeo.
I worship neither the image nor a demon, but in this bodily representation I
see the sign of the thing which I must worship.

It was also the excuse of the idolaters, that images were the books of idiots,
and served the ignorant instead of Scripture. Porphyrie, the capital enemy of
Christ's name would speak so, as Eusebius relates in the third Book of the
Evangelicall preparation, (...).
Men have represented obscure things by manifest representations, to them who
by the statues, as by books, have learned to gather that which is written of
the gods. And Athanasius, in the Oration against the Gentiles, says, that they
excuse themselves, saying, that (...).
Images are unto men like Scriptures, which men meeting and conversing with,
may comprehend something of Gods knowledge. And in the same place, (...).
If these images be to you like Scriptures, to contemplate God, as you untruly
say, etc. Where observe by the way, that our Adversaries by saying that images
are the books of idiots, say by consequent that they must not be worshipped.
For themselves would not worship the holy Scripture, though it be a thousand
times better then images. The books of the ignorant are good, when they are
remedies against ignorance: But images maintain ignorance, and breed in men's
minds gross and unworthy conceits of the Deity.

Tertullian, in the Book of Idolatry, chap. 5. says, Cur ergo Moses in Eremo
simulacrum ex aere fecit.
That the image-makers alleged the example of Moses, who made a brazen
Serpent in the Desert. In effect it is the same style, as that of the
Adversaries. By the same language one may know that they were bred in the same
School, and taught by the same spirit.

CHAP. 5. When the images of Saints were first brought into the Latin or
Occidental Church, and of the progress of that abuse.
WE have showed in the first Chapter of this Controversy, that in the time of
Pope Gregory the II. who lived in the year of the Lord, 720. The Roman Church
had not yet received the images of God. And that Nicephorus, who lived about
the year 1300. does detest the pictures of God as most absurd things.

As for the images of Christ or the Saints, who so will run over the whole
history of the three first ages of the Church, and more then half of the
fourth, shall not find any trace in it, of images or statues set up in
Churches. The antientest Latin Author, that mentions images in Churches of
Christians, is the Poet Prudentius, who according to the vein of Poets,
delights to describe pictures, in which the sufferings of the two Martyrs,
Cassianus and Hippolytus were represented. There was a crowd of people painted,
and executioners, and horses draging Hippolytus: That only for a memorial, and
only in a flat picture, without any Religious service. Let us suppose that
Prudentius made no use of the License familiar unto Poets, who should not be
Poets, if they said the truth always.

Horat. de Art Poetica. Pictoribus atque Poe^is, q^odl^bet audendi semper fuit
aequa potestas.
Painters and Poets in all times retain
Equal privilege to devise and fain.
But the Reader may consider, that Prudentius writ about the year of Christ
395. and that he speaks not of statues, nor of that which is called an image in
our days, but only of histories drawn with the pencill; and of that he has
seen in some place of Italy, not of the custom of the Universal Church; and
that these pictures were not venerated with any Religious service, or with any
adoration; and that this can have no force against the custom of the four first
ages, much less against the Word of God, to establish, by virtue of the
testimony of a Poet, the service of images in the Christian Church.

A little after, that is, about the year 425. Paulinus Bishop of Nola in Italy,
caused the histories both of the Old, and of the New Testament, to be painted
on the walls of the Church of Nola, to stay the eyes of those that sat at the
Table of These Agapes, or Feasts of Charity were kept in the Church after the
Communion: And because of the abuses that were committed in them, they were put
down by the Councils.
Agapes, or Feasts of Charity, where many times they licensed themselves to
speak frivolous things, and many times also to drink till they were drunk.

At the same rhyme, that custom being come over into some parts of Africa,
Austin complains of it in a place lately alleged, chap. 34. of the first Book
of the manners of the Christian Church, Novi mulios esse sepulchrorum and
picturarum adoratores: Novi multos qui super mortuos luxuriosissime bibunt.
I know (says he) that there are many worshippers of sepulchers and pictures,
I know many that drink most riotously over the dead. Which he says, because
the tombs of the Martyrs, were the Tables used for those Feasts of Charity.

The unruly devotion of the people, and man's natural inclination to love
pictures better then doctrines, and the recreation of the sight, then the
instruction of the soul, made this evil so to increase, that from flat
pictures, they came to statues, and from representation to adoration, so that
about the year 590. Serenus Bishop of Marseille, seeing his people falling to
the adoration of statues, brake them, and cast them out of the Church. About
which Gregor. Epist. li. 7. Epistola 109. Zelum vos ne quid manu factum adorari
possit habuisse laudamus, sed frangere easdem imagines non debuisse judicamus.
Idcirco enim pictura in Ecclesiis adhibetur, ut hi qui literas nesciunt saltem
in parietibus videndo legant quae legere in codicibus non valent.
Pope Gregory the first reproves him in two Epistles, saying, that images
indeed ought not to be worshipped, but that they ought not to be broken
neither, because they are instead of books unto the ignorant.

But it was not long before the Popes became the great Patrons of the adoration
of images, and made it a means of their rising; for when the Greek Emperors
fell to the breaking of images, Gregory the II. took thence occasion to shake
off the yoke of the Emperors, as enemies of the Saints, and made Rome and part
of Italy to revolt from the obedience of their Sovereign: And he made himself a
temporal Prince, under that color of defending images, as Sigon. lib. 3. Ita
Roma Romanusque Ducatus a Graecis ad Romanum Pontificem propter nefandam eorum
haeresim impietatemque pervenit. Sigonius calls the enemies of images heretics.
Sigonius, after many others, relates in the third book of the Kingdom of
Italy. See also Anastasius in the life of Gregory the II.

Another reason moved the Popes to maintain images. They were laboring to
suppress Scripture, which they felt to be contrary to their Empire. Therefore
to divert the people from it, they gave them images instead of books, and
stones for their teachers, being sure that such books could not serve to
dispute against the Popes. Thus while they amused the peoples eyes, they did
insensibly steal the Word of God from them. Yet those images they hide in Lent,
which is the time of Preaching, as acknowledging that images must hide
themselves before the Word of God, and that they must not appear in the time of
devotion.

All that is brought out of Latin Authors before Prudentius, in favor of
images, is either fabulous, or taken from such Authors as are not receivable.
Damasus, whom they say to have lived in the year 376. says in his Pontifical,
in the life of Sylvester, that Constantine built a Temple, where he set up the
images of Christ and his Apostles. But Bellarm. de Scripto 116. Ecclesiastico
in Damaso. Tribuitur sancto Damaso liber de vitis Pontificum sed liber ille est
Anastasii Bibliothecarii non Damasi ut notum est.
Bellarmine does freely acknowledge, that the book is not of Damasus, but of
Anastasius the Library Keeper. That Anastasius writ in the year 858. when the
Popes were fighting for images. So it is no wonder if a Library Keeper of the
Pope, would lie in his masters behalf; or if he being a man of shallow
learning, was easily mistaken about things so remote from his time.

The same I say of a Sermo de Gervasio and Protasio Tomo 3. Surii.
Sermon concerning Gervasius and Protasius, attributed to Ambrose, where it is
spoken of the image of Saint Paul. For the finding of the bodies of Gervasius
and Protasius, upon which that Sermon was made, was long after Ambrose, as we
proved before. In this same Book, I. Controv. chap. 11.
Besides in that Sermon, there is no mention of images in Churches, nor of any
service deferred unto them.

CHAP. 6. Of the Original and progress of Images in the Greek and Oriental
Churches.
THe Greek and Oriental Churches have been for many ages without images in
their Temples. The Fathers of the three, yea of the four first ages,
unanimously reject them, as I have fully proved.

For, as for Christ's image Printed in a linen cloth, given by himself to
Veronica, and of another image made by Nicodemus, they are blind tales, no more
believed by the learned among our Adversaries. Neither do we need to disprove
them, for (as they are described) they were not images set up in Churches, or
given to receive any Religious service.

Eusebius in the seventh Book of his History, chap. 14. speaks of a statue of
Christ at Cesarea Philippi, erected in the street before the door of the
Canaanitish woman, healed by Christ of a bloody flux, in memory of that
miraculous cure. And in chap. 9. of the fifth book of Evangelicall
demonstration, he speaks of a Terebinth, (a tree known enough) under which
Abraham entertained the three men that appeared unto him, near unto which tree,
the inhabitants of the Country had set up the picture of those three men. But
besides, that these examples speak not of images set up in Churches, we heard
the same Eusebius before, saying, that such images were made by a Pagan custom:
As in effect, in the same places the people committed idolatry, as the same
Eusebius relates in the third book of Constantines life, chap. 51. In the
thirtieth book of his History, chap. 4. he punctually describes the Temple of
Tire, forgetting not so much as the forms and tables, but speaks not of images.

The same Author in the life of Constantine relates, that the same Emperor
built Churches in Jerusalem and in Bethlehem, of which he describes the form,
the seeling, the pillars, the ornaments, but of images he makes no mention. He
says indeed in the third book, chap. 38. that Constantine set up the signs or
marks of a good Shepherd in the marketplace, and Daniel with the Lions in the
den, the whole work made of brass over-laid with gold. But he speaks of no
images in Churches.

Athanasius lived in the same time: A testimony of his is alleged for images
out of the Questions to Antiochus, Qu. 39. But that book cannot be of
Athanasius, seeing that (Qu. 3.) Epiphanius is alleged, who writ many years
after the death of Athanasius. It is the same of all the Questions attributed
to Athanasius: For in the thirtieth Question, upon the sayings and parables of
Scripture, the Author says, that the Judge mentioned Luke 18. who neither
feared God, nor respected men, and yet does right to a widow, to be rid of her
importunity, is God himself, who fears not himself. In the tenth Question he
says, that Peter the Apostle was crucified; herein contradicting the true
Athanasius, who says that he was strangled. Editionis Paris. an. 1627. p. 416.
In the 76. Question, the Author says, that the Romans are of the race of the
French, that crucified Christ. It were hard to say more absurdities in so few
words. Such a great man as Athanasius, could never come out with such
impertinencies. In the 86. Question Gregory is alleged, what Gregory soever
he means, he cannot have been but since Athanasius.

About the year of the Lord 370. flourished Basil Bishop of Cesarea in
Cappadocia. That Doctor in the Sermon upon the Martyr Barlaam, having commended
the constancy of the Martyr, exhorts Painters to paint out to the life his
virtuous actions, which he could not represent with words. If that be only a
passage of oratory, or whether it may be thence inferred that images were set
up in the Churches of Cappadocia, let the Reader judge. At least this remains,
that he speaks only of historical representations in pictures, not of statues,
nor of any Religious service deferred unto images.

Then also lived Gregory of Nyssa, to the end of whose works a false piece was
sowed up, the Oration about the Martyr Theodorus, where it is spoken of
pictures representing the sufferings of that Martyr; but we showed In the I.
Controv. of this 7. Book, chapter 11.
before the falsehood of that piece. But though it were true, in that place
there is mention only of historical pictures, and that only in a corner of
Cappadocia, not in the Universal Church.

Of the like stuff is the pretended testimony of Basil, alleged by the second
Council of Nice, where Basil exhorts to the adoration of images. But of that
nothing is found in all the works of Basil, nor any thing near it. That
Council, stuffed with impiety, commanding the adoration of images upon pain of
anathema, affirming that the Angels are corporeal, saying that images are as
good as the Gospel, and are better then prayer, and alleging many Texts of
Scripture for images in a ridiculous manner, deserves not to be believed.

So I give this for a certain truth, that from the Apostles time, unto the
fourth Council, which falls in the year of the Lord 451. no formal example
shall be found of statues set up in the Greek and Oriental Churches, nor of any
service deferred to any representation. We might come down lower yet, but it is
enough for us to keep within the term set by Cardinal du Perron.

In the sixth, seventh and eighth ages, images did multiply exceedingly, and
the Greek Churches began to venerate them with a Religious service. And this
gave occasion to a great increase of the Mahumetan Religion, which professes a
mortal hatred against images. For that reason, the Emperors of
Constantinople, especially Leo, in the year 725. and his son Constantine after
him, brake images, and persecuted the worshippers of them; and that trouble and
bloody strife lasted till the year 788. when the Empress Irene and her son
Constantine (whose eyes she put out soon after) called the second Council of
Nice, where the adoration of images was established. The Popes have been
striving with great fervor for the reception of that Council: And the French
were a long time striving against it. But in the end, the power of the Popes
increasing, and with their power the ignorance of the people, the error did
overcome, and images took the place of Holy Scripture; and such as would not
bow their knee to wood and stone, and adore inanimate things, were persecuted
with fire and sword.

That the people might not know the will of God upon this point, the second
Precept of the Law was put out of the Hours and Offices, which are put in
thepeoples hands. And because that Precept could not be put out of the Bible,
the Pope has forbidden the reading of it.

Third Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. In Answer to the third instance of
the fourth Book of Cardinal DU PERRON. Of PRAYER for the DEAD.
CHAP. 1. Of Prayer for the dead, and of Purgatory. What Scripture says of it.
And of the Purgatory of the Primitive Church.
WHosoever is a little versed in Antiquity, knows that prayer for the dead has
been many ages used in the Christian Church, therefore the great labor of Page
931:
Cardinal du Perron to gather testimonies to prove that, is more then needed,
and a superfluous diligence about a vulgar thing. De corona militis cap. 3.
(b) Tertullian who writ in the end of the second age, is the antientest Author
that speaks of it; We make (says he) anniversary offerings for the dead, and
for the natalitia, that is, for the commemoration of the sufferings of Martyrs.

But upon that we say two things, The one, that this custom sprung from the
unwritten tradition, and that in Gods word there is neither command nor example
for it: But rather that in the Scripture there are many testimonies that the
souls of the godly after this life, are presently transported into the heavenly
rest. Blessed are they which dye in the Lord; from henceforth [(...), from this
very time, if they dye now] says the Spirit they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them, Rev. 14.13. Christ tells us Luke 16.9. Make to your
selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may
receive you into everlasting habitations: that is, that when you dye, they may
receive you into heaven. He tells us also John 5.24. Verily, verily I say unto
you, He that hears my word, and believes on him that s^nt me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death unto life. How should that man be sent into a burning flame, who in this
very life has eternal life, and is past from death to life? Isa. 57.1. and 2.
says, that the righteous dying, is taken away from the evil to come, and
enters into peace. Wherefore Simeon being near his death, was saying, Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace. And Christ said to the repenting
thief crucified with him, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Yet that
thief according to the doctrine of the Roman Church stood in great need of
purgation. And the Apostle Paul preparing himself for death, and laying his
hand already upon the crown, was saying 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness. For there is no condemnation for them that are
in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1. If no condemnation, then neither eternal in Hell,
nor temporal in Purgatory. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin,
1 John 1.7. And of other purgation there is no need; for Christ having fully
satisfied for us unto Gods justice, there is no need of any other satisfaction.
God will not take two payments for one debt, when the first payment is
sufficient. By Christ God has forgiven us [(...), freely and gratis] all our
trespasses, Col. 2.13. God being our Father and having given his Son for us,
would he delight to burn his children in a vehement fire, for sins already
pardoned? Should not that Father be altogether wicked and unnatural that would
torment his children with punishments of no use for their amendment; only to
content himself, and to satisfy his own wrath and revenge? Now such is the
punishment of Purgatory, where they hold that the souls amend not, and are
never the better for their sufferings.

Note.
It is very considerable that in the Law of Moses there are sacrifices and
propitiations for all kinds of sin and pollution, even for leprosy, and for
the touching of a dead body; but that the Law prescribes no sacrifice or
propitiation for the dead, nor any service for their ease or release. Which M.
du Perron freely acknowledges, Page 939. and 943.
in the eighth chapter of the third instance of the fourth book, where he
groundeth the prayer for the dead upon the unwritten word only.

The other point is, that our Adversaries cannot accuse us of despising the
custom received in the ancient Church, since themselves also in this point
oppose themselves to the ancient Church, and reject that praying for the dead,
practiced by the old Christians: For it was of another nature, and for another
end then that which is used in these days. And if one would now pray for the
dead after the manner of the ancients, he should no less be accounted an
heretic then Aerius who did absolutely reject all prayers for the dead.

All the prayers which the Roman Church makes for the dead, are intended for
the ease of the souls which are thought to be in Purgatory. For although in the
public forms of prayers, in the Masses for the dead, no mention is made of
Purgatory, because those prayers are more ancient then the invention of
Purgatory, yet the intention of all that pray for the dead, is to release their
souls from Purgatory, according to the instruction which the people receive
from their Pastors.

That then the Cardinal may not here object Antiquity to us, it is expedient to
show how the Roman Church in this point is departed from the opinion of the
Ancients, and has forsaken the ancient customs, forging a new sort of prayer
for the dead, which all Antiquity never thought on, making the prayers for the
dead which then were used, not only useless, but also wicked and erroneous.

I say then that the Church of the third and fourth ages after Christ prayed
for the Saints departed, even for the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, Etiam
offerimus tibi pro omnibus qui a saeculo placuerunt tibi Sanctis, Patriarchis,
Prophetis, Justis Apostolis, Martyribus, etc.
which is no more done in our days. The form of those Prayers is found in the
eighth book of the Apostolical Constitutions of Clement, chap. 18. We offer
unto thee for all the Saints that have been pleasant unto thee from the
beginning of the world, for the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Righteous, the
Apostles, the Martyrs, etc. The like prayers are found in the Liturgies
attributed to St. James, to Basil, and to Chrysostom.

Epiphanius in the heresy of Aerius, which is the seventy fifth, puts this
among his errors that he approved not the commemoration of the dead, which was
done in the celebration of the Eucharist. Against that Aerius, Epiphanius
disputes thus, (...);
As for relating the names of the departed, what is to better purpose or more
seasonable and admirable then to make them that are present to believe that
they that are gone, are alive still, and are not brought to nothing, but that
they are and live with the Lord? Observe, that Epiphanius believed that the
dead, of which commemoration was made in the Eucharist, enjoyed life and were
with God. He adds, (...).
Also that the venerable preaching be expounded, that there is hope for them
that pray for their brethren as being in a pilgrimage. In all this there is
nothing whence one may gather, that they prayed in those days for the dead to
ease them of their torment in the fire of Purgatory. Those whom he says to be
in a pilgrimage are not the dead, but the living that pray for the dead. (...).
Epiphanius goes on, The prayer thus made for them profits, though it do not
cut off all the sins, but to signify a greater perfection, because often while
we are in this world, we offend both willingly and unwillingly. He holds that
prayer made for the dead, serves to show that in their life time they did not
attain unto perfection, and that having many times offended in their lives,
they had need to attain after this life to a greater perfection. His next words
are these, (...), etc. (...), etc.
For we make mention both of righteous and of sinners: For sinners looking to
the mercy of God; And for the righteous, Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, etc. that we may separate Christ from the rank
of men by the honor that is deferred unto him, and that we may defer
veneration unto him, meditating in our selves that the Lord is not equalled
unto any of men. In all that discourse is there any thing favorable unto
Purgatory? For as for the Saints, Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs for whom they
prayed, Epiphanius says not, that they prayed to fetch them out of Purgatory,
but to put Christ out of their rank, because he is the only one for whom, etc.
they prayed not. As for others, he says that they prayed for them looking to
the mercy of God, that is, either to the mercy which God had showed to them, or
to the mercy which God would show them in the day of judgment, as St. Paul
speaks, 2 Timothy 1.16. and 18. The Lord grant to Onesiphorus, that he may find
mercy of the Lord in that day.

To the same purpose we have such another discourse of Dionysius the Author of
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, in the third chapter, where he gives a reason
why in the sacred mysteries, the Church made commemoration of the dead. These
are his words (...), etc. (...).
After the kiss of peace comes the reading of the holy [Ecclesiastical] tables,
wherein the names of those that have led a holy life, and are gone to the
perfection of a virtuous immutable life, are pronounced with a loud voice,
exhorting and conducting us to the beatifical habit which is acquired by
resembling them, and to an end growing to a divine likeness; and celebrating
those as living, not as dead, as Theology says, but as past from death to a
most divine life, etc. For as Scripture says, God knows them that are his,
and the death of Saints is precious before him, [In which text] the death of
Saints is put for the perfection which is in holiness. Also consider holily,
that when the venerable signs whereby Christ is signified and communicated,
have been laid upon the sacred Altar, immediately after comes the description
of the Saints, whereby the inseparable bond of their supernatural and sacred
union with him is declared. This Author though he entangle his style with terms
borrowed out of Plato's school, yet is ancient, and may be read with profit.
His description of the public service of his time, shows that the Christian
Church did then live in peace, and had Temples and public ornaments with
splendor. It is like enough that he lived about the year 400. of Christ. All
this discourse shows that the prayer which was then made for the dead, was
only for persons whom they held to be happy and holy; not to draw them out of
the fire of Purgatory.

Austin who writ about the year 420. was the first that said that August. de
verbis Apostoli Sermon. 17. and de 8. qu. Dulc. qu. 2.
Martyrs must not be prayed for; That he does injury to a Martyr, that prays
for a Martyr. And that the usual prayers when they are named at the Altar, are
rather thanksgivings.

The same appears, in that the Ancients prayed for the souls that rested in a
quiet sleep, and that consequently were held not to be in torment. Which form
of prayer remains in the Canon of the Mass, where the Priest says every day,
Memento Domine famulorum and famularum tuarum quae nos praecesserunt in signo
fidei, and dormiunt in somno pacis.
Lord remember the souls of thy servants and haindmaids which went before us in
the sign of the faith, and now are steeping in the sleep of peace. Whilst that
prayer is said by the Priest, the names of the deceased for whom his friends
have paid, are said with a low voice, requesting that their souls tormented in
Purgatory may be relieved by that Mass. But that old clause by Gods permission
remains in the Mass to condemn Purgatory: For there is no reason why one
should give money to awake his friends soul which is sleeping quietly, or why
we should believe that souls tormented in a burning fire, which they say to be
seven times hotter then our ordinary fire, can sleep in the sleep of peace
whilst they are thus tormented.

Page 950.
The Cardinal in the second chapter of the fore-alleadged instance is sore
troubled to make that prayer agree with Purgatory, and says things so
unreasonable, that it is not like that he had any hope to be believed. First he
says, that the souls of the dead which are in that torment are said to rest in
peace, because they departed in the peace of the communion of the Church. It is
true, that such as are received into the communion of the Church, are said to
be in the peace of the Church; But that peace of the Church is not called a
sleep; Now the Mass prays for those that sleep in peace. The intention of the
Church receiving a man into her communion, is not to lay him asleep, and that
peace of the Church may happen and be given to many who are damned nevertheless.

This shift not contenting him, he brings another, saying that these souls
tormented in Purgatory are said to be resting and sleeping in peace, not in
respect of themselves, but of the Church. This conceit is somewhat extravagant.
For it is hard to comprehend, how a man who is burnt and tormented in a fire
can sleep in peace, not in respect of himself, but of another; For every one
that sleeps, sleeps for himself, not in respect of another. If they that
are burning in the fire of Purgatory sleep peaceably in respect of the Church,
the Church has a sense contrary to the truth, and to Gods will. And truly when
the Church prays for one that is tormented, she considers him as being in
torment, not as sleeping in peace. Would it not be a jolly reasoning, if one
said, that Philip is dead or blind in respect of himself, but living and clear
sighted in respect of his friends? Truly in that conceit of the Cardinal there
is either jesting, or want of common sense.

All that was said before, shows sufficiently that the Ancient Christians
prayed for the dead, whom they believed not to be in any place of torment. This
is confirmed by the prayer of Ambrose for the soul of Theodosius. For he speaks
of Theodosius as certain that he was enjoying heavenly felicity. Being free
from the doubtful combat, he enjoys the heavenly light. Again, Ambros. Orat.
de obitu Theodosii. Et ille quidem abiit sibi regnumque non deposuit, sed
mutavit in tabernacula Christi, jure pietatis ascitus in illam Jerusalem
supernam.
He was received into Christ's tabernacles because of his piety, and into
Jerusalem which is above. Again, Theodosius dwells in light, and glories in
the brightness of the Saints: And for all that he prays for him.

But upon that it may be demanded, What good then did the ancient Christians
hope to procure unto their departed friends by their prayers for them? I answer
that their prayers ended to these ends. First, they prayed to God that the
departed might one day rise again to salvation; Such was the prayer of Judas
Maccabee, 2 Mac. 12.42. For (says the Author) Judas did very well and
honestly, in that he was mindful of the resurrection. For if he had not hoped
that they that were slain should have risen again, it had been superfluous and
vain to pray for the dead.

To that prayer many prayers are conformable which are said in the Mass, for
the dead; As this, Absolve quaesumus Domine animas famulorum tuorum ab omni
vinculo delictorum, ut in resurrectionis gloria inter sanctos and electos tuos
resuscitati respirent.
We beseech thee, Lord, that thou absolve the souls of thy servants from every
bond of sin, that being risen in the glory of the resurrection, they may breath
among thy Saints and elect.

Also that was a constant belief among many of the Ancients, that the dead
should not all rise again at the same hour, but some sooner, some later; and
that sins were expiated by the delay of the resurrection; Modicum quodque
delictum mora resurrectionis luendo, suffering the pains, even of the least
sins by the delay of their resurrection, Lib de anima cap. ult.
as Tertullian says, who will have a wife to pray for her departed husband,
and Idem l. de Monogam. cap. 10. Refrigerium ei adpostulet and in prima
resurrectione consortium.
to beg refreshing for him, and that she may bear him company in the first
resurrection. Which is Ambroses prayer for Gratian and Valentinian; Te quaeso
sum Deus ut charissimos juvenes matura resurrectione suscites and resuscites.
I beseech thee, Sovereign God, that thou raise and bring up again these most
dear young men with a timely resurrection. They prayed then for the hastening
of their resurrection.

Then the solicitous care which the ancient Christians had for their dead
friends was increased by a belief received among many, that the Saints were not
received into the heavenly glory presently after their death, but remained in
underground receptacles, which they called Abraham's bosom, unto the day of the
resurrection: Which Cardinal du Perron acknowledges page 994. saying, that
then some persons believed that the souls of the godly enjoyed not the sight of
God before the final judgment, and that in Austins time the Church had not yet
pronounced any decision upon that. For that reason then the old Christians
thought it to be their duty to pray for the dead. That such was the opinion of
most part of the Ancients concerning the state of departed souls, we have
showed it in the third chapter of our Treatise of the Invocation of Saints.

We find also in the writings of the Fathers, that they stood in fear of the
fire of the day of judgment, through which they believed that all must pass
and be burnt more or less, according as every one had more or less sinned, not
excepting the Prophets, and Apostles, nor the Virgin Mary. Ambrose in the
twentieth Sermon upon Psalm. 118. Omnes oportet transire per flammas sive ille
Johannes Evangelista sive ille Petrus, etc.
All must pass through the flames, though it be John the Evangelist whom the
Lord loved, though it be Peter, etc. And in the third Sermon upon Psalm. 36.
Igne purgabuntur silii Levi, igne Daniel, etc.
The sons of Levi shall be purged by fire; Ezekiel, Daniel, and these having
been tried by the fire, shall say, We have past through fire and through water.
Hilary upon Psalm. 118. in the letter Gimel, Emundatio puritatis etiam post
Baptismi aquas reposita quae nos spiritus sancti sanctisicet adventu judicii
igne nos decoquat.
That purification which is reserved to us after the Baptism of water, may
sanctify us by the coming of the Holy Ghost, and perfect us by the fire of the
judgment. In the same place An cum ex omniotioso verbo rationem scimus
praestituri diem judicii concupiscimus, in quo nobis est iudefessus ignis
obeundus? etc.
Do we desire (says he) that day of judgment in which we must go through the
unwearied fire? in which we must undergo those grievous pains to expiate the
souls from their sins? And a little after Si in judicii severitatem capax illa
Dei virgo ventura est, desiderare quis audebit a Deo judicari?
If that Virgin that conceived God must undergo the severity of that judgment,
who is so bold as to desire to be judged by God? And in the second Canon upon
Matthew, Baptisatis in Spiritu reliquum fit consummari igne judicii.
To them that are baptized by the Holy Ghost it remains yet to be perfected
by the fire of the judgment. Irenaeus says the same in the fourth book chap.
9. And Lactantius in the seventh book chap. 21. Justos cum judicaverit Deus,
igne eos examinabit, tunc quorum peccata vel pondere vel numero praevaluerint
perstringentur atque amburentur.
When God shall have judged the righteous, he will examine them by fire. Then
they whose sins shall prevail, either in weight or number, shall be singed and
lightly burnt. Origin in the third Homily upon Psalm 36. Vt ego arbitror omnes
nos venire necess^ est ad illum ignem, Etiam si Paulus aliquis vel Petrus,
veniet tamen ad ignem.
I think that we must all come to that fire, though it were a Paul or a Peter,
yet shall he come to that fire. And in the fourteenth Homily upon Luke, Ego
puto quod and post resurrectionem a mortuis indigeamus sacramento eluente nos
atque purgante; Neque enim absque sordibus resurgere quisquam poterit.
I think that after the resurrection we shall have need of a washing and
purging Sacrament, for none can rise again without pollution.

Of that fire speaks Gregory Nazianzen, in the 42. Sermon, where he says,
(...).
Who can warrant that the judgment shall not overtake us, as being yet
indebted, and needing the fire that shall be there? And Ambrose in the book of
widows says, that Aurum quod judicii die nequeat ignis exurere.
God requires of us gold, which the fire of the judgment is not able to burn.
And Basil, in chap. 26. of the book of the Holy Ghost, speaks of one
Arthenogenes, who (...).
tended to that perfection which shall be made by fire; and in chap. 15. he
interprets that Baptism of fire of which John the Baptist speaks, (...), the
trial that shall be made in the judgment.

That fire is meant in the Texts which Page 990.
M. du Perron alleges, not the fire of Purgatory, which the Roman Church
believes. He alleges Gregory of Nyssa, who says in the book of the
sleepers, that man is purged after this life by the furnace of purging fire.
And Hierom upon Isa. 66. saying, Of those whose works must be purged by fire,
we hold the Judges sentence to be moderate, and mingled with clemency. And
Austin saying, Lib. 1. de dulcit. quaest. and de vera and falsa penitentia,
cap. 18.
that the fire whereby they shall be saved, shall be more grievous, then any
thing we can suffer in this life.

I answer, that these Fathers speak not of a fire where the souls be burnt when
they come out of the body, but of the fire of the day of judgment, which must
(after the opinion of the Fathers) purge the elect after the Resurrection.
Austin is express to that purpose, in chap. 34. of Book 16. of the City God.
Significatur isto igne dies judicii dirimens carnales per ignem salvandos and
igne damnandos.
By this fire is meant the day of judgment, which shall separate the carnal
that must be saved by fire, and those that must be damned by fire. And in chap.
25. of book 20. Ex his quae dicta sunt videtur evidenter apparere in illo
judicio, quasdam quorundam poenas purgatorias futuras.
Out of the things that were said, it seems evidently to appear, that in that
judgment, some pains of some persons shall be purging pains. The title of the
Chapter declares that he speaks of the fire of the last judgment. So the fear
of that fire was a reason why they prayed for the dead. Neither does Austin
contradict this, in Book 21. of the City of God, chap. 16. when he says, that
Purgatorias poenas nullas futuras opinatur nisi ante illud ultimum tremendumque
judicium.
none is of opinion that there shall be any purging pains, but before that last
and fearful judgment: For by the judgment, he understands only the
pronouncing of the last sentence, before which he holds that the purgation
shall be made by fire. By these words he condemns Origen's purgation, who
extended it till after the last judgment.

I could also bring places out of ancient Authors, to show that in their time
the damned souls also were prayed for, at least to ease their torments; and of
late Authors, which say that the Emperor Trajan was fetched out of Hell at
Saint Gregory's prayer. The answer to the 34th Question to Adriochus, which is
put among the works of Athanasius, says, that (...).
sinners (so he calls the damned) receive some benefit and ease by the prayers
of the Church. And we shall see hereafter, that Chrysostom in the third Homily
upon the Epistle to the Philippians, is of the same opinion.

Note by the way, that M. du Perron shows sufficiently, that he believes not
the fire of Purgatory, Page 950.
when he doubts whether it be a real or a metaphorical fire. I think not
that he durst speak so at Rome.

Out of all that was said, it is made manifest, that the prayers of the
Ancients for the dead, were not to fetch souls out of Purgatory, but that they
might rise to salvation, or that they might rise soon, or that in their
peaceable sleep they might receive some greater refreshing, or that they might
be but lightly burnt by the fire of the last judgment, or that the damned
might receive some diminution of their pains in hell. And that the Cardinal
does wrongfully challenge the protection of Antiquity, since the Roman Church
has long since rejected these ancient prayers, and altogether changed their
use and their end.

Of that imaginary fire, into which the Roman Church sends the souls presently
after death, and whence the Pope fetches them by indulgence, loosing under the
earth, where he cannot bind, and extending the power of the Keys, even to the
dead, which are none of his flock, we may affirm that there is nothing more
remote from the belief of the Ancients. For many of them hold, that the souls
while they are out of the body, can suffer nothing. Tertullian in chap. 48. of
his Apologetick, Neque pati quicquam potest anima sola sine stabili materia, id
est carne.
The soul alone cannot suffer any thing without a solid matter, that is,
without the flesh. The same he says in chap. 4. of the book of the testimony
of the soul. Gregory of Nyssa is of the same mind, in the III. Oration of the
Resurrection of Christ. That fire can never touch the separated soul; neither
can darkness be troublesome to her, seeing that she wants eyes: By these
probable reasons, we are moved to believe the Resurrection of the dead. Animam
per se scparatam ignis nunquam at^igerit, nec te^ebrae quid^m ei molestae
fuerint, utpore quae oculis caret.
And so Ambrose in the book of Penitence, chap. 17. Neque animam sine carne,
neque carnem sine anima, cum sint sibi gestorum operum consortiis copulatae,
sine consortio vel poenae esse vel praemii. Vide and orationem de fide
resurrect^onis.
The soul without the body, and the body without the soul, cannot be partakers
of punishment and reward. And Chrysostom in the 39. Homily upon the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, (...).
The soul without the flesh, shall not receive these hidden goods, as also it
shall not be punished. And Arnobius, in the second book, speaking of the soul
separated from the body, maintains, Quis non videt quod sit immortale, quo^
simplex, nullum posse dolorem admittere?
That a simple [substance] cannot feel pain, and that all that can feel pain,
cannot be immortal.

It would be an endless labor to gather all the places of Fathers, contrary to
the Purgatory of the Roman Church: We have produced a great number of them in
another place, In the Buckler of the Faith.
Read Cyprians book against Demetrian, and his book of Mortality. And Ambrose,
in the book of the good of death. This sentence of Austin, in the 232. Sermon,
which is the second against drunkenness, may serve instead of all. Nemo se
decipiat, fratres, duo enim loca sunt, and tertius non est ullus. Qui cum
Christo regnare non meruerit, cum diabolo absque dubitatione ulla peribit.
Let none deceive himself, Brethren, for there are two places, and there is no
third. He that shall not merit to reign with Christ, shall without doubt perish
with the Devil. Observe by the way, that meriting in Austins style; signifies
only acquiring. For that Father denies merits in many places, attributing all
the merit of our salvation to Gods grace.

In the Dialogues of Gregory the I. who writ in the end of the sixth age, it is
evident, that the Purgatory which is believed by the Roman Church, was not yet
forged. For that Pope puts the purgation of souls in bathes, in the wind, and
in rivers. And yet the same Pope in his thirteenth book upon Job, chap. 20.
speaks thus, Quia authoris nostri gratia redempti sumus, hoc jam coelestis
muneris habemus, ut cum a carnis nostrae habitatione subtrahimur, mox ad
coelestia praemia ducamur.
Because we are redeemed by the grace of our Creator, so much we have of
heavenly gift, that when we are withdrawn from the habitation of our flesh, we
are presently brought to the heavenly recompense.

The Greek Churches of our time, pray for the dead, but deny Purgatory; herein
conforming themselves to the example of the Ancients.

The Cardinals false dealing, page 588:
Here I must not forgive a notorious falsification of the Cardinal. He
alleges a place of Chrysostom, but quoteth not the Book or the Homily whence
he takes it, lest that his false dealing should be perceived. That place is
found in the third Homily of the Epistle to the Philippians. The words are
these, (...).
It is not in vain that the Apostles have constituted, that in the dreadful
mysteries commemoration be made of the departed, for they knew that much
benefit arises unto them from that. The Cardinal corrupts that place,
putting offering sacrifice for the dead, instead of making commemoration of
them. For he translateth thus, It is not in vain that the Apostles have given
by tradition, the offering of a sacrifice for the dead; They knew how much
profit they get by it. Note that Chrysostom had said a little before, that the
help that can be given to the dead is very small, and that the dead for whom we
should weep and give alms, are the infidels, and they that are dead without
Baptism. So that the Cardinal corrupts this place, both in the sense and the
words.

Observe also, that Gregory the I. in the 63. Epistle of the seventh book,
contradicts Chrysostom. For, he says that the Apostles consecrated with the
Lords Prayer only, and that the other prayers were added since at several
times. Besides, Chrysostom in this place speaks only of the commemoration of
the dead, not of praying for them.

The same Father did not believe that one can repent after death, or that after
this life one may satisfy for his sins. For so he speaks in the second Sermon
upon Lazarus, (...).
Pay all here, that thou may without trouble see that judicial seat; For while
we are here we have good hopes, but when we are gone thither, it is no more in
our power to repent, or to be purged from sins committed. Cyprian speaks the
same language toward the end of his Book to Demetrian. Quando istinc excessum
fuerit nullas jam penitentiae locus est, nullus satisfactionis effectus, hic
vita aut amittitur aut tenetur.
When one is gone hence, penitence has no more place, and satisfaction is
without effect. Here life is either had or obtained. And a little after, When
one is yet in this world, no penitence is too late: The access to Gods mercy is
open, and the access is easy to them that seek and understand the truth. Tu
sub ipso licet exitu and vitae temporalis occasu pro delictis roges, and Deum
qui unus and verus est confessione and fide agnitionis implores, venia
confitenti datur, and credenti indulgentia salutaris de divina pietate
conceditur, and ad immortalitatem sub ipsa morte transitur.
If thou pray for thy sins, though upon the point of thy departing, and of the
end of temporal life, and implore the only true God by confession, and with an
acknowledging faith, the pardon is given to the confessing [sinner] and the
saving indulgence is granted to the Believer by the divine compassion, and in
death it self, one passes to immortality. Of a third place, where penance is
made after death, the Fathers speak not, August. de peccatorum merito and
remissione, cap. 28. Nec est ullus ulli medius locus ut possit esse nisi cum
Diabolo qui non est cum Christo.
There is no middle place (says Austin) for any person; so that he that is not
in Christ, could not be any where else but with the Devil. And in another
place, Quinto Hypognosticon. Tertium penitus ignoramus, nec esse in Scripturis
sanctus invenimus.
We are totally ignorant of a third place, and find none at all in the holy
Scriptures.

The Fathers indeed speak often of a purging fire, both in this life and after.
But by the purging fire in this life, they understand the afflictions, of this
present life, or the length of the penance, which Penitents make publicly in
the Church. August. De Civitate Dei, l. 22. c. 13. Nos quidem in hac vita esse
quasdam poenas purgatorias confitemur.
We confess (says Austin) that in this mortal life there are purgatory pains.
And a little after, he reckons among the pains of that purgative fire, the loss
of friends, and the calamities of this life. Lib. 22. c. 16. Aliud est pro
peccatis longo dolor cruciatum emendari, and purgari diu igne, aliud peccata
omnia passione purgasse.
Thus Cyprian Epist. 52. comparing Martyrdom, with the public penance which
sinners do in the Church, calls that penance a purgation by fire.

The same Fathers speak also of a purging fire after this life, through which
they make all Saints, and even the Virgin Mary to pass. By which fire they
understand that of the last day of judgment, and in that fire, they believed
that both bodies and souls must be purged, according as they have more or less
sinned, as we proved before. They commonly call that purging fire of the day of
Judgment, the Baptism by fire, and the flaming sword at the entry of Paradise.
But as for a fire, into which the souls of the faithful enter immediately after
death, and the way to deliver those souls out of that fire by Indulgences or
Masses, no trace of that is found in Antiquity.

Pope Gregory the I. in his Dialogues, about the year 595. began to speak of
the purgation of souls in bathes, in rivers, and in the wind. Whence by degrees
that Purgatory was formed, which is now believed, and which feeds so many idle
bellies, who as far as in them lies, diminish the benefit of Christ's merit for
their temporal increase.

I will add here, the prayers used for the soul of a Cardinal, in his Obsequies
and Funeral, as they are set down in the first Book of the Sacred Ceremonies,
in the XV. Section, chap. 1. that the Reader may judge, whether those prayers
may help to fetch their souls out of Purgatory.

Deus cui omnia vivunt and cui non pereunt moriendo nostra corpora, sed
mutantur in melius, te supplices deprecamur ut suscipi jubeas animam famuli tui
per manus sanctorum Angelorum deducendam in sinum amici tui Abrahae
Patriarchae, resuscitandam in novissimo judicii magni die, and quicquid
fallente diabolo vitiorum contraxit, tu pius and misericors abluas indulgendo,
per Christum, etc.
O God to whom all things live, and to whom our bodies perish not when they
die, but are changed to a better condition, we humbly beseech thee to command
that thy servants soul be led by the hands of thy holy Angels into the bosom of
the Patriarch Abraham thy friend, to be raised up in the last day of the great
judgment; and that thou who art meek and merciful blot out all the vices
which he had got by the Devils deceit. And a little after, Domine quando
veneris judicare terram, ubi me abscondam a vultu irae tuae? Quia peccavi nimis
in vita mea, commissa mea pavesco and ante te erubesco, dum veneris judicare,
noli me condemnare, etc.
Lord, when thou come to judge the earth, where shall I hide my self from the
face of thy wrath? For I have offended thee very much in my life. I am frighted
with mine offenses, and am confounded before thee. When thou come to judge,
do not condemn me. And a little after, Absolve quaesumus animam famuli tui ab
omni vinculo delictorum ut in resurrectionis gloria inter sanctos and electos
tuos resuscitatus respiret.
We beseech thee, Lord, absolve the soul of thy servants from every bond of
sins, that being risen again in the glory of the resurrection, he may be
refresht among thy Saints and Elect. Then the quire singing, answers, Libera
Domine de morte aeterna in die illa tremenda. Quando coeli movendi sunt and
terra, dum veneris judicare saeculum per ignem. Tremens factus sum ego and
timeo dum discussio venerit atque ventura ira, Quando coeli, etc. Dies illa,
dies calamitatis and miseriae dies magna and amara valde.
Deliver, Lord, from eternal death, in that dreadful day, when heaven and
earth shall be moved, when thou will come to judge the world by fire. I am
become trembling, and dread the coming of the examination, and of the wrath to
come. When the heavens shall be shaken, that day, that day of calamity and
misery, that great and very bitter day.

All these prayers are but words of a soul frighted with the fear of hell and
eternal death, and they are requests that the departed person may not be
eternally damned, and that he may rise to salvation. Of release from Purgatory,
not one word. For these prayers are more ancient then the invention of
Purgatory. Indeed as the Cardinal doubts whether the fire of Purgatory be
real or metaphorical, which is as much as doubting whether it be true or
imaginary; so I believe not that half the people of the Roman Church believe
it. No doubt but most of them laugh at it in their heart.

CHAP. 2. Of Indulgences given unto the dead, and generally of Indulgences.
IF the Fathers of the first ages of the Church had made any mention of the
Popes power to fetch souls out of Purgatory, and of the Indulgences, which the
Pope scatters abroad, not any upon the living, but upon the dead, we may be
sure that the Cardinal would not have omitted it in his Treatise of the prayer
for the dead: For the principal end of his book is, to exalt the Popes power.
But he durst not stir that matter, knowing that it is a sink, which the more it
is stirred, the more it stinks; and that no mention of the Roman Indulgences is
found in all Antiquity. It is a noli me tangere, a sore fistula, which they
dare not touch. This was it that gave occasion to Luthers preaching. It was the
first means that God used to discover the abuse, the tyranny, and the shameful
traffic of the Roman Prelat. Whereupon it will be to good purpose to hear that
famous President Thuanus in the first book of his history. Leo cum alioquiad
omnem licentiam sponte sua ferretur, Laurent^i Puccii Cardinalis hominis
turbidi cui nimium tribuebat impulsu, ut pecuniam ad immensos sumptus undique
corrogaret, missis per omnia Christiani orbis regna diplomatis omnium
delictorum expiationem ac vitam aeternam pollicitus est, constituto pretio quod
quisque pro gravitate peccati dependeret. In eamque rem per provincias
quaestores and aeraria ordinavit, quibus additi praecones qui tanti benificii
magnitudinem apud populos commendarent, etc. Quod licentiose nimis a
Pontificiis Ministris passim atque in Germania praecipue fiebat. Vbi qui
redimendam pecuniam Romae a Pontifice conduxerant per lustra and per popinas
quotidie sine pudore in alea usum ususque turpissimos potestatem extrahendi
animas functorum ex igne expiatorio profundebant.
Pope Leo, a man of himself given to all licentiousness, by the instigation of
Cardinal Laurentio Puccio, a turbulent man, to whom he deferred too much; that
he might scrape up from all parts money to maintain his infinite expenses, sent
Bulls over all the Kingdoms of Christendom, promising the expiation of all
sins and eternal life, and taxing the rate which every one was to pay,
according to the grievousness of the sin. To which end he sent receivers of
money, and established places of receipt in all Provinces. And to the receivers
Preachers were joined, which recommended the greatness of that high benefit
unto the people, and by Sermons composed with much art, and by the publishing
of certain Pamphlets excessively exalted the efficacy of these Bulls. Which was
executed too licentiously in many places by the Popes Ministers, especially in
Germany, where those that had taken the farm of those profits from the Pope did
lavish out the benefit of that power they had from the Pope to fetch souls out
of Purgatory, spending it every day without shame, in bawdy-houses, and
Taverns, upon dycing and most filthy uses. Then arose Martin Luther.
Pollydorius Virgilius in the eighth book of the inventours of things gives the
same account of that business.

To know out of what stock the Popes bring forth that spiritual liberality, we
must know that the Pope boasts that he keeps the keys of the Churches
treasure, wherein are laid up the supererogatory satisfactions of Christ, of
the Saints, and of the Monks. By that account Christ suffered more then needed
for our redemption. And the Saints and Monks have suffered and done more then
was requisite for satisfaction for their own sins. Pope Clement the sixth
Extravagante Unigenitus. Ad cujus quidem thesauri cumulum beatoe Dei genitricis
and omnium electorum a primo justo ad ultimum merita adminiculum proestare
noscuntur.
says, the dispensation of that treasure is committed unto him, and that the
merits of the blessed Mother of God, and of all the elect from the first to the
last, serve to heap up that treasure, and that one must not fear that ever it
be consumed or diminished.

That Pope makes Christ's merit to serve to make up a stricken measure, and the
merits of the Saints to make it a heaped measure, which is not a small
augmentation of the treasure, and addition to Christ's benefit. Christ then is
very much in debt. Is he not?

In that treasure the Pope turns his hand, and dispenses these superabounding
satisfactions of Christ and his Saints, when, and to whom, and in what measure
he thinks fit. And this is called pardons and indulgences, which are very
lucrative to his Holiness, and to the Clergy. Of which pardons the Pope takes
what part he pleases for himself, as the Jesuit Emanuel Sa Eman. Sa
Aphorismis in verbo Indulgentiae. Indulgentia utitur etiam qui eam concessit.
Soto Navarr. Bellarm.
says after Soto, Navarrus, and Bellarmin, so that the Pope pardons himself.
And whether these indulgences be given upon just or unjust cause, one must not
enquire, as the same Jesuit says, Some say that the indulgence given without
cause is valid. Others say that the cause must be just and proportionate to the
indulgence. For my part, I hold that one must not at all doubt of the
Indulgence given by the Pope. And these indulgences are of such force, that he
that commits a reserved sin (which sort of sin is held to be most horrible) in
hope that the Jubilee will come, may be absolved by the Jubilee; as the same
Jesuit says Id. ibid. Reservatum crimen patrans, spe Jubilaei, potest per
Jubilaeum absolvi.
after Navarrus and Bellarmin, That is, a man that has set a Church on fire,
or killed a Priest, trusting upon the approaching Jubilee, Id. ibid. Ego de
indulgentia a Papa data non censeo quicquam dubitandum.
in which he shall have plenary indulgence, shall not be disappointed of his
expectation, and shall be absolved, so that he may be wicked without danger.
Cardinal Tolet a Jesuit defines thus a plenary indulgence. Tolet. Instruct.
sacerd. lib. 6. cap. 24.. 3. Indulgentia plena remittit totam poenam and culpam.
It is that which remitteth all the pain and all the fault.

To proceed with order, every five and twentieth year the Pope celebrates a
Jubilee, in which he opens that treasure, and names certain Churches of the
City of Rome, where he places those pardons and plenary indulgences, upon
condition of making certain devotions upon certain days in the said Churches.
He that should do the same devotions in other Churches nearer to him, or lying
more conveniently for him, yea though he should do ten times more devotions,
yet should have no part in those indulgences, for being so simple as to seek
the remission of sins in a place where it is not to be found. That year the
inhabitants of Rome have two great advantages; The one, that they have the
remission of sins at their door and near home, whereas those that live in
Poland, in Ireland, or in Portugal, come from very far to seek it. The other,
that they grow fat by receiving pilgrims, whose blood and marrow they suck, and
that the Churches of Rome are inrinched with the offerings of strangers.

The next year, if it be his Holinesses pleasure, he transports the Jubilee
into the remote Provinces, and puts it in one or two Cities of France for the
convenience of the French. They that live near, or that have good legs or good
horses, and money to travel, get that plenary pardon at an easy rate, but the
poor, and the lame, and they that want horses are deprived of that spiritual
liberality.

The Pope does more, for he gives indulgences to the dead, and appoints
certain Altars, upon which whosoever gets a Mass sung on certain days, draws a
soul out of Purgatory, such as he will choose; which is not done without paying.

And that one may not doubt of the certainty of the pardon, the Pope gives
pardons to several Churches, Tolet. de Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 6. cap. 24. Sect.
Secund. Cum conceditur limitata indulgentia temporis ut mill annorum and bis
mill and plurium.
with an exact reckoning of years and days, as if they had cast account with
God. For example, the book of Roman indulgences says, that at the Church of
St. Eusebius of Rome there is for every day seventy eight thousand years of
free pardon, and as many forties. Here is another out of the same book, of
singular virtue for recreation. Nel mese de Febraro, la Domenica delle
Sertuagesima e statione a S. Lorenzo fuori d'elle mura e indulgentia plenaria e
undieci milla anni d'indulgentia e quaranta, otto quarentene e la remissione
d'ella terza part di tutti peccati, e si libera una anima d'elle pene del
purgatorio.
In the month of February upon Septuagesima Sunday, there is a station at St.
Laurence out of the walls, and plenary indulgence, and eleven thousand years of
indulgence, and forty eight forties, and the remission of the third part of all
sins: and there a soul is delivered from the pains of Purgatory. I cannot
comprehend what good it does to a man who has got full pardon of all sins, to
grant him over and above the pardon of the third part of his sins.

There is a book well known Printed at Paris chez Abraham Saugrain rue S.
Jaques aax deuz viperes. 1604.
of the Indulgences of St. Francis his coard, to which the indulgences of Rome
are added. There among many the like absurdities, this is found page 251. Every
day (of the month of August, until the Nativity of our Lady) there are eight
hundred threescore thousand two hundred threescore and two years, and a hundred
days of indulgence, and the remission of the third part of sins, granted in
many Churches; He that needs but a hundred thousand years of pardon, what shall
he do with the seven hundred thousand that remain to him? And to what purpose
those hundred days added to the eight hundred thousand years?

Here is worse, for the Pope distributes indulgences at random, throwing them
among the multitude, as if one cast a handful of farthings among a company of
beggars. The Pope does this on the day of his coronation, sitting upon throne a
set upon the top of the stairs of St. Peter's Church; There he scatters upon
the people standing in the place of St. Peter, a plenary indulgence, that is, a
full and whole pardon, as it is written in the first book of the sacred
ceremonies, in the last chapter of the last Section, in these words, Diaconus a
dextris tiaram quod regnum appellant triplici corona ornatu^ Pontificis capiti
imponit. Populo acclamante Kyrie eleison Diaconus adextris Latin, a simstris
vero vulgariter publicant plenarias indulgentias.
The Deacon that stands on the right hand, sets upon the Popes head the tiaera,
which is called the reign, adorned with a triple crown; And the people crying,
Kyrie eleison, the Deacon which stands at the right hand, in Latin, and the
Deacon standing at the left, in the vulgar tongue, publish full indulgences.
That being done, a banquet is brought for the refection of his Holiness. That
spreading of Indulgences, is an imitation of Kings, who in the day of their
coronation scatter some handful^s of money upon the multitude. As Kings take
that liberality out of their temporal treasure, so does the Pope take that gift
of indulgences out of his spiritual treasure. And that scramble of Indulgences
being thrown upon the crowd, every one catches what he can.

Observe what advantage the Pope gives to himself over other Bishops in the
power of Indulgences. For whereas the Pope distributes Indulgences, by hundred
thousands, Bishops cannot give above forty days pardon ordinarily, and one
years pardon in the dedication of a Church. Then there are many sins, of which
the absolution is reserved unto the Pope, although Christ said unto all the
Apostles, and consequently unto all their successors, Matthew. 18. John 21.
Whatsoever you loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, reserving no
particular advantage unto St. Peter.

The Lord Cardinal du Perron has been employed for the distribution of that
kind of wares. For when he was yet but Bishop of Eureux, being Ambassador at
Rome to Clement the VIII. and having born the penance and satisfactions
enjoined unto his King by the Pope, as representing the Kings person; the Pope
to appease the King (who might have taken that usage unkindly, as one who had
never yet learned that lesson to be beaten by Attorney) gave to M. du Perron
some bags full of little crosses, and blessed grains to bestow among the people
of France, with this indulgence, that every Frenchman that should have some of
these grains in his beads, should get a hundred years of pardon every time that
he should kiss them.

At the same time that M. du Perron was venting abroad those light wares* and
that these Indulgences were set in the streets, and public places of Paris, I
was Chapplain in Ordinary to Catherine de Bourbon.
Madam the Kings sister, who being then at Fontainebleau, I had some speech
with M. du Perron about that subject, and told him, that it was not credible
that a man of such an excellent wit as he, should believe that by kissing those
grains, he might get a hundred years of pardon, and that he had little care of
his ^eputation, when he brought such wares out of Italy. Upon this he grew
angry, saying that I accused him of Atheism: Then he alleged the example of
Christ, who sent the leprous to the pool of Siloam to make them clean, although
he could have cleansed them without that; That the Pope also without these
means could forgive sins, but it pleased him to make use of these means. But
upon further conference, I could not get from him any command of God, for that
practice, nor any example of the Apostles, nor of their Disciples, nor of any
ancient Doctor. It is not found, that the High Priests of the Old Testament
laid up in their treasure the merits or satisfactions of Noah, or Abraham, or
Moses; or that they gave any Indulgences. Yea, the Pope exercises a power,
which Christ did never exercise. Neither the Apostles nor their Disciples gave
any indulgence. There was no speech then of pardons of a hundred thousand
years, nor of privileged Altars to deliver souls out of Purgatory. Neither is
it like, that the Apostles having taught the Church, that the blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin, believed that the Bishop of Rome ought or might
gather the overplus of the merits or satisfactions of the Saints, thereby to
purchase the remission of sins. For who gave him commission to gather that
overplus of their satisfactions, and lay it up in his treasure? Who has
instituted that treasure? Who has entrusted him with the dispensation of the
same? When did that dispensation begin?

Let us hear, what the most famous of our Adversaries say of this point.

Cardinal Cajetan chap. 2. of the Treatise of Indulgences, De ortu
ind^lg^ntiarum si cert^tudo hab^ri posset veritati indagendae opem ferret,
rerum quia nulla Sacrae Scripturae nulla priscorum Doctorum Graecoru^ aut
Latinorum authoritas scripta haec ad nostram dedaxit notitiam, sed hoc solum a
trecentis annis Scripturae commendatum est de vetustis patribus, quod Beatus
Gregorius indulgentias stationum instituit.
If one might have some certainty of the origin of Indulgences, it would help
us to the search of the truth; but we have not any written authority, either of
the holy Scripture, or of the Ancient Greek or Latin Authors, that bring us the
knowledge of it. Only, since these three hundred years it was written
concerning the ancient Fathers, that St. Gregory instituted the Indulgences of
the stations. He says, that some, as Thomas Thomas in 4tum Sententiarum.
have written that of Gregory, yet in Gregory's writings no such thing is
found. And for many ages after that Gregory, who writ in the year 595. no
mention of it is found.

Navarrus in the Comment of the year of the Jubilee page 545. speaks thus, That
most holy man John of Rochester, reverend for his dignity of Bishop and
Cardinal, taught us why the Ancients speak so seldom of Indulgences, and the
modern Authors so often. And these are his reasons Multa de Evangeliis and
aliis Scripturis sunt excusa luculentius, and intellecta perspicacius quam
fuerant olim. Quod nemo jam dubitat orthodoxus an Purgatorium sit, de quo tamen
apud priscos illos nulla vel qua^ rarissima fiebat mentio.
Many things of the Gospels and other Scriptures are now more splendidly
printed, and more clearly understood then they were in old time. No Orthodox
man doubts now whether there be a Purgatory, of which yet the Ancients speak
not at all or very seldom, etc. For when they made no mention of Purgatory, no
body sought for indulgences.

Biel speaks to the same purpose, Gabriel Biel Lectione 57. in Canonem missae.
Dicendum quod ante tempora beati Gregorii modicus vel nullus fuit usus
Indulgentiarum. Nunc autem cr^brescit earum usus, quia sine dubio Ecclesia
habet Spiritum Sponsi sui Christi, and ideo non errat.
It must be confessed, that before Gregory's time the use of Indulgences was very
little or none at all. But now the use of them grows frequent, because without
doubt the Church has the Spirit of her Bridegroom and therefore erreth not.
Upon this the Cardinal of Rochester is very express, whose words are alleged
by Polydorus Virgilius chap. 1. of the eighth book of the Inventors of things,
Multos fortasse movet indulgentiis istis non usque adeo fidere, quod earum usus
in Ecclesia videtur esse recen^ior, and admodum sero apud Christianos repertus.
Quibus ego respondeo non admodum certum esse a q^o primum tradi coeperint, etc.
De Purgatorio apud priscos vel nulla vel rarissima fiebat mentio. Sed and
Groecis ad hunc usque diem non est creditum esse. Quandiu enim nulla fuerat de
Purgatorio cura, nemo curabat Indulgentias.
Perhaps that which moves many persons not to put much trust in Indulgences,
is that the use of them in the Church seems to be new, and very lately found
among Christians. To which I answer, that it is not very certainly known by
whom they began first to be given. Then he adds, No Orthodox man makes a
doubt whether there be a Purgatory, of which yet there is either no mention or
very little among the Ancients: And to this day the Grecians do not believe it.
For as long as no man cared for Purgatory, no man also cared for Indulgences:
For hence depends all the value put upon Indulgences. Take away Purgatory, what
need of Indulgences? At that time then began Indulgences when men began to be
afraid of the torments of Purgatory.

Bellarmin does not contradict this, but says Bellarm. lib. 2. de Indulgentiis
cap. 1. Sect. Quarta.
If we had nothing certain about the treasure of Indulgences (which yet we do
not grant) before Clements constitution: Yet we might be certain enough of the
truth of that treasure, by the declaration of the High Priest Clement: For we
know that God gave him to be a Master, and a Doctor. Now that Clement lived but
three hundred years ago.

Navarrus goes further, for although he was the Popes Penitentiary, yet when
he writ for Indulgences he could not abstain from speaking ill of them, saying
that Navarrus de Jubilaeo page 548. A^^otat. Glossa ea ratione quod quaestores
non quaerunt commodum animarum sed pecuniarum.
the grant of them is odious, because the Collectors seek not the good of the
souls, but the profit of money, as the Gloss of the rules of Chancery observes
in the fifty sixth rule. He says also that Per eam multum enerva^ur
satisfactio poenitentia^is.
by Indulgences the penitential satisfaction is much enervated. Concedens
ind^lgentiam, de alieno soluit alterius debita, and indecorum esse id fusius
facere significat illud barb^rum proverbium, De alieno corio corrigias longas.
Yea, he snibs the Pope his Master very smartly, saying that he that gives
Indulgences pays the debts of the one with the estate of another, according
to the Provorb; It is cutting large thongs out of another man's leather. Which
he says, because the Pope by his Indulgences turns the merits and
satisfactions of Saints and Monks into a payment for others.

It is true that the word Indulgence is often found in the Fathers, but taken
in another sense, for the remission of sins, and for the ease from penances
imposed upon penitents by the Ecclesiastical Canons.

Especially of Indulgences given to the dead, we have seen above, that Pope
Gelasius Gelas. Commonitorio ad Faustum Leg^tum.
who lived toward the end of the fifth age does formally condemn them, and
denies that the Bishop of Rome can give any absolution to the dead, because it
is written, All that thou shall loose upon earth, not under the earth. And how
can the Pope pretend to be the Pastor of them that are no more in the world,
seeing that they are no more of his flock, and that no charge of them is
committed unto him? For the power of binding and the power of loosing were
given together unto the Apostles, and these two things are inseparable. Yet the
Pope uses not the power of binding toward the dead. Of which the reason is
evident. Note.
Even that none would give money to bind the souls of his departed friends, and
to increase their torment, or condemnation. Navar. Comment, de Indulg. and
Jubil. page 570. I^f rior Papa non ^otest indulgentiam intendere ad mortuos
Purgatorii.
The Pope then has reserved that which is lucratiVe unto himself, for he gets
an incredible revenue that way. Observe, that this is the most important point
of religion, namely the remission of sins. Wherefore Satan was most busy about
it, and into such a holy matter, brought such an horrible corruption.

About this point there is a dissent among the Doctors, some say that the Pope
draws souls out of Purgatory by a power of jurisdiction. Others say, that he
does it by way of suffrage; But all agree, that souls come out of Purgatory by
virtue of the Indulgence. The first sort has reason to mock the second. For he
that intercedes for a sinner, does not forgive him. To pardon by intercession
is an expression that contradicts it self. Now every indulgence is a pardon.

Observe also that the Pope being able (if we may believe him) to deliver as
many souls as he pleases out of Purgatory, yet leaves them by millions, and
for so many ages in that burning torture, which is an unmercifull and most
cruel part.

I will add for a corollary some expressions of Bellarmin, which will show how
Indulgences derogate from the merit of Christ, and clip the benefit of the
same. That Cardinal Jesuit speaks thus, Bellarm. l. 2 de Indul. cap. 1. Sect.
Tertia, Merita Christi partim sunt omnibus necessaria partim non necessaria,
sed utilia, atque hoc modo ad fundamentum indulgentiaru^ pertinent, etc. Ac si
quis post gratiam reconciliationis adeptam adhuc sit reus luendae poenae
temporalis, is non necessario eget meritis Christi ut per ea reatus illi
simpliciter condonetur, etc.
Christ's merits are partly necessary to all, partly not necessary, but useful;
and in that second respect they belong to the ground of Indulgences. Now to
show how the merits of Christ are only useful, not necessary, he adds, If
any after he has obtained the grace of reconciliation is yet in guilt and
debt, as for the temporal pain, that person has no need of the merits of
Christ, that by them that obligation to the pain be absolutely remitted. Not
that without the merits of Christ that obligation to the pain can be absolutely
remitted, but because he may perhaps not ask of God so great a liberality, and
be content to make himself the satisfaction by his own labors and pains,
either in this life, or in Purgatory, the merit of Christ always working
together. Of which he gives the reason in the third chapter, because it is a
thing more honorable to us, and more useful, that the second causes be not
idle, but contributing with the first cause. That Jesuit seems to personate a
sinner speaking thus unto God, It pleases thee to give me an absolute pardon
by Christ, and remit the whole pain, both the eternal and the spiritual: But I
will not accept such a great liberality. I choose rather to be burnt for some
hundredths of years, and to satisfy thee my self. For it is honorable for me
to satisfy in person. Is not that a magnanimous part, to send back unto God
his gift, and refuse to be too much obliged unto him? Upon that account the
Devils who make the whole satisfaction unto God by their punishment, are the
most honorable. And it is not credible that a man who has taken that generous
resolution, will desire the Popes indulgences to shorten his sufferings, unless
he choose rather to be obliged to the Pope, then to God.

Fourth Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. OF THE Celibat of Clarks and Monks.
CHAP. 1. A comparison of continent Virginity with Matrimony. That many
Prophets and Apostles were married. That the high Priests under the Law were
married. Examination of the Cardinals shifts.
ALthough chaste and holy matrimony has God for the Author, who did institute
it in Paradise, even before man's Fall: And though Christ himself did honor it
with his presence, and the woman was given to man for the propagation of
mankind, for help and mutual comfort, and for a remedy against incontinence:
Yet it must be acknowledged, that continent Virginity, not tempted with any
carnal desires, but possessing integrity of mind, no less then of body, has
many advantages above matrimony. For a continent man who leads a single life,
is not distracted with the care of his family: He has fewer bonds to tie him
unto the world; He has more time to employ in study and meditation, and being
less laden with other burdens, he is the fitter to bear the Cross. When it is
put on any to take a forced or voluntary exile for the Gospel, a single man
will fly with more ease, then he that is clogged with wife and children.

But that gift of continence untempted with concupiscences, is given but unto
few persons. And God gives it not sooner to a Pastor of the Church, then to
one of the people, and they that ask it of God by prayers, have no promise to
be heard in that point: For God has promised to hear us in things necessary to
salvation; but that gift, to be able to be without a woman, and without any
temptation in that kind, is not necessary for that end. Yea many that made that
vow of a single life, before they had well measured their strength, have cast
themselves into ruin, and entangled themselves in the Devils nets. In that, as
in all other things, God shows his wisdom: For having created man for
society, not for solitude, and taking care of the preservation of mankind, he
has bestowed that gift upon few persons, and has planted in man a natural
desire of marriage. Which desire, whosoever out of an affectation of greater
perfection will resist with obstinacy, or with a rash vow, shall find in the
end, that he has drawn a great deal of sorrow upon himself, and ensnared
himself into many sins, and that to his own harm he would make himself wiser
then God. For this cause the Apostle Paul, to whom God by an especial
privilege had given the gift of continence, said to the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
7.7.
I would that all men were, even as I my self: But acknowledging that it is
beyond humane strength, and that it is a gift which God bestows upon few
persons, he adds, but every man has his proper gift of God, one after this
manner, and another after that. Next, he charge all to whom God has not
imparted that gift, to marry. If they cannot contain (says he) let them marry,
for it is better to marry then to burn. It is to be noted, that in all that
Chapter in which he speaks at large, both of marriage and virginity, and of the
conveniences of a single life, especially in time of persecution; he speaks
not of the Pastors of the Church, but of all the godly in general: Knowing
that God gives the gift of continence, not accoording to the charges that a
man has in the Church, but according to his own will, and distributeth his
gifts as he thinks best: And that where that gift of continence is wanting, he
will have all persons to marry, making no exception either of Ecclesiastical
charges, or of a Monastical vow, which then was not in use.

In this point, as in all others, we must consult the Lords mouth, and take his
Word for our rule. In that Word, we fi^d that the most excellent servants of
God were married: That Moses, Samuel, Isaiah, etc. had wives: In Isaiah
especially it is observable, that even when he had those excellent revelations,
and when God had filled him with the Prophetical Spirit, he begot a son on his
wife by Gods command, as is to be seen in the eighth chapter of his Prophecy,
ver. 3.

Thus the high Priests and other Priests under the Old Testament, who
continually attended the service of the Temple, yet were married, and that in a
time when God tied his people unto many outward purifications, and to a bodily
cleanness, far more strictly then under the Gospel. Sure, if there had been
some pollution in matrimony, or something derogating unto the holiness of the
sacred Ministry, God would have provided for the Priesthood by some other
means, then by the lineal succession.

Mark 1.30. Christ heals Peter's wives mother. Our Adversaries deny it not,
but they say, that such as were married among the Apostles, abstained from
their wives, since the time that they were called unto the Apostleship. But
that is said without proof, and against the sentence of the Apostle Paul, 1
Cor. 7.34. The husband has not power of his own body, but the wife. And in the
same place, Defraud not one another, except it be for a time. And against
Christ's prohibition, Matthew. 19.6. A man shall cleave to his wife, and both
shall be one flesh, so they are no more two, but one flesh: What therefore God
has put together, let no man put asunder. Now Christ speaks there of the
separation of the bed, and of the conjunction which makes husband and wife to
be one body and one flesh. Had Christ taken from his Disciples the use of their
wives, the Pharisees that spied his life and actions narrowly, would have been
sure to defame him for it, and make his doctrine odious.

It must not be omitted, that the Roman Church puts Saint Peter's daughter among
the Saints, and calls her Petronilla, by her Fathers name. Whence it follows,
that Peter begot her in the time of his Apostleship, for before he was an
Apostle, his name was not Peter.

The text of the same chap. Matthew. 19. where the Apostle Peter says to Christ,
behold we have left all things and followed thee. Whence our Adversaries
infer, that he had left his wife, shall be examined hereafter.

Not only St. Peter was married, but many others among the Apostles, if we
believe Ignatius in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, (...).
Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles did marry. And Clemens Alexandrinus,
speaking against those that despised matrimony, Clem. Alex. 3. Stromat. (...),
Do they reject the Apostles? for Peter and Philip got children: Philip married
his daughters to husbands. Ambrose upon 2 Cor. 11. Omnes Apostoli excepto
Johanne and Paulo uxores habuerunt.
All the Apostles, John and Paul only excepted, had wives.

Acts 21.9. it is written, that Philip the Evangelist had four daughters.

Platina in the life of Cletus, says that St. Luke had his wife in Bithynia.

Wherefore also the Apostle Paul, who was not married, declares that he had
power to carry along with him a sister that should be his wife, as well as the
other Apostles, 1 Cor. 9.5. Have we not power to lead about (...), a sister, a
wife, as well as other Apostles, and the brethren of the Lord and Cephas? It is
true, that the Greek word for a wife, signifies also any other woman. Note
that both in Greek and in French, the same word serves for a wife and any woman
But in vain to the word sister, had he added the word woman, seeing that every
sister is a woman, if by the word woman, he had not understood a wife. That
this might not be perceived, the Page 698, 699.
Cardinal alleging this text, says, a woman sister, instead of a sister,
woman or wife, making that word sister, added to the word woman, to distinguish
her (says he) from a married woman, whereas in Greek, the word (...), woman or
wife, is added to the word (...), sister, to distingush her from all other
Christian women, which generally were called sisters. Tertullian in the book of
Pudicity, chap. 8. confirms that explication, saying, It was lawful for the
Apostles to marry, and to lead their wives along with them. And Clemens
Alexandrinus, Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3. p. 192. (...); etc.
Paul makes no difficulty in a certain Epistle to name his wife, which which he
led not along with him, that he might be served with less trouble. He says
then in a certain Epistle, Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife,
etc. Which I allege not because I believe that St. Paul was married, but to
show how Clemens understood that sister woman, and that he took it, as we do,
for a wife. I am content to presuppose, that these Apostles who led their wives
about, used them only for household businesses, not out of any vow, or any
prohibition from Christ, or because they held that contrary to their Ministry;
but because minds transported unto divine things, will easily forget humane
things. Leo IX. Distinct. 3. Can. Omnino. Omnino confitemur non licere Episcopo
Presbytero diacono propriam uxorem causa religionie abjicero a cura sua; sed ut
ei victum and vestitum largiatur, sed non ut cum illa carnaliter ex more
jaceat. Sicut and sanctos Apostolos legimus egisse, beato Paulo dicente,
Nunquid non habemus potestatem mulierem sororem circumducendi?
Pope Leo the IX. though an adversary to the marriage of the Clergy, understood
that text of women married with the Apostles.

I am not ignorant that some of the Ancients, as Hierom and Austin, understand
these Texts of some women that followed the Apostles for their household
service, like those women that followed Christ, ministering unto him of their
substance, Luke 8.2, 3. not considering that in the Greek there is not a woman
sister, that is a Christian wife, as St. Austin says, but a sister woman, or
wife. Truly it would have been unbeseeming for an Apostle, that bad a lawful
wife, to leave her at home, and carry another about to use her about household
businesses; or if he had been a single man, to carry a woman about, especially
in journeys of a thousand or twelve hundred leagues. For although the Apostles
had virtue enough to overcome that temptation, yet they could not tie the
tongues of the people, or avoid distraction. Certainly such a service had been
performed with more decency by a man then by a woman, and by many women, more
decently then by one. The example of Christ, whom many women followed, is
nothing to this purpose: For these women that St. Luke speaks of, followed him
in great number, and their farthest journey was twenty five or thirty leagues,
which is the distance from Galilee to Jerusalem. But here St. Paul speaks of a
woman that follows an Apostle traveling from East to West, and making
journeys of above two thousand leagues.

CHAP. 2. That the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 7. obliges incontinent Clarks to
marry. Confutation of the Cardinals reasons.
THis advantage we have in this point, that our Adversaries confess that the
Celibat of Priests and other Ecclesiastical men, is not commanded in the Word
of God. It is then a tradition, and a Law taken from the unwritten Word. I
would charitably believe, that the Pope and his Clergy maintain that doctrine
and practice with so much eagerness, because they will tend Gods service with
less distraction, but that I see the great profits which the Pope reaps by it,
the Celibat being very fit for the preservation of the Patrimony of the Church,
and for keeping the Clergy in subjection under the power of his Holiness: Also
that I see how the same that forbids marriage, permits fornication, and that by
barring the Clergy from marriage, both natural and unnatural vices have
overflown the Clergy. 2a 2ae Qu. 88. Art. 11.
Thomas the Angelical Doctor acknowledges, that the Celibat of Clarks is but
of humane right, not of divine institution. Bell l. de Clericis c. 18. sect. At
B. Thom. Nunc solum breviter probandum est non jure divino, sed hamano duntaxat
prohibitum esse conjugium.
Bellarmine does the like after him.

Since then marriage is of divine institution, but the Celibat of humane
institution, it is a wonder that humane institution prevails over the
commandment of God; and that the fornication of a Priest, is held to be a far
lighter sin, then if he had taken a lawful wife. But let us hear what the Word
of God says of this.

1 Cor. 7.2. To avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let
every woman have her own husband. Note, that the Apostle says every man, that
one may not except Priests and Friars; and that he says, to avoid fornication;
Then a Priest subject to fornication is obliged to marry.

The same Apostle in the ninth verse of the same Chapter, says, If they cannot
contain, let them marry, for it is better to marry then to burn. Then if a
Priest cannot contain, he is obliged by the Apostles command to marry. Cyprian
practiced that rule. For in his time, about the year 250. of Christ, when
Monasteries were not yet, some Virgins living in their Fathers house, made a
vow of perpetual Virginity, which afterward were found in bed with men, yet
protesting that they did no harm with them. Of those women, Cyprian makes this
judgment, in the 62. Epistle to Pomponius, Quod si ex fide se Christo
dedicaverunt pudice and cast sine ulla fabula perseverent, etc. Si autem
perseverare nolunt vel non possunt, melius est nubant quam in ignem deliciis
suis cadant.
If they have dedicated themselves unto Christ, let them continue to live
chastely and honestly, without raising tales about themselves; and being thus
strong and firm, let them expect the reward of Virginity. But if they will not,
or cannot persevere, it is better for them to marry, then to fall into the fire
by their voluptuousness. He will have such women, that will not or cannot
contain, to break their vow and marry. Now I cannot conceive, why a vow made
unto God by a young woman, in her fathers house, by her parents consent, must
be less binding, then if she had been veiled by a Bishop. For the strength of
the vow lies not in that Ceremony, but in the obligation not to lie unto God.

Page 688, 689.
To this Cardinal du Perron gives three answers.

First he affirms, that when the Apostle says, If they contain not, let them
marry, for it is better to marry then to burn; he gives that order by way of
counsel, not by way of precept. Sure, when the Cardinal writ this, his mind was
somewhere else, for he considered not that counsel, when it is distinguished
from precept, is not an order, so that by saying that St. Paul gave an order by
way of counsel, he speaks things contradictory. Besides, one might that way
elude all the Commandments of God, and dispense himself from them; saying, God
commands me not to believe in Christ, or to obey my father, or not to be a
murderer, only he counsels me so. When the words of God are imperative, as
in this place, If they contain not, let them marry; then to take his words for
counsels, is a manifest impiety. Also this Prelate ought not to have been
ignorant, that Gods counsels ought to be taken for commands by those that fear
him. Thus Prove. 1. Heavenly Wisdom denounces Gods judgments to the profane,
that set at naught his counsel. And Luke 7.30. the Pharisees are condemned for
rejecting the counsel of God. Rev. 3.18. Christ says to the Church of
Laodicea, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire. A counsel which
the Church of Laodicea could not reject, but to their perdition.

The Cardinal uses another shift: Page 697, 698.
He says that this counsel is given only to those that had made no vow of
Celibat, and that were free. Of which vow he produces an example (and repeats
it often) of the widows that had dedicated themselves to the service of the
Church in the Office of Deaconesses, and then married, breaking their vow. Of
these widows St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 5.12. that they had damnation, because they
had cast off their first faith. But the Cardinal is much mistaken, if he think
that the faith mentioned in this place, is the vow of a single life; for the
Apostle speaks of the vow given by those women to consecrate their whole life
to the service of the Church, in the Office of Deaconesses. It is so far then,
that the Apostle would oblige them never to marry after that promise, that on
the contrary he commands them, if they be yet young, to marry notwithstanding
their promise: For speaking of the same widows, he says, v. 14. I will that
the younger women marry, bear children, etc. But that for the time to come,
they should not be constrained to abandon their Church Service for marrying,
and to violate their faith and service, he forbids that any woman be received
into that charge, or (as our Adversaries speak) to make that vow, before she be
threescore years old. Let us suppose then, that these widows Deaconesses, had
made a vow never to marry, how comes it that the Apostle will have those of
their number that were young to marry, and not to keep their vow? Why does he
forbid that any be admitted to make that vow, if she be under threescore years
of age? Why does the Roman Church go directly against that command, admitting
young Girls to make that vow, before they can know the desires of nature? Why
do they condemn the Apostle, who forbids young widows to keep that pretended
vow? But the plain truth is, that the Apostle speaks not here of the vow of a
single life, for at threescore years of age that vow would be ridiculous.

Here the Cardinal pronounces a sentence both severe and rash, absolutely
affirming that those widows, that had violated their faith, were damned. Saint
Paul says not that he says only, that they had [that] The Translator craves
leave to say here, that our English version, Having damnation, needs a mild
construction, (...) may here signify judgment, as Mat. 7.2. and the sense of
the text may be, that these widows are condemned in the judgment of godly
persons, for breaking their faith and promise.
condemnation, that they had cast off their first faith. He condemns them as
guilty, but pronounces not an absolute sentence of eternal damnation against
them. He takes not the hope of pardon from them that repent.

What then, may one say? do you teach men to break their vows? are you
preachers of disloyalty? Before I answer, I would wish our Adversaries to
answer their own Canons, which say, C. 22. qu. 4. cap. in malis. In malis
promissionibus frange fidem. In voto inhonesto frange consilium.
In ill promises break thy faith. Perform not what thou have imprudently vowed.
That promise is impious, which is fulfilled by sin. For things ill, to vow, are
worse yet to perform. He that vowed to be unfaithful, must he keep his vow that
he may be faithful? He that vowed to kill his father, must he be a Parricide
for fear of offending God? Or if one promises that which is not in his power,
as to take the Moon; or a thing ridiculous, as never to walk abroad, but with a
green cap and a mealy face, or a thing to him unknown, as they that from their
childhood vow things which they know not; or that make a vow grounded upon a
persuasion, that God will give them that which he has promised to none: Must
all such vows be performed?

Then especially the vow is evil, when one cannot fulfill it, without breaking
another vow which was good, necessary to salvation, and to which all are
naturally bound. Then vows must be kept, when they are of good and righteous
things, not dishonest, not absurd, not harmful to others, not hurtful to our
salvation, and such as are within the compass of our power.

If the vow of single life be examined upon these rules, it will appear that it
is a vow which ought not to be made, and to which those that consecrate
themselves to the holy Ministry, ought not to be tied. Also that many who have
made that vow, are obliged by Gods commandment to break it. For they that
wanting the gift of continence, make a vow not to marry, go against Gods
command by his Apostle, If they contain not, let them marry; and to avoid
fornication, let every one have his wife. That vow also is contrary to a
precedent vow, to which we are bound by our birth, by our Baptism, and by our
ordinary prayers; even to the vow which every Christian makes to obey God.

Then it is a rash part to vow that which is not in our power. Now the
continence, not only of body, but of spirit, free from all desires and carnal
concupiscences, is a gift which is not in our power, and which God gives but
to few persons: Neither has he promised to give it to those that ask it,
because it is not necessary to salvation. Whosoever voweth continence, does
rashly presuppose, that God will give it him, and will bestow a grace upon him,
which he did not bestow upon many Saints, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs. He
does, as if he vowed never to be sick, and never to have the desires which are
natural unto all men. A man burning with incontinence, who voweth unto God
never to marry, is like a sick man that voweth never to use the remedies which
God presents unto him. He says to God silently, Lord I promise thee to disobey
thy Word. And yet he will have that disobedience allowed him as a work of
superarragation, and a greater perfection then to fulfill the Law of God. If
then he has made that vow without knowledge, as those that are cast into
Monasteries, before they be acquainted with the stings of concupiscence, when
he comes by age to see himself engaged in a dangerous vow, which kindles his
lust, and barreth him from the means to quench it, he must break that vow which
he made ignorantly, and get out of Satan's snares. Hierom, the great enemy of
marriage, found it so; for in his Epistle to Eustochium, he confesses, that
among the austerities and fasts, he had his heart among fair maids, and burnt
with incontinence. Bernard confesses the same, in the Book of the inward
house, chap. 29. and 36. In Cassian, in Collation 12. chap. 9. and in Collation
2. chap. 23. and in Collation 22. chap. 2. the Monks, Moses, German, and
Theonas confess, that after their fasts and prayers they had nocturnall
pollutions: And to allay their heat, they permit in their rules things
dishonest to relate.

Page 688.
The Cardinals third answer is, that the gift of continence which the Apostle
Paul speaks of, is not the possibility of containing, belonging to the general
grace, which the Schoolmen call sufficient. Otherwise the acts of incontinence
should not be so inexcusable, and should not be sins, being committed by
persons that had not the power not to commit them. But he understands by the
gift of continence, the act of containing, belonging to the efficacious grace,
which not only enableth to do, but causes to do. What a deal of dark gibrish
in a clear matter? But it is this Prelates custom, when truth presses him, to
hide himself in darkness. I let alone for the present that School distinction,
truly ridiculous, which forgeth a grace to be able to do without doing; a grace
to be able to contain, but not to contain, which is an useless grace. Then a
sufficient grace, which yet has no efficacy; for therefore it is insufficient,
because it has no efficacy. And that false maxim which he sets down, that
sins are no sins, when they are committed by persons that have not the power
not to commit them. Upon that score the Devil should never sin, for he is
altogether incapable and unable to do any good. And drunkards, who by a long
habit cannot leave their intemperance, should not sin by their excess in
drinking. In him that by his fault has brought himself to the unableness of
doing good, and to the necessity of sinning, that very necessity increases the
sin, as Aristotle Aristot. Ethic. l. 3. c. 7. (...).
teaches, That those persons are damnable, and wilfully vicious, who by custom
have brought upon themselves the necessity of doing ill.

But to fetch M. du Perron out of his dark hiding place, the sum of his
discourse is, that when Paul says, If they contain not, let them marry; by not
containing, he understands, not being incontinent in their desire and lust, but
committing the act of fornication. And to the same purpose when Paul says, It
is better to marry then to burn; by burning, he understands not being tempted
with fervent concupiscence, but bringing that temptation to act. This man cuts
his throat with his own sword; for if not containing, signifies here
fornicating: And if the Apostle commands them that contain not, to marry, all
fornicating Priests and Friars are of necessity bound to marry, and (as the
same Apostle says) to avoid fornication, every one ought to have his wife. By
the way, how can burning be interpreted fornicating, seeing that by
fornicating, men seek to quench their burning? Who knows not that in all
languages, unchaste love is called burning, Formesum pastor Coridon ardebat
Alexin.
especially when one cannot compass the end of his desire.

To conclude, If he to whom God has given continence, makes a vow not to
marry, as long as he has that gift, and is not tempted with carnal desires, he
does wisely and righteously to keep his vow, and not to marry. But if he fall
into ill desires, and see himself in danger of falling; that man not being able
to quench his lust without marriage, ought to marry to obey Gods command.
Wherefore it is more expedient not to make that vow. A wise man will mistrust
his strength, and not put himself in danger to break his vow. And they that
will oblige all those to that vow, that will consecrate themselves unto the
service of the Church, are the causes of many evils, and oppose Gods Ordinance.

I pass by the abuse of the Franciscans and other Monks, who when they enter
into the Monastical life, make the vow of perpetual continence, not to God
alone, but also to the Patron of their Order, as Saint Francis and Saint
Dominick, When a Dominican Novice becomes Profess, he makes the vow in these
words, I make a vow to God, and to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and to all the
Saints, to yield obedience to such or such a Prelate, etc. Against the Word of
God, Psalm 50.14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most
High. For vowing is an action of latria, and of the highest Religious service,
as Thomas 2a 2ae Qu. 88. Art. 5.
Thomas teaches. And Cajetan. in notis in illum locum Thomae.
Cajetan after him; who to excuse those vows made unto the Saints, says, that
the Saints are Gods by participation. Bellar. de Cultu. Sanctor. l. 3. c. 9..
Praeterea Cum scriberentur Scripturae, nondum coeperat usus vovendi Sanctis.
Et. secunda, Votum non convenit Sanctis nisi quatenus Dii sunt per
participationem. At sanctos cum Christo regnantes certo scimus esse tales.
Bellarmine says the same; and freely acknowledges, that when holy Scriptures
were written, it was not yet the custom to make vows unto the Saints. For the
Apostles had not attained yet that measure of instruction.

CHAP. 3. Another text of the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 4. against the prohibition
of marrying. Examination of the Cardinals answers.
THe Apostle Paul speaks thus, 1 Timothy 4.1. The Spirit speaks expressly, that in
the latter days some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits and doctrines of Devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
conscience seared with a hot iron: Forbidding to marry. That holy Apostle
says, that forbidding to marry is a doctrine of Devils.

Cardinal du Perron answers, Page 699, 700.
that Saint Paul speaks there historically of the Legalists, that would have
the Law observed with the Gospel, and forbad the use of meats forbidden by the
Law, and the use of marriages forbidden by the Law, that is of marriages
contracted with other persons, but such as were descended from Abraham's family.

Those Legalists, who were also called Nazarenes, of whom the Cardinal speaks,
were in the Apostles time. Against them, Saint Paul writ the Epistle to the
Galatians, and part of that to the Colossians. That sect did vanish a little
after the Apostles time. Whence it is evident, that it is not of them that
Saint Paul speaks in this text. For he speaks of some seducing spirits that
should come in the latter days, and that were not yet come when he was
writing. In the latter days (says he) some shall depart from the faith, etc.
speaking in the future. He that says that some persons are to come thereby,
signifies that they are not yet come. Wherefore the Cardinal mistrusting that
answer, has recourse to the ordinary shift, that Paul speaks of those that
condemned marriage in it self, as the Eneratites and Manicheans, who dogmatized
that marriage was an institution of the Devil.

It is true, that they that maintain marriage to be evil of its nature, do
wickedly, and are condemned by the Apostle. But therefore they that condemn
marriage out of scruple or superstition, or out of an opinion of
superarrogation, are not excuseable, but have part in the same condemnation.
For Paul calls generally and without distinction, all that forbid marriage,
seducing spirits, teaching doctrines of Devils. Whosoever brings exceptions to
the general rules of Gods Word, must draw them out of the same Word of God, not
forge them in his brains. Did the Word of God except the Clergy from that rule,
or those that forbid marriage for exercise, or out of affectation of greater
holiness, or to make works of superarrogation; it were well done to allege
that exception. But these men bring nothing out of the Word of God, and
themselves confess that their Celibat is not of divine institution. So, as by
diverse ways, several persons may come to the same precipice, likewise by
diverse ways and for diverse ends and considerations, several persons may
transgress the same Commandment, and come to the same condemnation.

The Cardinal is mistaken, when he says that the Manicheans did absolutely
condemn marriage in it self, as evil by its nature, and an institution of the
Devil. Austin freeth them of that blame, August. Epist. 74. Auduores qui
appellantur apud eos and carnibus vescuntur, and agros colunt, and si voluerint
uxores habent, quorum nihil faciunt qui vocantur Electi.
They that are called Auditors, among the Manicheans, eat flesh, plow the
land, and have wives if they list; of which things nothing is done by those
that are called Elect. Those Auditors were the people; and those Elect were a
few persons, who among the Manicheans, by austerity of life, affected a greater
holiness. Themselves complained, that they were wronged in the report and
opinion of men, as Austin says, Idem lib. 2. de moribus Ecclesiae and
Manicheorum, chap. 18. Hic non dubito vos esse clamaturos invidiamque facturos,
capitatem perfectam vos vehementer commendare atque laudare, non tamen nuptias
prohibere, quandoquidem Auditores vestri quorum apud vos secundus est gradus,
ducere atque habere non-prohibentur uxores.
Here I make no doubt (speaking to them) that you will exclaim, to make us
odious, that you greatly commend and praise perfect chastity, but yet forbid
not marriage, seeing that your Auditors, which are in a second degree amongst
you, are not forbidden to marry, and to have wives. That is very far from
believing, that marriage was of the Devils institution. Thus in the Council of
Gangra, Eustach Bishop of Sebastia was condemned, because he prohibited eating
of flesh, and contemned married Priests; although he protested that he did it,
Sozom. Book 3. chapter 13. (...).
not out of disdain, but out of a pious exercise, according to God, as we learn
of Sozomenus.

I will say more. That whosoever will take the pains to read the Decrees of the
Popes Syricius and Innocent. Did. 82. Can. Proposuisti.
Innocent, shall find that the Heretics that condemned matrimony, as evil and
polluted by its nature, have not spoken of it in such odious terms as the Popes
have done: For they not only forbid the habitation of Clergymen with their
wives, as a thing contrary to their vow; but also forbid to admit unto holy
Offices, those that dwell with their wives, because it is written, Be ye holy,
for I am holy, as though there were no holiness in marriage, and because it is
written, unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving nothing is pure; and they that are in the flesh cannot please God;
as if married persons were impure, unbelieving, and debarred from the
possibility to please God; wickedly wresting that which in the Word of God, is
said against the profane in general, to use it against the marriage of
Clergymen. And the same Pope Syricius Ibid. Can. Plurimos.
calls the habitation of a Clark with his wife a crime, and turpem coitum: And
married Priests, sectatores libidinum and praeceptores vitiorum, followers of
whoredom and teachers of vices. To these expressions the practice is suitable.
For why do they exact of a man the vow of perpetual Celibat, before they admit
him into the Clergy? Why is a married man excluded from all Orders of the
Church, but that they hold the marriage of a Clark unlawful of its nature, and
incompatible with the holiness of Ecclesiastical ministry? They are the very
words of Pope Innocent, That it is not lawful to receive into the sacred
Offices those that use carnal acquaintance with their wives, because it is
written, Be ye holy, for I am holy, says the Lord. This sentence is of the Old
Testament, when Priests were married by Gods commandment, and is not said to
the Priests only; but to all the people.

The Cardinal gives a third answer, Ibid. Can. Proposuisti. Neque eos fas sit
ad officia sacra admitti qui exercent etiam cum uxore carnale consortium, quia
Scriptum est Sancti estote quoniam sanctus sum, dixit Dominus.
Chapter 28. page 700.
that the Roman Church does not forbid marriage, because it is in every man's
liberty to choose celibat or matrimony, and that no body is constrained to the
ministry of the Church or to monastical profession.

I answer, that in the Roman Church there is a constraint to the celibat three
ways, 1. He that finding not himself fit for civil businesses, nor capable of
a great labor, sees no other way to pass his life with some honor and
commodity then by serving the Church, is constrained to make that vow, which he
takes half willing, and half unwilling, and he will do it because necessity
lies upon him to have that will. 2. Then many are cast into Monasteries, not
by their choice, but by the will of their parents, or from their infancy have
mitres set on their head, and great Church Livings bestowed upon them, so that
they have not their free choice when they come to the age of choosing, and when
nature is most prone to corruption. 3. But the greatest constraint is in them,
that have vowed and acknowledging themselves incapable to keep their vow, and
being unable to contain, yet are kept against their will under the yoke of that
vow against the Apostles command, if they do not contain, let them marry; For
humane institution has prevailed over Gods commandment.

CHAP. 4. Another text of the same Epistle, chap. 3.
ONe text more remains, which more then any puts our Adversaries to the rack.
The Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 3.1. speaks thus, A Bishop must be blameless the
husband of one wife; etc. one that rules well his own house, having his
children in subjection with all gravity, for if a man knows not how to rule his
own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God. And the like order he
gives for the choosing of a Bishop, Tit. 1.6. If any be blameless, the husband
of one wife, having faithful children, not accused of riot, or unruly, For a
Bishop must be blameless, etc. Observe that the Apostle says that the Bishop
must be (not that he has been) the husband of one wife. For if the Apostle
said, the Bishop must have been blameless the husband of one wife, vigilant,
sober, etc. he should make Episcopacy a cessation of virtues, and a
dispensation from doing good. And when the Apostle will have the wives of
Bishops and Deacons to be grave, not slanderers, sober, etc. it is evident that
he instructs them that are wives of Bishops and Deacons, not them that are
their wives no more.

Pope Leo the first understands it so, Leo Epist. 85. in quibusd. codicibus est
Epist. 87.
saying, The Apostle bids that such a man be made a Bishop, which is known to
have been or to be the husband of one wife.

And Chrysostom upon Tit. 1. Hom. 2. (...),
St. Paul shows that marriage is so honorable, that with it one may get up
into the holy See, so he calls Episcopacy. He says (...) with it, not (...)
after it, as all that have some little skill in Greek understand well. Here
admire the Cardinals ignorance in Greek; For whereas he reads (...) (instead of
(...)) he joins (...) with (...), the neuter with the masculin, as if one said
negotium ille pro illud, which is a gross incongruity.

To know how and in what sense the Apostle will have the Bishop to be the
husband of one wife, it must be known that a man may have two wives together,
two several ways, Either having two wives together in one house, Or one at
home, another divorced without cause of adultery. In this manner a woman may
have two husbands, for it was in fashion then, both among Joseph. Origin. l.
11. c. 11. Salome soror Herodio Costobarum virum suum repudiat.
Jews, and Coelii Epist. 8. Ep. 7. apud Ciceronem. Seneca de Benef. l. 3. c. 16.
Pagans, that wives would give the b^ll of divorce to their husbands. Of which
we might bring a great number of examples. The same custom was practiced of old
among the Christians. Justin Mar^yr in the beginning of the first Apology
speaks of a Christian woman that put away her husband (...).
giving him the bill of divorce. Which is condemned by the Eliberin Council in
the eighth and ninth Canon; And in a Council of Carthage, which is the one
hundred and second Canon in the Code of the Canons of the Apud Balsamonem.
Church of Africa. Hierom in the eighty fourth chapter to Oceanus, says, that
Fabiola put away her husband. And in the Epitaph of Marcella he says, that it
was the custom of the rich women to marry poor husbands to put them away. For
which cause the Apostle gives order, that the widows that had been wives of
more then one husband, should not be admitted into the office of Deaconesses,
that is, if at the same time they had a husband at home, and another divorced.
Chrysostom understands it so, and says that the Apostle forbids the Bishop to
have two wives at the same time, saying that Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 3. cap 3. Hom.
3. (...).
the Apostle forbids the excess, because among the Jews the association of a
second marriage was lawful, and to have two wives together. Here the truth is
so evident that Cardinal du Perron, and with him Baron. an. 58. Sect. 14.
Salmeron Comment. in 1 Cor. 16. Disp. 30. Sect Septima. Estius Com. in hunc
locum.
Cardinal Baronius, and Salmeron, and Estius, acknowledge that in St. Paul's
time married men were received to be Bishops. But they say it was only for a
time, by reason of the variety of unmarried persons in the time of the birth of
the Church, when the Jews cursed the Ministers, and the Pagans punished them;
But that after the Emperor Constantin had given privileges to them that did
lead a single life, the Church began to make use only of persons that lived in
celibat.

This is a remarkable confession, that in the Apostles time Bishops were
married. For God would not have permitted in the Apostles time a thing evil of
its nature in a matter of so high importance as the Ministry of his Gospel.
Also it is a great concession, that the celibat of Clarks began in Constantins
time, that is, above three hundred years after Christ's birth: As in effect all
the Canons and testimonies of Antiquity, which Cardinal du Perron brings upon
that subject are since that time. We have then for us in this cause by the
confession of our Adversaries the whole Church of the old Testament, and the
three first ages of the Christian Church. We may safely believe that the
Apostles were at the least, as wise as the Bishop of Rome, when they commanded
that the Bishop should be blameless, the husband of one wife, without declaring
that it was a commandment only for a time, or saying how long it must be
observed in the Church.

For indeed St. Paul spoke not of toleration, but gave a rule without
exception. Else we should say, that as the command of being husband of one wife
was given to the Bishop by toleration and for a time, so the command which
obliges the Bishop to be blameless, sober and vigilant, is but a command for a
time. And it will follow, that the Apostle suffers ad tempus, and
provisionally, that the Bishop be of a holy and blameless life, for these
things are tied together by the Apostle, and equally recommended to the Bishop.
But who sees not that when St. Paul says, Let the Bishop be blameless, the
husband of one wife, he gives us to understand, that the Bishop must be the
husband of one wife, that is, he must not have two together, that he may be
blameless. For that was an ordinary thing in those days to have two wives, the
one at home, the other divorced. Yea, wives would put away their husbands to
take other husbands, as we have proved. Hierom in the Epistle to Oceanus
confuteth those, that by one wife understand the Church.

CHAP. 5. Vindication of the assertion of his Majesty of Great Britain, that
the Canonists teach, that fornication is more tolerable in the Ministers of the
Church, then lawful Matrimony.
THis doctrine of the Canonists and other Doctors of the Church of Rome, who
hold that whoredom is more tolerable in Priests, then lawful marriage, seemed
very harsh and profane to his Majesty. To which the Cardinal answers, I have
read no such thing in the Latin Canonists, as having little applied my self to
turn over their writings. This Prelat makes himself an ignorant when he
pleases, and will not take notice of a thing known to all. Who knows not that
at Rome marriage is forbidden to the Clarks, but that Brothel-houses are there
publicly licensed? Who knows not, that Eman. Sa Aphorism in verbo Episcopus,
meretricium est jure permissum.
if a Priest keeps a concubine, or commits whoredom, it is made a laughing
matter, but if he had a wife lawfully married, he should be held a monster, and
should by no means be suffered? Does not Cardinal du Perron call the marriage
of one that has vowed continence a sacrilege? Who ever gave that odious name
unto whoredom? Has not Pope Innocent the third pronounced his judgment upon
that? For this being a rule without exception in the Roman Church, that a
bigame that is, one that was married the second time is irregular, that is,
incapable to atttain unto the order of Priesthood, as being in a condition
incompatible with the holiness of the Order; yet he that keeps many concubines
may be admitted to that Order, and is capable of the Priesthood; and that by
the judgment of Pope Innocent the second in these words Extra de Bigam. cap.
Quia circa. Postulasti per sedem Apostolicam edoceri si Presbyteri plures
concubinas habentes bigami censeantur. Ad quod duximus respondendu^, quod cum
irregularitatem non incurrerint bigamiae, cum eis tanquam simplici fornicatione
nota^is, quod ad executionem sacerdotalis officii poteris dispensare.
Thou have desired to be taught by the Apostolic See, whether Priests that
have many concubines ought to be accounted bigames. To which we have thought
good to answer, that since they have not incurred the irregularity of bigamy,
thou may dispense with them, as for the exercise of the Office of Priesthood,
as with persons that are noted but with simple fornication. That Pope held,
that a second marriage leaves a stain which is for ever incompatible with the
Order of Priesthood: but as for whoredom with a multitude of harlots, he holds
it compatible with the holiness of the Order, and says that it is but a simple
fornication. To that Decree of Pope Innocent the Gloss of the Canon Maximianus
Did. 81. Communiter dicitur, quod pro simplici fornicatione quis deponi non
debet, cum pauci sine illo vitio inveniantur. Vide Did. 82. Can. Presbyter, in
Glossa.
is consonant, which speaks thus, It is commonly said, that a Priest ought not
to be deposed for simple fornication, seeing that very few persons are found
without that vice.

Cardinal du Perron himself joins with them in that opinion, calling (with
Bellarm. de Monachis cap. 19. Sect. Jam vero. Non solum conjugium sacerdotum,
quod sacrilegium est non conjugium, sed etiam sanctorum matrimonium sine
pollutione quadam and turpitudine non exerceri.
Bellarmin) the marriage after the vow of continence, a manifest sacrilege,
speaking thus, Besides that the infraction of the vow is against the precepts
of the first Table, and imports a manifest sacrilege; other sins are but acts
of sin, not resolutions and habits of sin, Whereas the violation of the vow by
marrying, is not a simple act of sin, but a continuance, an habit, a perpetual
resolution of sin, and a breach of the vow made, not by a simple contrary
action as fornication, but by a contract, and as it were by a vow of
persevering in the breach of the vow. This Prelat casts dust into the eyes of
the ignorant, speaking against his conscience. For he knew that a great
multitude of Priests and Bishops commit whoredom, not by one only action, but
by a continued habit. He knew that by so doing, they sin against the vow which
they have made unto God to obey his law, which vow every man is obliged to
fulfill. He knew also that a Priest having a concubine, or many, goes against
the vow which he made, when he took upon him the order of Priesthood, that he
would live honestly and continently. He knew also that a vow made against God,
and against his word, ought not to be kept; and by consequent that a Clark
subject unto whoredom ought to marry, because God says by his Apostle, If they
contain not, let them marry, for it is better to marry then to burn. So that
whereas Holy Scripture says, If they contain not, let them marry; the Roman
Church says, If Clarks contain not, let them not marry for that. And whereas
St. Paul says, It is better to marry then to burn, the Roman Church says, It
is better for Priests and Monks to burn then to marry. And whereas St. Paul
says, To avoid fornication let every man have his wife, the Roman Church
says, Let not Priests given to whoredom have any lawful wife. And whereas St.
Paul says, Let the Bishop and the Deacon be husbands of one wife, and let them
instruct their children in all gravity, The Roman Church says, Let neither
Bishop, nor Priest, nor Deacon have a wife, and let them not beget children.

So many texts of Scripture are so many thunderbolts, which the Cardinal thinks
to turn away with blowing, bringing testimonies of Fathers against them, that
is, men against God. To those testimonies of Fathers we will give a chapter
apart.

But how can the marriage of Clarks be but odious in the Roman Church, and held
worse then fornication, since Sodomy is held among them more tolerable then
marriage? For whereas marriage is judged altogether incompatible with sacred
Orders, the like judgment is not made of Sodomy. For by the rules of the Roman
Church, a Sodomist may exercise the Priesthood, and by that abominable vice
does not run into irregularity. Navarrus the Popes Penitentiary teaches that,
saying, Navarr. in Caput in inferenda 23. Q. 3. De defensione proximi.
The crime of Sodomy is not comprehended among the crimes that bring
irregularity. First, because a man incurreth not irregularity but by the cases
expressed by the Law, in which number that crime is not. Secondly, because such
are the words of Pope Innocent. Thirdly, because it matters not if that crime
be foul and detestable, seeing that mental heresy is worse, as Thomas says;
which yet brings no irregularity.

CHAP. 6. Answer to the reasons and testimonies which the Cardinal brings
against the marriage of Clarks.
THE Cardinal having confessed that the action of matrimony, which has no other
end but to get issue, Page 695.
is free from sin, says nevertheless, that in that action there is much
imperfection, and that it works a total subversion and sinking down of reason.
To which I answer, that how great soever man's imperfection be in that point,
yet Gods institution, and his especial command covers that defect; God
regarding more his ordinance, then our imperfection. If he that drinks in his
burning thirst has all his senses so diverted from all other thoughts, that it
is impossible for him to pray to God at that time, or to attend any holy
meditation, it follows not that such a diversion is vicious, or that Clarks
must be forbidden to drink when they are dry.

The Cardinal adds, that by that action original sin is communicated. It is
true, that without that action original sin would not pass to posterity, for
mankind should perish, and there would be no posterity. But that does nothing
against matrimony, which is more ancient then sin; And by the same reason they
that attend Gods service ought not to eat, because by meat the life of the
wicked, and the sin which is in the world, is maintained.

He says next, that God did always put off those that exercised the act of
matrimony from dealing and partaking with his mysteries, unless they were
purified before.

That is altogether false, and no such thing is to be found in Gods word. If it
were true, God would have commanded the Pastors of the Christian Church to
abstain altogether from their wives, because they ought continually to attend
Gods service. And God would have forbidden those that are married among his
people to be partakers of the Lords holy table, unless they had purified
themselves before by some especial ceremonies; For as for the purity of the
conscience, it ought to be continual. Of purification after the marriage bed
Christ and his Apostle spoke not a word. Wherefore the Cardinal alleges no
examples but out of the ceremonial Law, though he knew it to be abolisht by the
preaching of the Gospel. He ought by the same reason to have spoken of the
touching of a dead man, and of the like pollutions which by the Law of Moses
hindered a man from administering holy things. Yet let us see what examples he
brings.

All the time (says he) that the Priests of the Law attended the service of
the Temple, they abstained from the use of their own wives. This is altogether
false.

Of such a constitution there is not one word in the Old Testament. Yea, the
contrary is clearly proved by several texts. The High Priest every day burnt
the incense, and ordered the lamps in the Holy place, as it is commanded, Exodus
27.21. and 30.7. Aug. Qu. in Leviticum. qu. 31. In tabernaculum necesse erat
quotidie introire and accedere ad altar propter continuam servitutem,
The same High Priest made the continual morning and evening sacrifice in the
Temple. And the ordinary food of the Priests was the shoulder and the breast of
the sacred victims, and the offerings of the people, and the show bread. By the
Cardinals rule Aaron and his successors till David ought not, and could not be
married. It is true, that David instituted four and twenty courses of Priests
serving by turns, every one a fortnight in a year. Of that order was Zachariah
father to John the Baptist, who, because he lived far from Jerusalem was
constrained to leave his family all the time of his service. But the High
Priest with his wife and children were lodged in the very Temple (as it may be
seen 2 Chronicles. 22.11, 12.) and absented not himself from his wife.

The Cardinals next allegation is, that when God would give his Law to his
people of Israel, he commanded them to abstain from their wives. But is the
abstinence of three days to any purpose to prove the perpetual Celibat? By the
same reason if God had commanded in his Law to abstain from eating, certain
days, one might infer that the Clergy must not eat all. Legal abstinences are
no rules under the Gospel. Note also, that the alleged abstinence for three
days from the use of women, was not for the Priests only, but for all the
people. Wherefore we might with more probability infer, that God requires no
greater abstinence in that point from the Clergy, then from the people.

The Cardinal alleges also that when David and his followers desired to eat
the shewbread, Abimelech the Priest asked them whether they were pure from
women, that is (as the Cardinal expounds it) from touching their lawful wives.

The absurdity of this exposition is evident. For if for lying with his own
wife a man was made incapable or unworthy of eating the shewbread, the Priests
were to abstain for ever from their wives, seeing that the shewbread was their
ordinary bread. Either then by those women, other women then lawful wives are
understood, or the Priest Abimelech asking David 1 Samuel 21.4.
whether his men had kept themselves at least from women, meant the abstinence
from the marriage bed in the time of their separation, in which women were
declared polluted according to the Law: and so may Hierom be understood, who
upon the twelfth chapter of Matthew, understands that question of the Priest to
David's men of the use of their lawful wives.

But in this point Hieroms authority is of no weight, seeing that he was a
mortal enemy to matrimony. For if we must be ruled by him, we must say, that
marriage is ashame, that married persons are vessels to dishonor, and that the
fruit of marriage is death, but that the fruit of virginity is eternal life,
and that they that are in the flesh, that is, the married persons (for so he
expounds it) cannot please God. Yet let us receive the Cardinals
interpretation; For what strength can there be in that argument? The shewbread
was not to be given to those who a day or two before had lien with their wives:
Ergo, Monks, Deacons, and Priests must never marry. Will any man that is in his
right sense approve that consequence?

This is all that the Cardinal could find in the Old Testament for the
perpetual celibat. For he was ashamed to use Bellarmins proofs, who proves
that the Clarks of the Christian Church must never marry, because the Priests
of the Old Testament had a girdle about their loins, and wore drawers.

Page 695.
The Cardinal having alleged texts of Scripture with so little reason, to
amend the matter, he alleges fables and Pagan histories, saying, that
Hippolitus saluted Venus afar off, and that Alexander in that act acknowledged
that he was no God but man, and that the Kings of Taprobana were deposed
whenever they married. If thence it may be gathered that God in his word
prohibited the Clarks to marry, let any man judge. May it not rather be hence
gathered, that a man's cause is weak, when he is brought to use fables, and
Pagan stories.

Page 695.
From the Old Testament the Cardinal passes to the New, and says, that
marriage turns away the affection of Ministers from the love which they owe
unto the Church, and divides and transfers it to the love of their children and
family, as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 7.32. He that is unmarried, cares for the
things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord, But he that is
married, cares for the things that are of the world, how he may please his
wife, and is divided.

I answer, that if the care of children distracteth the care which a Pastor
ought to have of the Church, the burning lust of those that live in an
incontinent Celibat does far more distract them. If in the one there be
distraction, in the other there is profanatian of the Ministry, and rebellion
against God. That distraction did not hinder the Apostle Paul from commanding a
Bishop to instruct and breed his children in the fear of God. The Prophet
Isaiah who begot children in the time of his prophecy and divine revelations,
was no less careful of the Church for that. The same I say of Moses, of
Samuel, of St. Peter, and of so many faithful Pastors of whom we will speak
hereafter. This also will serve for an answer to the Cardinals allegation of
Romans 12.8. where the Apostle commands, that he that rules, should do it with
diligence. Note also, that Paul speaking of the distraction from Gods service
through the care of wife and children, speaks not of Pastors only, but of the
people in general.

To that reason he adds an evident untruth: That St. Peter, Matthew. 19. says
to Christ upon a discourse about women, Behold, we have forsaken all and
followed thee, thereby inferring, that Peter had forsaken his wife to follow
Christ. But it is most false, that Peter said that unto Christ upon a discourse
about women. These words of Peter are in verse 27. now from verse 13, to ver.
27. there is not a word of women and marriage. It is true, that in ver. 29.
Christ adds Every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my names sake, shall
receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit eternal life. Christ took occasion of
saying that upon Peter's words, Behold we have forsaken all, and followed thee:
But Peter did not say that upon the subject of women. Besides, it is wresting
Christ's words, to limit to the Clergy only that which Christ said unto all; for
all without exception are obliged to forsake Houses, Lands, Wives, Children,
Fathers, Mothers, yea, and their own life, when they cannot keep it without
breaking their faith unto Christ, and renouncing the profession of the Gospel.
Wherefore Houses, Lands, Fathers, Mothers, Wives, and Children are here put in
the same rank. Whence it is made plain, that as Pastors are not obliged by
their charge to forsake their fields, their houses, and their children, no more
are they obliged to forake their wives. Only in case of persecution, and when a
man must either lose these things, or forsake Christ, he must lose all these
things to follow Christ. So does Austin expound it in the Epistle to Hilary,
which is the eighty ninth, Occurrit aliquando necessitatis articulus, ut aut
uxor dimittatur, aut Christus.
Sometimes there happens a point of necessity, that one must leave either his
wife or Christ. And Basil in the eighth interrogation of the more general
rules, expounding that text, says, that God commands (...).
to leave these things, when they oppose his commandments.

The Cardinal shuts up his proof by a text out of Matthew. 19. where Christ
speaks of those that made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heaven. But he
abuses the Readers, going about to persuade them, that these words are said
only of Monks and Clarks who have vowed virginity or perpetual celibat, seeing
that Christ speaks of every godly man that leads a chaste life, and abstains
from the lust of women, to serve God with more liberty. But every one that
makes the vow of celibat is not of those Eunuchs, seeing that many with that
vow lead an unchaste life. And Christ speaks not there of a vow, but of a
separation from bodily pleasures, which is commendable in Laymen that have the
gift of continence, as well as in Clergymen.

In vain does he go about to second that text with another, Isa. 56.4. Thus
says the Lord, unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things
that please me, etc. Even unto them will I give in my house, and within my
walls a place and a name better then of sons and of daughters. Our Adversaries,
and Cardinal du Perron after others, wrest this text to an Allegory. These
Eunuchs (if we may believe them) are those that have vowed never to marry. And
that name better then of sons and daughters, is the glory given in Paradise
unto works of superarrogation, that is, a degree above the vulgar souls, and
the plebeian Saints. But there is no need of an Allegory, where the literal
sense is plain. The strangers and the Eunuchs by the Law of Moses were excluded
from entering into the house of God. The Prophet Isaiah foretells, that these
distinctions shall be taken away by the vocation of the Gentiles, and by the
preaching of the Gospel; and that neither Nation, nor bodily imperfection shall
be a hinderance to any man from entering into Gods Church. And the Spirit of God
declares, that by that reception into the Church, their condition shall be
better then of those that are sons and daughters, and natural children, that
is, then the Israelites.

Of the Canon of Neocesarea which the Cardinal adds out of order, as if it
were a text of Scripture, we shall speak hereafter.

CHAP. 7. What was the belief of the Ancient Church about the marriage of the
Ministers of the Church. The reasons and allegations of Cardinal du Perron are
examined, and some of his falsifications observed.
THE question about the Celibat of Ecclesiastical men is the point about which
the Fathers dissent most, not only the one from the other, but each one from
himself. Canons of Councils are found pointed one against another; and the same
Fathers that commend the Celibat, yet acknowledge that it was not practiced by
many. Then the customs of Countries were diverse; The Greek and Oriental
Churches commonly receiving married persons into the sacred Orders, and not
separating them from their wives after their Ordination. And as humane Laws
brought in without authority of Gods word, will get strength and take root by
the length of time; So we find that in the end of the fourth age, and in the
fifth, the Laws of the celibat were strengthened in some places, and that from
other places also God raised oppositions against them. And that as the Popes
power increased, that yoke grew heavier upon the Clergy of the West, whence
great troubles and tumults arose in Christendom.

We deny not, that in the writings of the Fathers virginity is much exalted,
and that they exhort them that have vowed virginity to keep their vow. But in
the three first ages, and very far within the fourth, none was constrained to
make that vow before he was received to the sacred Orders, and commonly Priests
were married and dwelt with their wives, although they that lived in celibat
were held by many to go beyond others in holiness. We find also that other
Churches condemned the example and the Laws of the Roman Church, when they
began to take wives from Priests, and to impose the yoke of celibat upon them.
Of this it is easy to bring a multitude of instances. I will bring but some of
the most pregnant.

Among the Canons of the Apostles, or those that are so called, The fifth is
this, (...).
Let not the Bishop or the Priest put away his wife under pretense of piety. If
he put her away, let him be excommunicated; If he persist, let him be deposed.

The Council of Ancyra assembled about the year of the Lord 308. speaks thus in
the tenth Canon, (...).
All Deacons that are established in their charges, if they have declared in
their reception, and said that they have need to marry, and cannot remain as
they are, Let them continue in their service after they are married, because
they had permission from the Bishop; But they that have said nothing of that
[intent] and have undertaken in their ordination to remain so, (that is,
unmarried) if they come after that to marry, let them be deprived of their
Deaconship. The Cardinal has translated (...) having been received, not
knowing that (...) has an active signification, and has no other active but
the verbum medium. The Canon says not, that they were received upon condition
of not marrying, but that themselves undertook it, and bound themselves to it.
Observe, that this Council believed, that a Deacon after his ordination could
marry, so that he had permission from the Bishop.

In the Council of Nice held in the year 325. some made a motion, that wives
should be taken from Priests and Bishops; and that they should not be allowed
to lie together. To which Paphnutius Bishop of Thebaid in Egypt, who had one
eye put out, and the ham-strings of one of his legs cut off, for the testimony
of the Gospel, did vigorously oppose himself, as Sozomenus relates, Sozom. book
1. chap. 23. (...), etc.
Others (says he) thought that Laws ought to be brought in to forbid Bishops
and Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons to lie with their wives, whom they had
married before they were consecrated. But Paphnutius the Confessor arose and
opposed it, calling marriage precious, and habitation with their own wives
chastity. And gave counsel to the Synod not to establish that Law, because it
was a thing hard to bear, which might cause both them and their wives to live
incontinently. Socrates says the like; that when the motion was made of
removing wives from Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 11.
(...), etc.
Paphnutius rising in the midst of the Assembly, cried out that they should not
lay a heavy burden upon sacred men, saying that the very bed is honorable, and
the unpolluted marriage, lest that by an excess of rigor they should rather do
harm to the Church, for all cannot bear that discipline, and be untoucht from
all desires. Only he was of that opinion, that he that had taken the sacred
Orders being unmarried, should remain as he was according to the ancient
tradition, and that he said being not married. His advice was followed by the
Council.

Suidas in the word Paphnutius relates the same history in the same words,
(...).
and adds with Socrates, that the whole Assembly of Bishops believed the
words of Paphnutius, and left it to every ones liberty to do what he would in
that point.

Gelasius Cyzicenus who writ the Acts of the Council of Nice makes a relation
altogether conformable to that of the alleged Authors, and adds in chap.
33. Nemo, ut opinor, in castitate servabitur, si mariti singuli suis privantur
uxoribus. Virovum cum suis uxoribus consuetudinem ego praeclaram continentiam
esse dico, nec posse separari eam quam Deus conjunxit, and quam semel cum
lector aut cantor aut laicus esset, uxorem duxit.
None I think shall be saved in chastity (said Paphnutius) if every husband be
deprived of his wife: for I say that the habitation of husbands with their
wives is an excellent continence, and that a woman which God has conjoined
[with a husband] cannot be separated, when a man has married her when he was a
Reader, a Chaunter, or a Layman. Wherefore he says that the Council left it
to the will of the Clarks to abstain if they would from their wives by mutual
consent.

See also Cassiodorus Cassiod, hist. tripartitae lib. 2. cap. 14.
and Nicephorus Calistus Niceph. Callist. l. 8. cap. 9. Synodum rogavit ut eam
legem non perferret. Gravem enim utrisque sacerdotibus scilicet and conjugibus
eorum, atque etiam fortasse vitae parum pudicae causam fore. Vide Polydorum
Virgigilium lib. 5. de Inventoribus rerum cap. 4. ubi hanc historiam confirmat.
who observes that Paphnutius said, that if sacred persons were forbidden the
use of their wives, that Law should cause both the Priests and their wives to
lead an unchaste life. But because then some Bishops and Priests to get the
reputation of a more exact holiness were not married, but instead of a lawful
wife, kept at home a woman whom they called (...). De Agapetis Hier. ad Eust
ochium.
a well beloved, or Associate, which was covered with the title of holy love,
or of some alliance (a thing subject to obloquy and sinister interpretation)
the Synod made a Canon whereby it was forbidden to Ecclesiastical persons to
keep those Associates in their houses, and command to have no other women about
them, but such as were unsuspected, as a Mother, a Sister, and an Aunt. The
words of the Canon are, (...).
The great Synod has wholly forbidden, that it be permitted to any Bishop,
Priest, or Deacon, or any of the Clergy, to have an associate; but only his
Mother, or Sister, or Aunt, or those only persons that are out of all suspicion.

To answer that history of Paphnutius, and fence himself against the authority
of the Council of Nice, Chap. 20. of the third Observation page 705.
the Cardinal labors and sweateth hard. He accuses that history of untruth,
as invented by Socrates, not considering that so he accuses the Roman Decree
of falsehood wherein the same history is inserted, Did. 31. Can. Nicena.
and that he gives the lie to so many witnesses, which we have produced. He
says then that there are six recusations against that History, but he brings
but five.

The first is, that Socrates was a Novatian, and by consequent not to be
believed. Which I have showed to be a calumny, and brought diverse testimonies
of Socrates, whereby he accuses the Novatians of schism, and reckons them
among heretics. That objection of the Cardinal is against him, for the
Novatians professed a preciser holiness then the Orthodox, and therefore would
rather have been contrary to Paphnutius who disallowed the rigor of that yoke.
Yet let us suppose that Sacrates was an heretic, for since in the point of the
Celibat of Clarks the Novatians dissented not from the Orthodox, a Novatian
historian cannot be suspected in this history. Besides, it is with little
reason that he falls out with Socrates and medleth not with so many other
witnesses which we have brought, who say the same as Socrates. It seems that
the Cardinal had read none but Socrates upon that question.

He says in the second place, that the Grecians unanimously hold the relation
of Socrates to be false as for Episcopacy; but he alleges no Author for that
but Cedrenus a new Writer, who says that Paphnutius hindered the Council of
Nice who would forbid to the Clarks the conjugal acquaintance with their wives,
and decreed that Bishops only should observe it. But we shall hereafter see an
Author of far greater authority then Cedrenus even Balsamon. in Can. 5.
Apostolorum. (...).
Balsamon, of all the Grecians the most versed in Councils, and Ecclesiastical
Canons, who says that before the Council of Trull held in the year 692.
Bishops also might keep their wives. Justinian and the Council of Trull, which
du Perron alleges after to invalid the relation of Socrates, are to no
purpose, for they speak not of Paphnutius, nor of the Council of Nice.

In the third place, the Cardinal says that Socrates is manifestly convinced
of falseshood by the act of the Council of Nice which (designing what sort of
women the Council allows to lodge in the Bishops house, as the Mother, the
Sister, the Aunt) excludes the wife from that number; and thereby will
persuade us that the Council forbids the Bishop to have his wife at home. This
is an extreme ignorance to have so ill understood the word (...) which
signifies an Associate. This Cardinal believed, that when the Canon of the
Council of Nice, which I have here produced, forbids the Bishop to keep an
Associate at his house, by that Associate the Bishops wife must be understood.
One must be very little versed in Antiquity to be ignorant, that these women
which they called (...) were strangers not wives. Ruffinus in the first book of
his history chap. 6. so translateth this Canon of the Council of Nice, Ne quis
Episcoporum caeterorumque Clericorum cum extraneis mulieribus habitet,
praeterquam cum matre, etc.
Let none of the Bishops or other Clarks dwell with strange women, saving only
his Mother, his Sister, or his Aunt, which are very near persons, where he
terms strangers those which in Greek are called (...) or Associates. The
first Council of Carthage speaks the same language in chap. 3. Nullis lic. at
ab affectu abstinentibus carnali apud extraneas pariter commorari.
Let it not be lawful [to them that have a pastoral charge] who abstain from
carnal affection, to dwell with strange women; For the occasions of sin must be
cut off. And the fourth Council of Toledo, Can. 42. Quidam Clirici legitimum
non habentes conjugium, extranearum mulierum interdicta sibi consortia appetunt.
Some Clarks being not married, seek the company of strange women, or of their
maids, which is forbidden unto them. Hierom in Epist. 22. to Eustocheum shows
plainly enough that those women were no wives. Vnde in Ecclesias pestis
Agapetarum in -- troiit? Unde sine nuptiis aliud nomen uxorum? Vnde novum
concubinarum genus?
Which way (says he) is that plague of Agapets [or well beloved women] crept
into the Church? Whence came that other new name of wives without marriage?
Yea, whence came that new kind of concubines? And Epiphanius in the sixty third
heresy, Epiph. haer. 63. number. 2. (...). Vide Petavium in Epiph. page 331.
We call Agapets the Associate women. Eusebius in the seventh book of his
history chap. 22. puts that among the crimes of Paulus Samosatenus, that he had
about him a company of unmarried women, not without suspicion of lying with
them. The Law of the Emperors Honorius and Theodosius is formal to this
purpose, Cod. de Episc. and Clericis lege 19. Quicunque and cujuscunque gradus
sacerdotio fulciuntur vel clericatus honor censentur, extranearum sibi
mulierum interdicta consortia hac tantum eis facultate concessa, ut matres
filias atque Germanas intra domorum septa contineant.
All that are promoted to any degree of Priesthood, or honored with
Ecclesiastical Office must know, that the association of strange women is
interdicted unto them, being only permitted to have their Mothers, Daughters
and Sisters within their houses. Wherefore Justinian in the 123. Novell chap.
29. alleging the words of that Canon of Nice, instead of (...), and in the
Latin superinductam, has put (...) that is, brought in, or crept in from
abroad. Among the verses of Gregory Nazianzen there is an Epigram against these
(...), Associates, (...).
where he says that he knows not whether the persons so associated be married
or not married. In a word, who so will believe that those Agapets or associate
women were married women, shows himself very ignorant in Antiquity.

Out of all this it is made evident, that this Canon of the Council of Nice, is
made only against unmarried Bishops who kept Associates instead of Wives.
Photius teaches that very expressly in his Nomocanon, setting down this Canon
in these words. Photius Nomocanone Tit. 8. de Paroch. cap. 14. (...). Apud
Balsamonem page 99.
Let no Clark that has no wife, keep an associate at home, saving only his
Mother, his Sister. etc. The second Council of Tours has the like Canon, Cap.
14. Episcopum Episcopam non habentem nulla sequatur turba mulierum.
Let no troop of women follow a Bishop that has not a Bishoppess.

Also the Cardinal goes about to convince Socrates of untruth for saying, that
the Council of Nice being persuaded by Paphnutius made no new order about that
point. If (says he) that dissuasion had been true, the Council neither could
nor ought to abstain from it: For that Law which he says to have been opposed
by Paphnutius had been made already by many particular Councils, as by the
Eliberin Council where the same Osius, that presided in the Council of Nice,
had been present. Nay, the clean contrary follows. For since Socrates,
Sozomenus, Gelasius, Cassiodorus, Nicephorus, and Suidas, of whom the first
four are ancient witnesses that Paphnutius spoke of that Law of Celibat as of a
new Law and a yoke which had not been before, we may certainly affirm that as
yet there was no such Law. Neither could the Cardinal produce any Council more
ancient then that of Nice for that Law: for the Eliberin Council which he
alleges prescribes the contrary. The words of the Canon are, Placuit in
totum p^ohibere Episcopis Presbyteris Diaconibus and Subdiaconibus positis in
Ministerio abstinere sese a conjugibus and non genenerare filios, etc.
We thought it good to forbid altogether Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons established in the Ministry to abstain from their wives and from
begetting children. Can more express terms be devised to condemn Clarks that
make conscience to come near their wives, and to beget children? Truly, if that
Canon ought to be taken in a quite contrary sense, as the Cardinal will have
it, and if thereby the marriage of Clarks had been forbidden, Hosius who was
both present and President in the Council of Nice, and who had been before one
of the Eliberin Council would have contradicted Paphnutius. Would he not have
told him, You err saying that this Law of Celibat is a new Law, and not
established before, seeing that it was established in the Eliberin Council,
where I was present? This is then the difference: The Eliberin Council says,
It is ordained that prohibition be made to Bishops to abstain from their wives,
but Cardinal du Perron maintains that prohibere signifies commanding or
enjoining to abstain, which is an horrible licentiousness. Page 703.
Yet he defends himself with a text of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.3. prohibentes
abstinere a cibis, which (says he) signifies commanding to abstain from
meats: But that is false. For there is in the text prohibentium nubere,
abstinere a cibis: The word prohibentium, belongs to the precedent clause. And
better it is, in the second clause, abstinere a cibis, to supply a convenient
word to the Apostles intention, and translate commanding to abstain from meats,
as also the Doctors of Lovain have done in their French version. Thus when
Virgil says, that Ipse Quirinali lituo parvaque sedebat Succinctus trabea.
Evander sat clad with a short robe, and with a crookod staff, he means not
that Evander was clad with a staff.

Note also, that this Eliberin Council was held in Spain, and that in Spain
since that Council Bishops were married, and begot children in the time of
their Episcopacy, as we shall see hereafter by the example of Carterius.

The Cardinals fourth answer whereby he labors to weaken the authority of that
history of Paphnutius, is, that the constitution made in the Eliberin Council,
before the Council of Nice was repeated again after the Council of Nice in many
subsequent Councils. This Cardinal having said, That the Law of the Celibat had
been already made by many particular Councils before the Council of Nice, could
not bring any Council but that of Eliberis which commands the clean contrary,
as we have showed. Now he brings Councils much later then that of Nice, wherein
he says that this Law was confirmed, which against truth he pretends to have
been constituted in the Eliberin Council; But what does that for the weakening
of the relation of Socrates about the dissuasion of Paphnutius? Who knows not,
that in points of discipline and Ecclesiastical order ages will alter, and
customs will vary? He alleges then the second Council of Carthage, held
about the year of our Lord 390. that is, sixty five years after the Council of
Nice, and but a particular Council of some Provinces of Africa. But in the same
time, both in Greece, and in all the East, Priests were married, and kept their
wives which they had married before their ordination. The same I say of the
first Council of Toledo, and of The Cardinal has quoted in the margent the
first Council of Arles instead of the second.
the second Council of Arles, if the Acts that are extant be true: For we have
them only in the Latin Tomes of the Councils, the first of which has almost
nothing certain but the Canons which the Greek Church has preserved for us.
Neither is it like that those petty Councils which are put a little after the
Council of Nice, would have opposed themselves unto that venerable Universal
Council which had rejected those that would bring in that Law of the Celibat,
and had left that to every man's liberty.

In the Roman Decree Did. 28. Can. Assumi.
a Canon of the third Council of Arles is alleged, saying that a married
Priest must not be admitted, unless he promise conversion. Which is not found
in that Council of Arles in the Tomes of Collen of the year 1567. But in the
elder Editions of the year 1538. at Collen, and of 1551. and in that of
Bartholomew Caranza, there is the clean contrary. For the Canon speaks thus,
Assumi aliquem ad sacerdotium non posse in conjugii vinculo constitutum non
oportet, nisi fuerit promissa conversio. That is, It is a thing that must not
be, that a man being in the bond of matrimony should not be received to the
Priesthood, unless he promise conversion before. So little trust there is to be
put in those Latin Canons of Councils which are not found in the Greek.

It is very considerable, that a few years after the Council of Nice a Council
was held at Gangra, whose Canons (though but of a provincial Council) were of
so much authority that they were inserted in the Code of the Universal Church,
and approved by the Universal Councils that followed, especially by the sixth
Council assembled again in the Palace of Trull to make Canons. For such is the
second Canon, Council. in Trullo Can. 2. (...).
We ratify all the sacred Canons of the holy Fathers, etc. those of
Neocesarea, as also those of Gangra. Now of that Council this is the fourth
Canon, (...).
If any make a difference of a married Priest, as if none ought to partake of
the oblation when he does the service, let him be anathema. There is in the
Greek (...), which signifies a married Priest, not one that has been married.
So does the Apostle speak 1 Cor. 7.10. (...), to them that are married, not to
them that have been, as our Cardinal (after Bellarmin) would persuade us page
708. And Theodoret says, Libro (...), cap de matrimonio.
that St. Peter was called to the Apostleship (...) out of the company of
married persons, not of those that had been married.

The Roman Decree Did. 28. Can. Si quis.
translateth this Canon, presbyterum conjugatum, a married Priest. And Socrates
in book 2. cap. 33. speaking of the condemnation of this Eustathius by the same
Council says, He commanded that the communion of a Priest, (...), that had a
wife, should be avoided like a crime. Truly although the Greek tongue should
suffer that interpretation, yet the occasion upon which that Canon was made,
does not admit it. For the Preface of that Council shows, that this Council
was assembled against Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, who among many
errors taught wives to forsake their husbands, and to shave themselves, and
commanded fasting upon the Lords day, and forbad eating of flesh, (...). The
Latin translateth in domibus conjugatorum.
and dissuaded Christians from praying in the houses of married persons, (...).
despising married Priests, and teaching men not to be partakers of the holy
mysteries touched by their hand. Which errors the Council condemning, adds in
the end, We admire virginity when it is with humility, and honor the honest
cohabitation of matrimony. Where it is clear, that persons that live in
matrimony, are understood, not they that sometimes lived in that state.

The Cardinal adds places of Eusebius, and Epiphanius which he has falsified
as we shall hereafter see. And those places speak neither of the Council of
Nice, nor of Paphnutius, of whom it is in question in this place; We shall see
what authority those Fathers may have whom he alleges.

About the time of the same Council the Emperor Constantin made a Law which is
the second in the title de Episcopis and Clericis, and speaks thus Clerici ad
parangariam praestationem non vocentur, nec eorundem facultates atque
substantiae. Omnibus Clericis haec praerogativa succurrat, ut and conjugia
clericorum and liberi immunes semper ab hujusmodi muneribus perseverent.
Let not Clarks be obliged to the expenses of public messengers or posts, nor
their goods and estates. Let this prerogative serve for all the Clarks that
their wives and children, both sons and daughters be exempted from such charges.

The eighth Canon of the Council of Neocesarea commands a Clark (...).
to send his wife away, if she has committed adultery after his ordination.
For that Council which forbids Can. 1.
Priests to marry after their ordination, permits them to keep their wives
which they had married before their ordination. Which custom the Greek Church
has always observed, and observes to this day.

The Council of Chalcedon in the fourteenth Canon (...).
forbids Readers and Singers to marry with wives of diverse religion. And in
the sixteenth Canon power is given to the Bishop to give permission to marry to
persons that have vowed virginity.

Pope Syricius Can. Quisquis, in the eighty fourth Distinction speaks thus,
Quisquis clericus aut viduam vel secundam daxerit uxorem, omnis Ecclesiasticae
dignitatis privilegio mox denudetur.
Let any Clark that shall marry a widow or a second wife be immediately
deprived of all privileges of Ecclesiastical dignity. That Canon permits not
only married persons to be Clarks, but the Clarks also to marry. This agrees
with the Council of Tela or Tellene, where there is a Decretal Epistle of that
Syricius, containing nine Canons, of which this is the fourth, Vt mulierem id
est viduam clericus non ducat uxorem.
Let not a Clark marry a widow. The twelfth Canon of the third Council of
Carthage says, Vt filii vel filiae Episcoporum vel quorumlibet clericorum
gentilibus vel haereticis aut schismaticis matrimonio non conjungantur.
Let not the sons or daughters of Bishops, or other Clarks whatsoever, be
joined in matrimony with Pagans, or Heretics, or Schismatics. And in the
Epistle of Innocent the I. to Victricius, Let not the Clark marry a widow.

Socrates in the fifth book, chap. 22. speaks thus, I have observed another
custom in Thessalia, That one that is made a Clark is degraded, if after he was
made Clark, he lie with the wife which he had married before he was a Clark.
Whereas in the East, they that are famous (...).
and the Bishops themselves, abstain altogether [from their wives] if they
will, but they do it not being constrained by any Law: For many among them in
the time of their Episcopacy have begot children of their lawful wives. He
adds that Theodorus or Heliodorus, Clark of Triba or Trixa, the same that
writ the love-book called Ethiopica, brought that custom into Thessalia.

The Cardinal in the same twentieth Chapter, brings many Texts of Hierom
against marriage. Which is not fair dealing, for he knows how much Hierom was
blamed for that, as himself confesses in his Apology to Pammachius. We need
not repeat the slanderous and reviling words of that Father against marriage,
of which we brought some before: Wherefore his words in this question are of no
weight. But that which is most observable, is, that himself in the first Book
against Jovinian, where he deals so unworthily with matrimony, acknowledges
nevertheless that in his time Bishops were married. If (says he) Samuel
brought up in the Tabernacle did marry, what does that to the prejudice of
Virginity? Quasi non hodie plurimi sacerdotes habeant matrimonia, and Episcopum
Apostolus describat unius uxoris virum habentem liberos cum omni castitate.
As though many Bishops in our days were not married. Seeing that the Apostle
describes the Bishop, the husband of one wife, having children with all
chastity. And in the same place, Married men are chosen, I deny it not. Again,
Frequenter in ordinatione sacerdotali virgo negligitur, maritus assumitur.
Many times in the Ordination of a Priest, a Virgin is neglected, a married man
is taken.

Yea the same Hierom in the Epistle to Oceanus praises Carterius a Bishop in
Spain, that being a Bishop, he begot children of a second wife. Carterius
(says he) Ille in uxore optavit liberos, tu in meretrice sobolem perdidisti;
illum naturae and benedictioni Dei servientem dicenti crescite, etc.
cubiculorum secreta texerunt, te subantem ad coitum publica facies execrata
est. Ille quod licebat verecundo pudore celavit, tu quod non licebat impudenter
oculis omnium ingessisti. Illi scriptum est, honorabiles nuptiae, etc.
desired to have children by his wife, but thou applying thy self to an harlot,
have lost thy race. He was hid in the secret of his chamber, whilst he served
nature and the blessing of God, who says, Increase and multiply, and fill the
earth: But thou in thy libidinous heat wast detested by the looks of the
people. He did cover with an ingenuous shamefac'tness that which was lawful,
but thou have impudently exposed unto the eyes of all, that which was unlawful.
For him it is written, that marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled: But
for thee it is said, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God shall judge.

In the same place speaking of married Bishops, Episcopos sigillatim si voluero
nominare, tantus numerus congregabitur ut Ariminensis Synodi multitudo
superetur.
If I would name all the Bishops one by one, I might assemble so great a
number, that it would go beyond the number of the Synod of Ariminum. In which
Council there was above six hundred Bishops.

The same Doctor in the same Epistle, expounding the Text of Saint Paul, Let
the Bishop be the husband of one wife; says, Apostolus praecepit ne eandem
licentiam Ecclesiae sibi vindicent sacerdotes, ne bina pariter and trina
conjugia sortiantur, sed ut singulas uno tempore uxores habeant.
the Apostle commands that the Bishops of the Church take that license no more,
and forbids them to have two or three marriages together, but will have them to
keep but one wife at once.

Epiphanius, in the Heresy of the Novatians, which is the 59. says, that
where the Ecclesiastical Canons are exact and strict, a man begetting children,
is not received into Ecclesiastical Orders. But in the same place he
acknowledges that these Orders were not practiced every where. (...).
Thou will tell me (says he) that yet in some places, Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons beget children. To which he answers, that this is done, not by
the rules, but by the looseness of men; (...).
and because they found not persons enough that might fill up the charges,
because of the great number. The Cardinal alleges this place according to
his wonted faithfulness, Falsification of the Cardinal.
for he falsifies it, and clips from it what displeases him. He translateth
for his own convenience (...), sincere, whereas it signifies exact and strict,
and clips this clause, Thou will tell me, that yet in some places Priests and
Deacons, etc. beget children; Also that which Epiphanius says, that for want
of others, Priests that beget children are chosen.

The same Epiphanius in the Heresy of the Apostolicks, which is the 61.
praises those that vow perpetual Virginity, yet acknowledging that such a vow
has no ground in Scripture, but in tradition. He says that a Virgin that
breaks her vow, sins grievously: Yet he declares, that it is better for her
to break that vow, and to marry, then to fall into fornication. (...), etc.
It is better (says he) to have one sin then many. It is better if a man be
fallen off from his course, to take a wife openly, according to the Law, and
being decayed from Virginity, after a long penance, be brought in again into
the Church, etc. then every day to be wounded with secret arrows, and by the
vice suggested by the Devil.

And now since we speak of falsifications, the Cardinal in the same twentieth
Chapter, bringing his fifth recusation against the History of Paphnutius,
quoteth a Text of Eusebius, which is found in the seventh Chapter of the first
Book of Evangelical demonstration. There is according to the Greek, (...).
The Heralds of the word of piety, for the present, necessarily study to keep
themselves retired from matrimony, because they tend better things, employing
themselves to the divine, and not carnal generation of children. The Cardinal
contented not himself to omit these words, for the present, whereby Eusebius
signifies, that they that abstained from matrimony, did it in consideration of
the present time: But he has translated also (...), dissolution, to persuade
that they that consecrated themselves to the holy Ministry, forsook their
wives, and made a dissolution of Matrimony: A thing forbidden by Christ, Matthew.
19.6. and 9. And by Paul, 1 Cor. 7.11. Indeed (...), signifies not dissolution,
but retirement from society, in the same sense as the Hermites are called in
Greek Anachorets, that is, living a retired life far from society, but that
word signifies not makers of dissolution; in the same sense as in the first
Book of Herodian, (...), signifies, a place of retirement, far from
communication; but that does not import any dissolution. Eusebius then says,
that in his time many Christians, the Pastors of the Church especially, did not
marry, that they might tend their office with more liberty. Which is very
commendable in them that have the gift of continence. And it is credible, that
God at that time gave it to more persons then he does now. But they did it by a
voluntary abstinence, without any binding Law: For of that Law or Rule,
Eusebius speaks not. If there had been such a Law, Paphnutius would not have
spoken in full Council against that Law (that some would have brought in) as
new and intolerable. And the Synod would not have followed his advice.

But in the same time lived Athanasius, who in the Epistle to Dracontius has
these words, (...).
Many Bishops never were married, but there are Monks that are Fathers of
children. As on the other side, we have known Bishops that were Fathers of
children, and Monks altogether without issue, and Clarks that fasted, and Monks
that drunk. (...).
For it is permitted so to do, and it is not forbidden to do otherwise.

Theodoret speaks thus, Theodoret. summa divinorum dogmatum, cap. de
Virginitate, (...), etc. (...).
The Lord God made no Laws about Virginity, for he knew that to be above
nature. And in the same place, The divine Apostle says of Virginity, I have no
commandment of the Lord, for the Lord gave no Law about Virginity. (...).
And in the following Chapter, The first of the Apostles was called out of the
company of married persons.

Austin in the book of Heresies, in the Heresy of the Apostolicks, In suam
communionem non reciperent untentes conjugibus, and res proprias possidentes,
quales habet Ca^holica Ecclesia monachos and Clericos quamplurimos.
They receive not into their communion, those that make use of wives, and that
have propriety of goods: Of which sort of men the Catholic Church has many,
both Monks and Clarks. We have heard before Chrysostom saying, in his second
Homily upon the Epistle to Titus, that marriage is so honorable, that with it
men may rise even to the Episcopal See.

In the twenty eighth Distinction of the Roman Decree, Can. De Syracusana, Pope
Pelagius, though he followed the course of his predecessors, Syricius and
Innocent, sworn enemies to the marriage of Clarks, yet the people of Saragossa,
being desirous of a certain Bishop that had a wife and children, granted him
unto them, upon condition that he should not bestow the goods of the Church
upon his wife and children. Uxor superstes and filii per q^os Ecclesiastica
solet p^riclitari substantia.
For (says he) wife and children are they, by whom the Church goods use to be
endangered. Thereby showing two things; the one, that then there were Priests
married, and that the marriage of a Bishop was not held a thing of its nature
unlawful, since it was permitted to some. The other, that the true reason which
moved the Popes to make that constitution in the Roman Church (for the Greek
Church never received it) was the preservation of Ecclesiastical goods.

Isidorus in the beginning of the second Book of Ecclesiastical Offices, brings
this rule of the ancient Fathers, Contubernia extranearum foeminarum nullatenus
appetant, Castimoniam quoque inviolati corporis perpetuo conservare studean^,
aut certe unius matrimonii vinculo foederentur.
Let not Clarks desire to keep strange women at home. Let them study to keep
the perpetual chastity of an inviolate body; or let them, at least be allied
with the bond of one marriage. It is evident, that by those strange women,
those Agapets or Associates are understood, which the Council of Nice
prohibited. And note, that this rule permits not only to make married men
Clarks, but Clarks to marry, as Tertul. lib. de pudic. c. 8. Licebat Apostolis
nubere. sect. 54.
Tertullian, told us before, that it was lawful for the Apostles to marry.

Baronius an. 453. brings a Synod of Anjou, which says among other things, Non
nisi unius uxoris viri, iidemque virginibus copulati, diaconi vel Presbyteri
ordinentur.
Let none be ordained Priests or Deacons, but such as are husbands of one only
wife, and that have married Virgins. That constitution was still kept in Gauls,
in the ninth age. For Hinckman in his Epistle to the Clergy, and the people of
Tournay, speaks thus, p. 590, Nec unquam ordinationes praesumat illicitas, ne
bigamum aut qui virginem (si de conjugatis ag^ndum est) non est sortitus uxorem.
Let him not presume to make unlawful Ordinations. Let him not receive a bigame
to Orders, nor him that married a woman that was not a Virgin; if it be in
question of married persons. And in the Epistle to the Clergy and people of
Beauvais, Non recipitur ad clerum qui maritus viduae fit.
That man is not received into the Clergy that marries a widow.

Du Haillan in the life of Charles the Simple, says, that in that Kings reign
a Council was held in France, in which it was permitted unto Priests to marry
Virgin wives.

This is the 43. Canon of the Council of Toledo, The Clarks that have married
without the Bishops counsel, or taken widows, or divorced women, or whores for
their wives, must be separated by their own Bishop.

Pope Innocent the first, in the fourth Epistle to Felix Bishop of Nocera,
speaks thus, It is forbidden in the Law unto the Priest, to have a woman that
was a widow; or one of a sordid condition. The same in the Epistle to
Victricius, chap. 4. Vt viduam Clericus non ducat uxorem. Let not a Clark marry
one that was a widow.

Above all, the thirteenth Canon of the Council of Constantinople, reassembled
at Trull, is express to this purpose, Whereas we have heard, that in the Roman
Church this is given for a rule, that such as are to be honored with the Order
of Deacon or Priest, must openly promise that they shall join no more with
their wives; We according to the ancient rule of the exact Discipline and Order
of the Apostles, will that hereafter the co-habitation of sacred men, made
according to the Laws, remain firm, not separating them in any wise from
touching their wives, nor depriving them of their mutual company in convenient
time; so that if any be found worthy to be Ordained Subdeacon, or Deacon, or
Priest, Clerici qui sine consultu Episcopi sui uxores duxerint, aut viduam aut
repudiatam vel meretricem in conjugium receperint, separari eos a proprio
Episcopo oportebit.
he shall not be kept off from that degree upon pretense of his cohabitation
with his lawful wife: And at the time of his Ordination, no promise shall be
required from him, that he shall abstain from the lawful habitation with his
own wife, for fear that by that means we be constrained to wrong and disgrace
matrimony, which God has instituted, and blessed with his presence, seeing that
the Gospel cries up, That which God has joined, let not man separate. The
thing most to be observed in that Canon, is that the Church of Rome is by name
condemned in it. Can. sextum Did. 3. de Consecratione. Sextam Synodum recipio
cum omnibus Canonibus suis.
Pope Adrian approves the Canons of that Council, as does also the second
Council of Nice.

It is true, that in the same Council marriage is forbidden to Bishops. But
Balsamon Patriarch of Antioch, upon the fifth Canon of the Apostles, speaks
thus, (...).
Before the VI. Council, which was held in the Palace of Trull, Bishops were
permitted to keep their wives, even after they had the Episcopal dignity
bestowed upon them. And he adds, that in Africa, Lybia, and other places,
they are allowed to cohabit with their wives.

That I may not amplify this matter further, I will shut up this discourse
with a place of Gregory the I. who writ in the year 595. when the Law of the
Celibat of the Clergy was strengthened in those places, where the Bishop of
Rome had power. In the IV. Book of his Dialogues, chap. I. he speaks of the
wives of Priests, which he calls Presbyteras, Priestesses; and says that a
Priest of Nursia abstained from touching his wife. Habent quippe sancti viri
hoc proprium. Nam ut semper ab illicitis long sint, a se plerunque licita
abscindunt.
For (says he) holy men have this property, to cut off themselves from lawful
things, that they may always be far from the unlawful.

The same Pope in the twenty fourth Epistle of the third Book, De
ordinationibus vero vel de nuptiis clericorum, nullus quicquam praemii
praesumat accipere.
forbids to receive money for the Ordination, or for the marriage of Clarks.
These Popes, though fully bent upon planting the Law of Celibat with all their
power, yet were often forced to give place unto nature; and conscience did many
times put them to the rack, and made them confess the truth: So far that Pius
the II. was saying, that Sacerdotibus magna ratione sublatas nuptias, majori
restituendas videri.
for great reasons marriage had been taken from Priests, but that for greater
reasons it should be restored to them, as Platina says.

The words of Polydorus Virgilius, are notable in the fifth Book of the
Inventors of things, chap. 4. The Apostle Saint Paul has prescribed to our
Priests the manner how they ought to contract matrimony, writing thus unto
Timothy, The Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife; And a little
after, Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife only. That which is
permitted to Bishops, is also granted to Priests, seeing that upon Hieroms
testimony we have said in another place, that Priests in old time were called
Bishops. Of Subdeacons he says nothing, who in those days were not a sacred
Order.

CHAP. 8. Examples of Clarks married, both Ancient and Modern.
WE heard before Ignatius, and Clemens Alexandrinus, and Ambrose, saying, that
most part of the Apostles had wives: And Athanasius saying, that he had known
married Bishops, and others living single: And Hierom praising Bishop Carterius
for begetting children on his second wife, in the time of his Episcopacy. I
will bring here a few more examples.

Dionysius Alexandrinus, a man of holy life, who writ about the year 260.
(...), etc.
speaks of his children in an Epistle which is in the sixth Book, chap. 40. of
Eusebius.

Sozomenus, book 1. chap. 11. speaks thus of Spiridion Bishop of Cyprus, (...).
That rustic man, having a wife and children, yet never the unfitter for that,
for divine things. p. 709.
The Cardinal, who to wrest the Fathers finds nothing too hard, says that
Sozomenus understands, that Spiridion for being a rustic man, was not the
unfitter for divine things; but the Greek construction is repugnant to that,
for the word (...), relates necessarily to that which is next, and the Authors
meaning is that Spiridion was not unfitter for Gods service, for having a wife
and children. Also the Cardinal would persuade the Reader, that Spiridion's
wife was dead when he was made a Bishop. Which Sozomenus contradicts, saying,
That rustic man having a wife and children, not that sometimes had a wife. The
Menology of the Grecians alleged by the Cardinal, that is the Lunar Calendar
which the Greek Churches use now, is of no more authority, then if he alleged
a new Almanac printed at Venice.

He is ridiculous, when he will prove that Spiridions wife was dead because his
daughter served him, as though a daugher did owe no service to her Father
during her mothers life.

In the ninth Epistle of the seventh book of Sidonius Bishop of Clermont in
Auvergne, De Sidonio vide Gregor: Turonensem and ejus vitam scriptam a
Savanarola.
Sidonius puts this among the praises of Simplicius Bishop of Bourges, He has
a wife of the race of the Palladians, and two sons well and prudently
instructed.

Sidonius himself had married a wife named Papianilla daughter to the Emperor
Avitus, who distributed her plate unto the poor.

Gregory Nazianzen was son to Gregory Bishop of Nazianza, who during his
Episcopacy lived with his wife Nonna to an extreme old age in the same house;
as it is seen in the said Gregory's life set before his works; And in the
Oration which the said Gregory made upon his father, and in the oration about
his sister Gorgonia, and in that about his brother Caesarius.

The Cardinal pretends to prove, Page 710.
that he did not touch his wife since he was a Bishop, because he dyed being a
hundred years old, and was forty years Bishop. He means that a man has lost
his vigor at the age of threescore years. Which cannot be true in a man that
lives a hundred years. Yet suppose that it is so: But who knows not that a
man then jumped not into Episcopacy with one leap, and that this Gregory had
past many years in the other Orders of the Church, before he was a Bishop.

St. Gregory of Nyssa brother to St. Basil was married. Nicephorus speaks thus
of him book. 11. chap. 19. Et quamvis is conjugem habuerit, rebus tamen aliis
fratri minime cessit.
Although he had a wife, in other things he was not inferior to his brother.

Liberatus in his Breviary, chap. 10. Ordinatus est Episcopus Alexandrinus
Dioscorus qui fuit quidem Archidiaconus ejusdem Cyrilli, qui neque uxorem neque
filios habuit.
observes in Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria as a thing not ordinary, that
he had neithet wife nor children.

Synesius Bishop of Cyrene being desired to take upon him the office of Bishop
would not accept of it, but upon condition that he might be allowed to keep his
wife, and have her with him, and beget on her as many children as he could, as
himself says, Epist. 105. As for me, I will not separate my self from her in
any wise, and will not lie with her by stealth like an adulterer, but I will
endeavor and wish to have by her many fine children.

This example shows indeed that in Africa the Law was more rigid then in
other places, and that they made difficulty to admit a married Bishop. But this
shows also that this rule was not generally observed. In vain the Cardinal
alleges, that this Synesius did not believe the resurrection: For that is
nothing to this question. It is enough that he was a Bishop dwelling with his
wife, and was very much honored. (...).


In the fifty sixth Distinction of the Roman Decree in the Canon Osius, there
is a long list of Bishops, children of Clarks.

Osius Papa filius fuit Stephani subdiaconi. Bonifacius Papa fuit filius
Jocundi Presbyteri, etc.
Pope Osius was son of Stephen Subdeacon, Pope Boniface was son of the Priest
Jocundus. And that one may not think that they were begotten by fornication, or
before their fathers were Clarks, The Canon Cenomanensem, in the same
Distinction has these words, Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos
Pontifices supra leguntur esse promoti, non sunt intelligendi de fornicatione
sed de legitimis conjugiis nati, quae sacerdotibus ante prohibitionem ubique
licita erant and in Orientali Ecclesia usque hodie licere probantur.
When then we read before, that persons born of Priests were promoted to the
charge of High Priests, we must not understand, that they were begotten by
fornication, but in lawful matrimony, which before the prohibition were
allowed every where; and yet to this day they are permitted in the Oriental
Church. In Armenia the marriage of Clarks was in such honor, (...).
that none was received to the sacred Orders unless he was of sacerdotal race.
For which the Armenians are condemned by the Council of Trull Can. 33. which
forbids to regard the extraction in the ordination.

Yea in the West, for all that the Bishops of Rome could do, Priests were
commonly married. In Germany especially, where Pope Gregory the VII. surnamed
Hildebrand stirred up many troubles and scandals about that, as it is related
by Schafnaburgensis, and Sigebertus, who speaks thus upon the year 1074.
Gregorius Papa convocata Synodo Simoniacos anathematizavil, and uxoratos
sacerdotes a divino officio removit, and Laicos missam eorum audire interdixit,
novo exemplo, and ut multis visum est inconsiderato praejudicio, contra
sanctorum Patrum sententiam.
Pope Gregory having called a Synod, excommunicated the Simoniacks, and
expelled married Priests from the divine Office, and forbad Laymen to hear
their Mass, by a new example, as many hold, and by an inconsiderate prejudice
against the opinion of the Holy Fathers, etc. And so Schafnaburgensis on the
same year; Contra hoc decretum quo statuitur ne quisquam ad sacros ordines
admittatur, qui non perpetuam continentiam vitamque caelibem profitetur: tota
Clericorum factio vehementer infremuit, hominem esse haereticum clamitans, etc.
Against that Decree [of Gregory the VII.] whereby it was constituted that none
should be admitted to holy Orders, but such as would profess perpetual
continence and single life, the whole faction of the Clergy began to inveigh
vehemently, crying out that the man was an heretic, who having forgotten the
words of the Lord, All men cannot receive this saying [Matth. 19.11.] and those
of theApostle, If they do not contain, let them marry, by a violent constraint
imposed upon men an Angelical life.

In the year 1225. Innocent the third, and after him Innocent the fourth sent
Legates into England, to dissolve the marriages of Priests. Westmonast. in
floribus historiarum lib. 2. An. 1125. and Matthew. Paris.
One of these Legates called John de Cremona laboring for that separation was
found in a Bawdy House.

Theodoricus a Niem Secretary to three Popes who writ about the year one
thousand four hundred and ten Nemore unicrus Tractatu 6. qui inscribitur
Labyrinthus cap. 35.
affirms, that in his time in Norway, Ireland, Gascony, and Portugal, Priests
were married, and that it was a shame for Priests not to be married.

CHAP. 9. Confession of the Adversaries.
AENeas Sylvius who since was Pope, and was called Pius the II. in the end of
second Book of the history of the Council of Basil, says that when it was in
question of electing Felix Pope instead of Eugenius, some alleged that it
could not be because he had been married, and had children. Upon which the same
Aeneas relates the reasons propounded by others against it in a full Council,
to which the Council adhered. These are the words, Illud autem quod de uxore
dicitur, nihili pendo, cum non solum qui uxorem habuit, sed uxorem adhuc habens
queat assumi. Cur enim disputant Doctores, an uxoratus electus in Papam uxori
solvere debitum teneatur, nisi quoniam etiam conjugatus recipi possit?
Fuerintque, ut scitis, in matrimonio Pontifices. Nec Petrus Apostolorum
Princeps uxore caruit. Quid ista modo objicimus? fortasse non esset pejus, ut
sacerdotes quamplures uxorati essent, quoniam multi salvarentur in sacerdotio
conjugato, etc.
As for that which is said of his wife, I make nothing of it, seeing that not
only he that had a wife, but he that has one, maybe elected. For to what
purpose do the Doctors dispute, whether a Pope that is married be bound to pay
the due [benevolence] unto his wife, if a married man may not be admitted? And
there have been married Popes, as you know; and St. Peter the Prince of the
Apostles, was not without a wife. But why do we object these things? Perhaps it
were never the worse if many Priests were married, because many should be saved
in matrimony who are damned in a barren Priesthood. In the margent of that
discourse, there is this annotation, Read the fifth Epistle of Ignatius the
Martyr, and you shall see that all the Apostles had wives. Read also Baptista
Mantuanus in Fastis, and you shall find that Hilary Bishop of Poitiers had a
lawful wife. This is the same Pope Pius the second who told us before, that
for great reasons women were taken from Priests, but that for better reasons,
they ought to be restored unto them.

The Roman Decree in the twenty third Distinction Can. His igitur, speaks thus
of Clarks, Castimoniam non vi^lati corporis perpetuo observare studeant; aut
certe unius matrimonii vinculo faederentur.
Let them study to keep always the holiness of an inviolate body, or at least
let them be allied with the bond of one marriage only.

In the one and thirtieth Distinction Can Aliter. The tradition of the Oriental
Church is diverse from that of this holy Roman Church. For their Priests,
Deacons, and Subdeacons are married, etc.

In Cause 26. Quest. 22. Can. Sors non est. Copula sacerdotalis nec Legali nec
Evangelica vel Apostolica authoritate prohibetur, Ecclesiastica tamen lege
penitus interdicitur.
The marriage of Priests is not forbidden, neither by the authority of the Law,
nor by that of the Gospel; yet by the Ecclesiastical Law it is altogether
forbidden. Aliter se Orientalium traditio habet Ecclesiarum; Aliter hujus
sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae: Nam eorum sacerdotes Diaconi aut Subdiaconi
matrimonio copulantur. Istius autem Ecclesiae vel Occidentalium nullus
sacerdotum licentiam habet conjugium sortiendi.


Pope Leo, the first in the eighty seventh Epistle, Virginem uxorem accipiat,
and alterius horum nesciat quae futura est uxor Pontificis.
Let him marry a Virgin, and let that woman that must be a Bishops wife, be
altogether ignorant of another husbandsbed.

Polydorus Virgilius in the fifth book of the inventors of things, chap. 4.
Syricius circiter annum salutis 363. sedere coepit, sacerdotibus conjugio
primus interdixit, nec ante Gregorium 7. an Domini 1074. conjugium
Occidentalibus Sacerdotibus adimi potuit.
Syricius began to sit in the year 363. He was the first that forbad Priests to
marry. And a little after, Before Gregory the seventh in the year of the Lord
1074. marriage could not be taken away from the Occidental Priests. Then he
adds, that this constrained chastity was so far from overcoming the conjugal
chastity, that rather the fornication of Priests was thereby so much increased,
that it defamed religion more then any other evil. Wherefore he wishes that
marriage were restored unto them.

Cassander a Canon of Collen in the chapter of the Celibat of Priests, Restat
ut in posterum ordinandis hoc statutum relaxetur, and more veteris Ecclesiae,
and huc usque Orientalium Ecclesiarum honesti quoque mariti ad Ecclesiae
ministerium admittantur.
It remains that hereafter this statute may be relaxed for those that shall
be admitted into Orders; and that according to the custom of the ancient
Church, and of the Eastern Churches until now, honest married men be also
admitted to the Ministry of the Church, and that they be permitted to use
familiarity with their wives according to the Canon of the sixth general
Council, whereby it is determined that the marriages of Priests and Deacons
ought by no means to be dissolved, and that before their ordination they ought
not to be constrained to profess chastity.

CHAP. 10. Of the disorders happened by the Celibat: Also of the Charthusians,
and of St. Francis and his rule.
CArdinal du Perron Chapter 9. of the third Observation page 690.
seeing that he could not deny the great disorders and the unchaste life of
most of them that live in celibat, says that the celibat is no cause of those
disorders: That in Austins time the chastity of Clarks was exemplary, even of
those that had been constrained to be Clarks, and that the cause of that
disorder must be attributed to the lust and corruption of men. He propounds the
Carthusians and Capuchins as examples of chastity; and says that the most
predigious examples of lust are found in married persons: Not only in such as
Nero and Heliogabalus, but even in David, who had ten or twelve wives, and in
Solomon, who had three hundred: Which hindered not David from defiling his bed
with murder and adultery, nor Solomon from prostituting himself to The
Cardinal has not read Scripture well, for Solomon had 700. wives and 300.
Concubines.
seven hundred concubines.

One syllable only of Gods word is better then all that artificial discourse,
which is directly contary to the Apostle, who says 1 Cor. 7. Ibid.
To avoid fornication let every man have his wife and every woman her own
husband, plainly teaching that marriage serves to avoid fornication, whereas
M. du Perron says that married men are most given to lust. St. Paul says, If
they contain not, let them marry: but M. du Perron opposes him, saying that
married persons are the most incontinent.

It is true, that as there are persons that keep their health in a contagious
air, and some that are sick in a pure air; And some that are warm in Winter,
though they come not near the fire, and some that are cold in Summer because of
the ill disposition of their bodies: Likewise some live chastely in celibat,
some live unchastly in matrimony, breaking all obstacles with their unbridled
lust, and being sick in the midst of remedies. But thence it follows not, that
it is more easy to live chastely unmarried, or that the Apostle was mistaken
when he taught that marriage is the right remedy against fornication. Only it
may be thence inferred: that he that lives unchastely in matrimony, would do
worse in that kind if he were not married, and that vices are so strong in some
men, that they cannot be overcome by any remedy.

In vain he alleges the Carthusians for examples of chastity. For to keep a
man prisoner all his life and then praise his chastity, it is as if one put out
a man's eyes, and then commended him for never looking upon women. Then
continence is to be commended, when one has the means to please his
incontinence. Yet whosoever has read the books of Cassian, knows that Monks
suffer great inflammations of lust, and are disquieted with strange desires in
their solitariness. St. Benedicts life, the Author of the order of the
Benedictins, of whom the Carthusians are a branch, says that he would tumble
his naked body upon a sharp thornbush to allay his unchaste heat: It had been
better done for him to marry, and to follow the Apostles counsel.

As for the Capuchins whom the Cardinal propounds as examples of chastity,
the world speaks of them diversely, and they are not free from blame no more
then others. Besides, it is no wonder if their habit frights women. And such
women may be found, who being but too free otherwise would make conscience to
pollute the habit of St. Francis, which many will put on when they dye, because
it is held worth a second Baptism. M. du Perron says that the Capuchins are
restituted to their ancient Discipline, that is, that they keep the whole rule
of St. Francis. Of which rule it will not be amiss to produce some clauses to
know whether there be much perfection in the observation of them. That rule
prescribes that Nullo modo licebit iis de ista religione exire, juxta mandatum
Domini Papae, quia secundum Evangelium sanctum nemo mittens manum ad aratrum
and respiciens retro aptus est regno Dei.
None after the year of probation have leave to come out of that religion
according to the command of the Lord Pope, because according to the holy Gospel
none that puts his hand to the plough and looks behind is fitted for the
kingdom of God. And a little after, Qui necessitate coguntur, possunt portare
calceamenta, and fratres omnes vilibus vestimentis induantur, and possunt ea
repetiare de saccis and aliis peciis cum benedictione Dei.
They that are forced with necessity may wear shoes. And let all the brethren
be clothed with vile garments, which they may piece with sacks and other
pieces, with the blessing of God. The same rule commands the Lay Monks of the
Order of St. Francis Laici dicant 24. Pater noster pro matutinis.
to say twenty four Paternosters at Mattens, besides the other Paters of the
rest of the day, which amount to forty seven, so that they make seventy one
Paters every day. To fast from All Saints day to Christmas. To receive no money
neither by themselves, nor by interposed persons. To have no proper goods, but
to beg alms confidently; For (says the rule) their deep poverty makes them
heirs of the kingdom of heaven. Cum brevitate Sermones: quia verbum abbreviatum
fecit Dominus super terram.
That they be short in their Sermons, because the Lord has shortened the word
upon earth. Non curent nescientes literas, literas discere.
That the brethren that cannot read, take no care to learn to read, but that
they desire above all things to have the Spirit of the Lord.

Whether the Capuchins keep that whole rule, and whether these precepts to
which Monks are bound by an oath without any mention of Holy Scripture or of
the word of God (which in that rule is alleged in derision) and whether such
works ought to be reckoned among the works of superarrogation more perfect and
more excellent then the Law of God, I leave it to the consideration of all that
have some freedom of judgment, and some knowledge in the word of God. For the
close of that rule, that goodly Saint speaks thus, Nulli hominum omnium liceat
hanc paginam infringere, vel and ausu temerario contradicere. Si quis autem hoc
attentare praesumpserit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei and beatorum Petri and
Pauli Apostolorum se noverit incursurum.
Let it not be lawful for any man to transgress this page, or to contradict it
by an audacious rashness. And if any presume to attempt it, let him know that
he shall incur the indignation of Almighty God, and of the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul. It was not enough to incur Gods indignation, unless he had
added that of Peter and Paul: and why not also that of John and James? And what
certainty have we, that for breaking the rule of brother Francis, that is, for
touching money with his hands, or for wearing shoes without necessity, or for
saying fewer then twenty four Paters at Mattens, or for possessing some proper
goods, a poor Monk must incur Gods indignation? and that by observing these
things, not commanded by God, but invented by men, he shall obtain a degree of
glory in heaven, above those that have done no more, but to fulfill the Law of
God? Here indeed one may doubt, which must be most wondered at, either the
blindness of men, or the audaciousness of these Authors of rules, or the
patience of God? I refer this to the judgment of the Capuchins, who affirm
that they wear a garment of three pieces in memory of the Trinity. In which
garment they make holes purposely to set pieces to it, although the garment be
new, whether they feel much virtue in that habit, and that Thomas 2a 2ae qu.
ult. Art. 3. Idem in 4. Sentent. Did. 4. Qu. 3. Art. 3. In vitis Patrum
dicitur, quod quidam vidit eandem gratiam descendentem super eum qui habitum
religionis assumit, and super eum qui baptizatur. Bellarm. l. de Monac. cap. 6.
Denique Emanuel Sa verbo Religio. 10. and 17. Bern. lib. de praecepto and disp.
it serves them instead of a second Baptism.

The life of St. Francis Patron of the Capuchins is such, that it seems that
they that writ it intended to defame him, or to abuse him. I leave a thousand
ridiculous passages, as that he would be wallowing naked in the snow to beat
down his libidinous heat. That he preached unto Birds and Crickets, calling
them Brothers and Sisters. That he took up the lice fallen from his garment,
and set them upon his garment again. That to obey Pope Honorius he wallowed in
the mire among hoggs. But there are three things in his life, which seem to me
very worthy of observation. 1. Legenda Jacobi de Voragine, Nocte quadam
Daemones ad eum venientes eum gravissime verberaverunt.
That he was cruelly beaten by Devils. 2. That being one day full of joy, and
being asked what was the subject of his joy, he answered, Ideo me exultare
noveritis, quia adhuc sanctus per totum saeculum adorabor.
Know ye that I rejoice, because being Saint, I shall be adored over all the
world. 3. This is observable above the rest, that one time having a great
longing to hear ill words, he commanded a Monk to rate him with injurious
words. The Monk not daring to disobey him, told him, Praecipiebat alicui fratri
ut verba vilificantia suis auribus conculcando proferret. Cum que frater ille
licet invitus eum rusticum and mercenarium impium and inutilem diceret,
exhilaratus dicebat, Benedicat tibi Dominus quia tu verissima loqueris.
Thou art a clown, a mercenary man, an ungodly, and an idle fellow. To whom St.
Francis answered, The Lord bless thee, for thou speak most true. That was a
sincere confession. But in my opinion all these passages are little resembling
the life of the Apostles.

To shut up this question of the celibat, it is easy to discern by what spirit
they that lay that yoke upon the Clergy are acted. For the Popes that made that
Law, are the same that license Bawdy-houses, even at Rome, and near the Sea of
his holiness. Then the celibat of Clarks and Monks conduces very much to the
preservation and augmentation of the patrimony of the Church. And the Decrees
of the Roman Church, as also the glosses adjoined unto them, are interlarded
with dishonest and jearing clauses, which show that those very men that preach
single life delight in bawdery, and laugh at their own rules. Such is the Canon
Is qui, in the thirty fourth Distinction, which has this inscription, Qui non
habet uxorem, loco illius concubinam debet habere.
He that has no wife, instead of her must have a concubine. And the Canon
Dilectissimis in Cause 12. Qu. 1. which approves Plato's opinion, and calls
him, Quidam Graecorum sapientissimus haec ita sciens esse communia, debere ait
amicorum esse communia omnia; In omnibus autem sunt sine dubio and conjuges.
The wisest of the Grecians, who said that all things ought to be common among
friends. Now (says the Canon) in that word, all things, no doubt but wives
also are comprehended. Of the same stuff is the Gloss of the Canon Absit, in
Cause 11. Qu. 3. which says, that Si ergo Clericus amplectatur mulierem,
interpretatur, quod benedicendi causa hoc faciat.
if a Clark embrace a woman, it must be interpreted, that he does it to give
her his blessing. And the gloss of the Canon Vidua, Distinction 34. gives the
definition of a whore, namely, that it is quae admiserit plures quam 23. mill
homines, she that prostituted her self to more then three and twenty thousand
men.

Out of the same spring proceed the interrogations of the 19. book of the
Decrees of Burchard, and of the book of Confessions of Benedicti, and the
Canons of the Roman Penitential, published by Austin Bishop of Tarragona, and
the horrible speculations of the Jesuit Sanchez about matrimony, and all the
foul stuff of the Casuists, who under a color of searching the consciences, or
imposing penances according to the circumstances of sins, or describing the
nature of sins to dissuade men from it, teach in effect so much ribaldry, and
so many abominations, that all the Pagan Authors now extant that have stretched
their wits upon lasciviousness, are modest in comparison of them. And I believe
that the Devil himself might be their Disciple. Any one may see that these men
took great delight in such meditations. Is not this a jolly Decretal of Pope
Alexander the third, As for adulteries and other lesser crimes, the Bishop can
dispense from them after the penance ended? Where note, that he speaks of the
dispensation which may be given to Clarks. And this Decretal of Clement the
third. Decretal. l. 4. de sponsalibus and matrimoniis, Cap. Inter. Statuimus ut
omnibus qui publicas mulieres de lupanari extraxerint and duxerint in uxores,
quod agunt, in remissionem proficiat peccatorum.
We decree that to them that take public whores out of the Bawdy House, and
marry them, that action shall be profitable for the remission of their sins?
Decretal. lib. 2. Tit. 1. de Judiciis Cap. At si Clerici. De adulteriis vero
and aliis criminibus quae sunt minora, potest Episcopus dispensare post
peractam poenitentiam.
Note that word We decree, for a decree of that nature can be made by none but
God who is offended, and to whom it belongs to pardon. Truly that Decree shows
a way to get the remission of sins at an easy rate.

CHAP. II. Of affected austerity, Reasons whereby the Cardinal maintains
professed slovenliness. The Original of Monks.
HIs Majesty of Great Britain had commended modesty in clothes, and sobriety of
diet, in those especially that teach others, and show them the way to live
well. But he believed not that a man is holy, because he is slovenly, or that
if lice get up into the Pulpit with the Preacher, his Preaching is the more
effectual for that. He believed not that Scab and Vermin are meritorious
before God, or that a man is the more acceptable unto God for going barefoot.
He condemned those that whip themselves for themselves, and more yet, such as
whip themselves for others. Only, he held that by whipping themselves they do
justly, for being so senseless, as to think to satisfy God with outward
gestures, not knowing that God requires not that we tear our bodies with cruel
handling, but that we turn our hearts with repentance; and not considering that
it is the part of a mad Judge, to release a Felon, because his neighbor has
whipped himself for him. Such Penitents are seen at Rome in great troops, the
week before Easter, whipping themselves in public, with their face hid, and
their back bare; others bearing a Cross of great weight in the streets, crying,
Fate ben per voi; that is, Do good for your selves. Beatus Rhenanus, in his
Comment upon the Book of Tertullian, Ad Martyrs, says that Istius veteris
diamastigoseos vestigium aliquod videas apud Italos in Litaniis.
in Italy in the Letanies, some resemblance or trace was seen of the old custom
of the Lacedaemonians to whip themselves. Of this, Lib. 7. de Inventoribus
rerum, cap. 6.
Polydorus Virgilius speaks in this manner. In public they march in order,
having most of them their face covered with linen sacks, chastening themselves
with a whip, having their back bare and torn, as it is convenient unto true
penitents. Then he adds, Caeterum res ista fidem facit a Romany Lupercis
institutum esse acceptum, quod illi Lupercalia ludicra celebrantes nudi per
urbem incedebant and larvati flagellis obvios caedebant.
This shows that this custom proceeded from the Luperci of the old Rome: For
when they celebrated the Lupercal games, they went naked and masked through the
town, and smote with whips such as they met in their way.

I am not ignorant that such an austere life, that horror, those stripes, that
slovenliness and sordid habit, bears some show of humility, and study to
mortify the flesh. But the Apostle, Col. 2.23. warns us against that show.
For condemning the exterior abstinences and austerities, he says, Which
things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and
neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh. For
pride will nestle even in dunghills, and many will bring themselves low, that
they may exalt themselves. The world honors them, because they despise
themselves, and by humility they get glory and reputation among men. Some out
of an affected humility, wear a torn garment, but their pride is seen through
the holes of their Cloak. Had they lived a life like other men, no body had
spoken of them, and they had not been discerned in the multitude. But a man
that leaves the crowd, to take a way by himself, is sooner taken notice of.

Truly it is a great mistake of holiness, to place it in things which God has
not commanded, and the Apostles have not practiced, and which may be done out
of hypocrisy, and wherein the Pagans have always outdone the Christians. For
the most austere among the Christians, come not near the 1 King. 18.28.
Priests of Baal that lanched their flesh with knives, for the service of the
Idol. The Dervis of the Mahumetans, and the Bramenies of the East Indies, go
far beyond the austerity of Friars.

Sure they that will pay God in such light coin, fancy to themselves a blind
God, and offer an high wrong unto Christ, when they present other satisfactions
for sins unto God, then the passion of his only Son.

To these things, of which the Cardinal was not ignorant, he gives a very
superficial answer. In the second Observation, chap. 10. and 12. page 663. and
665.
He says that Elijah and other holy men were clad with sheepskins. That John
the Baptist was clad with Camels hair. That Ambrose and Tertullian speak of the
dirt arid nastiness of the penitent. That Saint Simeon Stelites suffered his
legs to be eaten with In Latin Cimices, a vermin well known in Paris, and in
hot Countries, but unknown in England.
puneses, when he could take them away. That Saint Hierom clad himself with a
sack, and that his skin was of the color of a tawney-Moore. That he would
smite his breast with a stone till the blood came. That he says upon the 35.
Psalm, that sackcloth and ashes are the weapons of penitence, and that
Epiphanius says the same. As for the madness of those that whip themselves for
others, after he has praised the Kings gallant wit, and what a grace he has
to make the Reader laugh, and having compared him, uncivilly enough, to a
Stage Player, to whom it is more easy to make the beholders laugh, then to
make them weep; he answers, that he knows not those that thus cause
themselves to be whipped, and that as they gave him no proxy to imitate them,
neither did they give him any to defend them. He denies not that there are
such men, but he says that he knows them not, and that he would not follow
their example.

For answer, I say, that we condemn not vermin and dirt, as things contrary to
Gods command. Many Martyrs shut up in Dungeons, have been brought to that
condition: Or if Penitence and the contempt of the world, make a man so far to
neglect his body, as to forget cleanliness and decency, God forbid that we
should therefore condemn him. Only we condemn those that do these things, that
they may be seen, Mat. 6.17.
not remembering the Lords command, When thou fastest, wash thy face, that it
may not appear unto men that thou fastest, but to thy Father that sees thee in
secret. We condemn also those, that put merit in these austerities, and presume
thereby to satisfy God, either for theirs, or for their neighbors sins.
Wherefore we can hardly be persuaded to praise Saint Batheus, Sozom. lib. 6.
sect. 34.
who was of such a mortified holiness, that he suffered worms to run between
his teeth, as Sozomenus relates. Or Saint Francis, who to obey Pope Honorius,
wallowed in the mire. Or that Simeon Stelites, of whom the Cardinal says, that
he suffered vermin to eat his legs.

Antiquity has much admired two Simeon Stelites, so called from stele, a
pillar, because they stood upon pillars. The first of them lived under the
Emperor Theodosius the II. who died in the year of the Lord, 449. Of that
Simeon the Historian, Evagrius says, in his first Book, chap. 13. that for the
space of thirty years, he stood on the top of a pillar forty cubits high, with
an iron chain about his neck. The other Simeon, who came soon after, went
beyond the other, for he lived 68. years at roost upon a pillar, and
counterfeited himself to be mad for the love of Christ, and shut up himself
many hours with a whore, as the same Evagrius relates. Evagr. l. 4. c. 33.
Solus cum sola diu commoratus est, and lib. 6. cap. 22.
That is the Saint whom the Cardinal propounds for an example, who suffered his
legs to be eaten by vermin, when he could hinder it. The Cardinals legs were
little better, but that came not to him by austerity. But by voluptuousness,
which got him a body tormented with Venerean diseases, if the world says true.


The history of that age affords many the like examples. Socrates in the fourth
Book, chap. 18. says that Saint Macarius commanded a Monk in his sore thirst
to content himself with the shadow of a tree, and that he would sleep standing,
leaning against a wall. His Legend says, that he did strict penance for six
Months for killing a Gnat. Sozomen in the sixth Book, chap. 28. says the
Monck Theonas was thirty years without speaking. And in chap. 29. he says,
that the Monck Pior kept his eyes shut continually, and would see no body, and
could not be persuaded to open them to see his sister, which he had not seen in
fifty years. The austerity of the Apostles, never came near those examples.

The first Author of those abstinences and austerities, was Anthony the
Hermit, who died in the year of Christ, 358. For Paul the Hermit, dead a
little before him, made no Disciples. Austin in the first Book of the Christian
Doctrine, says of that Anthony, that he had learned the Holy Scriptures only
by hearing, for he could not read. Yet at Saint Anthony's Church near Paris,
his image stands with a Book in his hand, and a hogg by his side. We have his
life among the works of Athanasius, which says that he was cruelly whipped by a
troop of Devils. That he made grave and mild admonitions unto Asses and other
beasts, that ate the herbs of his Garden: And that this holy man foretold that
the Heresy of Arrius should be the last, and that after it there would be no
more in the world. In the same life there are many express Declarations against
Invocation of Saints, and Adoration of relics.

That Anthony left Disciples, who built with their own hands every one his own
Cottage. In less then fifty years their number did so increase, that the
Deserts of Syria and Egypt were full of Cottages, where those Hermites or
Moncks lived, who got their living by their labor, came not to Towns but to
sell their work, begged not, were not bound by any necessity of vow, Polydor.
Virg. de Invent. lib. 7. cap. 1. Nullum votorum vinculum, ita ut unicuique
integrum soret manner aut proficisci quo terrarum vellet.
asked no approbation of the Bishop of Rome of their Order, and received no
Indulgences from him.

Their garment was black and course, their fasts were austere, yet Cassian.
lib. 5. c. 5. Super jejuniorum modo haud potest uniformis regula custodiri,
quia nec robur unum cunctis corporibus inest.
unequal, and according to every man's strength. They held it a great crime to
fast upon a Cassian. l. 3. c. 9. and 10. Condemns the Roman Church for
fasting upon Saturday.
Saturday, or upon the Lords day. They wore a hood like a child's beggin,
because (says Cassian, in the first book, chap. 4.) it is written in the
Psalm, I was as a child that is weaned of his Mother; and because Christ said,
Unless you be like little children, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. They carried Idem. lib 1. c. 9. Baculus quo abigunt canes vitiorum.
a staff in imitation of Elisha, to beat dogs away, that is, vices. They wore
stockins, but no shoes, Idem lib. 1. c. 10.
for fear of touching dead things. Entering into the place of Prayer, they put
off their stockins, because it is written, Put off thy shoes, for the place
where thou stand is holy ground. In some places they wore long hair, as in
Mesopotamia, in other places they wore it short, but not shaven round, because
of the prohibition, Levit. 19.27. They celebrated Christ's Nativity upon the day
of Epiphany, which is the sixth of January. Idem Collat. 10. cap. 2.
Which was also the custom of the whole Patriarchat of Alexandria, a certain
proof that they were not subject to the Bishop of Rome. Breaking an earthen
pot, was held a great crime among them, or touching any man's hand. Cassian in
the fourth book chap. 10. says that they observed such a rigor of discipline,
that they durst not so much as piss without leave, not take up a fruit fallen
from a tree, and that for letting fall three seeds of Lentills, they did
public penance. That the Monck Mucius being commanded by his Abbot to drown
his son, carried him immediately to the River, and would have drowned him, had
he not been hindered, Cassian. lib. 4. c. 18. and 20.
as Cassian relates.

That Cassian, who writ about the year 440. and lived long among them, says,
that commonly they were Idem Collat 7.
beaten by Devils most horribly: And that among them, the Abbot Moses was
eminent in holiness, into whose mouth the Devil would thrust humane excrements.
Also, Idem Collat. 22. c. 2. and 3. and 5. and 6.
that Satan by contrectation, would cause unto them nocturnal pollutions, after
which they did not forbear receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, because
it was the Devils doing, not theirs.

The same Moncks were generally Anthropomorphites, as Sozom. lib. 8. c 11. and
Cassian. Collat. 10. cap. 2. and 3.
Sozomenus and Cassian witness. See also about their errors, the first book of
the history of Theodoret, chap. 9. Cyrillus of Alexandria made use of them as
of soldiers. He sent for five hundred of them out of the Desert of Nittia,
into the City of Alexandria, to stand against the Emperors Lieutenant Orestes,
whom they charged with stones, and wounded him in the face. Thus, scarce was
that profession come into the world, but presently many errors and excesses
crept into it.

About the year 380. at the instigation of Saint Hierom, a woman named
Marcella, and at her imitation some noble women and virgins of Rome began to
embrace the Monastical vow, not living in a Monastery, for there was none yet
at Rome, but living at home, and wearing a course black habit; Which new way
displeased very much the Christian people of Rome, as Hierom says in the
Epitaph of Marcella, Nulla eo tempore nobilium soeminarum noverat Romae
propositum Monachorum, nec audebat, propter rei novitatem, ignominiosum (ut tum
putabatur) and vile in populis nomen assumere.
None of the Noble-women knew yet at Rome, what the Monastical profession was,
and durst not take that name which was vile and opprobrious among the people,
because of the novelty of the thing, as they esteemed it at that time. And when
it happened that Blesilla daughter to Paula dyed out of excess of monastical
austerity, the people cried at her funerals, Quousque genus detestabile
manachorum non urbe pellitur? non lapidibus obruitur? non praecipitatur in
stuctus? Matronam miserabile^ seduxerunt, etc.
How long shall it be before that detestable generation of Monks be expelled
out of the City? why are they not stoned to death? Why are they not cast into
the water? They have seduced a miserable Matron, etc. These expostulations
regarded Hierom, the great promoter of Monastical profession at Rome, who drew
as many as he could into it, rich women especially, to whom he writ most part
of his Epistles. And yet himself in many Epistles detesteth the life of many
Monks, and the corruption crept into that profession, though it was of very
late birth. In the Epistle to Rusticus he speaks thus, Q^osdam ineptos homines
Monachos demonum contra se pugnantium portenta confingere ut apud imperitos and
vulgi homines miraculum sui faciant and exinde lucra sectentur.
Some foolish Monks forge prodigies of devils fighting against them, to make
themselves admired of the ignorant vulgar people, and thereby to get profit.
And in the same place he says that, Sunt qui humore cellarum, immoderatisque
jejumis, taedio solitudinis ac nimia lectione vertantur in melancholiam, etc.
he has seen many, who by the dampness of their cells, and by excessive
fasting, and by a long solitariness, and by too much reading, were become
melancholy and mad, and had more need of the help of Hippocrates, then of his
[that is, Hieroms] admonitions. And in the Epistle to Eustochium, Sunt qui
ciliciis vestiuntur and cucullis fabrefactis, ut ad infantiam redeant imitantur
noctuas and bubo nes, etc. Viros quoque fuge quos videris catenatos, quibus
foeminei contra Apostolum crines, hircorum barba, nigrum pallium, etc
There are some, who having made to themselves a hair cloth, and a frock [like
a beggin] to return to infancy, are like owls. And that I may not seem to
speak only of women, avoid those men also whom thou shall see with chains,
wearing long hair like women, against the commandment of the Apostle, a goats
beard, and a black cloak, going with bare feet hardened against the cold. These
are marks of the Devil.

Austin about the year 420. writ the book of the work of Monks, where he speaks
to Monks as unto tradesmen laboring with their hands. And complaining of the
imposture of the Monks of his time, he says, Callidissimus hostis tam multos
hypocritas sub habitu monachorum usquequaque dispersit.
the crafty enemy has spread abroad every where so many hypocrites under the
habit of Monks. Among whom he says that there were some that carried about
relics of Martyrs, which were suspect unto him; Venditant membra Martyrum, si
tamen Martyrum.
Others (says he) muster up some limbs of Martyrs, if yet they be truly of
Martyrs.

By these examples it is made evident, that austerity and nastiness are not
always proofs of holiness. As for Hierom, who lay naked upon the hard ground,
and beat his breast, as he says in the Epistle to Eustochium, we will relate
his own words, That man is held happy, who as soon as he begins to think on
filthy things, kills those thoughts, and bruiseth them against the stones. O
quoties ego ipse in eremo constitutus and in illa vasta solitudine quae exusta
Solis ardoribus horridum Monachis praebet habitaculum, putabam me Romany
interesse deliciis! Sedebam solus quia amaritudine repletus eram. Horrebant
sacco membra deformia and squallida cutis situm. Aethiopicae carnis obduxerat.
Quotidie lachrimae, quotidie gemitus, and si quando repugnantem somnus imminens
oppressisset nuda humo vix ossa haerentia collidebam, etc. Ille igitur ego qui
ob gehennae metum tali me carcere ipse damnaveram, scorpionum tantum socius and
ferarum, saepe choris puellarum intereram Pallebant ora jejuniis, and men's
desideriis aestuabat; in frigido corpore, and ante hominem suum jam carne
praemortua, sola libidinum incendia bulliebant.
Oh how many times, my self being in the desert, in that wast solitude, which
being scorched with the Suns heat, gives an horrible habitation unto the
Monks, did I imagine that I was among the dainties of Rome! I was sitting
alone, because I was full of bitterness: My ugly limbs were covered with a base
sackcloth, and my dirty skin had got the mouldiness of a tawny-Moors flesh.
Every day I wept. Every day I groaned. And if sometimes sleep overcame me
against my will, I knocked, with a hard fall, my bones, which hardly held
together, against the bare ground. Then he adds, I then who for fear of hell
had condemned my self to such a prison, being company only for Scorpions and
wild beasts, found my self many times among the dances of virgins. My face was
pale with fasting, and yet in my cold body my spirit burnt with lust; and the
flesh being dead already before the man, the only burnings of unchaste desires
boiled up in it. And a little after, I remember that I joined the day with the
night, crying, beating my breast without ceasing, till the Lord chiding me,
tranquillity returned to me.

This place is often Page 664.
alleged by Cardinal du Perron, not very faithfully translated, to defend
austerity, beating of ones self, dirt, and nastiness. And he adds something of
his own: For Hierom says not, that he beat his breast with a stone till the
blood came. And as for Hierom, since he was writing to a woman, in my opinion
he might have spared confessing to her, that among his austerities, his heart
was burning with lust, and that his imagination transported him among the
dances of Virgins. But this is an evidence that one grain of the fear of God is
better worth then a stone weight of monastical exercise, as St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 4.8. that bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable
unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come.

Besides, we know not whether we must receive this relation of Hierom as a true
story, or for a rhetorical license amplifying the matter. For in the same
Epistle we have a narrative of the same kind; Where he says, that it had been
his custom after his fasting, watching, and weeping, to take Tully or Plautus
in his hand; for which he was once carried before the throne of Christ, and
that being asked, Who he was? he answered, I am a Christian: But it was
answered him, Thou lie, thou art a Ciceronian; and that for being a
Ciceronian he was soundly whipped before the throne of Christ. And that one might
not think that it was an illusion, he swears, Testis est t^ibunal illud ante
quod jacui; testis judicium triste quod timui (ita mihi nunquam contingat in
talem incidere quaestionem) liventes habuisse scapulas, plagas sensisse post
somnum.
and takes God to witness that his shoulders were black and blew after he was
awake. I take to witness (says he) that judicial throne before which I lay
down, I take to witness that sad Judgment which I did fear (so may I never
fall into the like examination again) that my shoulders were black with the
stripes, and that I felt the blows after my sleep.

After that, who will not believe that Hierom spoke in earnest, and that such a
passage truly happened to him? Yet himself toward the end of his first Apology
against Ruffinus, who objected to him, that after he had been so whipped, yet he
continued to be a Ciceronian, answers that Sed tamen qui somnium criminatur,
audiat prophetarum voces somniis non esse credendum.
all that was but a dream, which must not be believed, no more then when it
happened to him often to dream that he was dead, or that he was flying, or when
a man dreaming that he is rich, awaketh, and finds himself a beggar. In a word,
he speaks of that whipping, as of a mere illusion. O God, how holy and precious
is thy word, in comparison of the word of men, and the writings of those who
under the name of Fathers cover great infirmities!

But to return to the Cardinal, who has nothing but Fathers in his mouth, and
leaves the word of God, he was not bold enough to deny that in the Roman
Church they whip themselves the one for the other. But speaking in ambiguous
terms, he says, Of men of that kind that whip themselves for others, none as
yet is come to my knowledge, and as they gave me no proxy to imitate them,
they gave me none to defend them. Could he have denied that such a thing is
done in his Church, he would have done it with all his heart. But the truth of
that is too notorious. The Roman Church teaches that a man can make
superabounding and supererrogatory satisfactions; Of that overplus the treasure
of the Church is made up, of which the Pope carries the keys, and turns it
into a payment for others. To that end the brotherhoods of the Cordon, and of
the Rosary, and the like, are erected; Into which all that enter have part in
the merits, labors, fastings, and beatings of those that belong to the same
brotherhood, although they have suffered nothing in their own persons. Here is
then a treasure, part whereof consists in lashes of whips, and the Treasurer
is he that calls himself God on earth.

St. Antonine Archbishop of Florence writ the life of St. Dominick, whom he
compares in holiness and miracles with Christ, and finds very little difference
between them. He writ also the life of St. Catherine of Siena whom he clotheth
with a holiness almost beyond all example. So that even when she was in her
swaddling clothes, it was not possible to make her suck upon Friday. Of these
two he says that they whipped themselves upon their bare flesh with iron chains.
To say that it was for their own sins, would be too great a derogation to their
holiness. It was then to satisfy for others. But as for St. Francis who when
he whipped himself naked, would say, Euge frater asine, Go to thou brother ass,
as his Legend says, he did it to lay down the boiling of his lust. Of these
superabounding satisfactions Bellarmin disputes at large, Bellar. Indulgent.
lib. 1. cap. 2. and 3. Sect. Prima. Satisfactiones Christo and Sanctis
supervacuae, appl^cari possunt aliis qui rei sunt luendae poenae temporalis.
and maintains that the satisfactions of Christ and the Saints, which are
superfluous unto them, may be applied unto others that are liable to temporal
pains, among which is Purgatory. Also a private man may satisfy for another,
by fasting and suffering corporal pains. As it is said in the Canon Animae,
Causa 13. Quaest. 2. Animae desunctorum quatuor modis solvuntur, aut
oblationibus sacerdotum, aut precibus sanctorum, aut charorum eleemosynis, aut
jejunio cognatorum. Sicut jejunium alicujus liberat mortuum, multo potius
alterius jejunium prodest vivo. Quod concedo si ille est vicine conjunctus
illi. Vid. Did. 7.82. Can. Presbyter in Glossa.
The souls of the dead are released four ways, By the oblations of the
Priests, or by the prayers of the Saints, or by alms of friends, or by fastings
of kinsmen. He that speaks this is Pope Gregory the first, who has forgotten
the intercession of Christ making request for us, sitting at the right hand of
God, Romans 8.33. It seems that the Roman Church may more easily be without that,
then without other helps. The Gloss adds (k) If the fast of a [living] man
delivers a dead man, much more shall the fast of another profit to the living
man. Which I grant, if he be his neighbor.

Pope Nicolas in the sixth book of the Decretals in the twelfth Title, in the
Chapter Exiit, teaches that to live a perfect life, a man must have no proper
goods. St. Francis has observed that, and bound the Franciscans to it. Against
that rule that Pope moves an objection, which is Christ's example, who had a
purse, and some proper goods. To which he answers, that Christ had his
ininfirmities, Egit etiam infirma, sicut interdum and in fuga patet and in
loculis. That is, Christ also had infirm actions, as it appears in that he fled
away; and that he had a purse. In these things he attained not to the
perfection of St. Francis. Yet I know not where that Pope found that Christ
fled.

Fifth Controversy, OF THE SEVENH BOOK. OF FASTING.
CHAP. I. That in the question of Fasting, and of Lent M. du Perron does not
touch the state of the question, but discourses about things not controverted.
CArdinal du Perron in the eighteenth chapter of the first book speaks
superficially of Fasting and of Lent, but treats that question more at large in
the second Observation in the eighth chapter. Page 655.


All his discourse is employed, not to answer us, but to set forth his thoughts
and conceits and to disguise the ancient customs.

Then to comprehend the nature of that question, our difference is not, whether
fasting be good, or whether it be a commendable custom to fast before Easter.
Would to God that we were condemned to fast all the year, and never to eat
flesh, upon condition that we were agreed about the rest. One cannot prepare
himself to such a holy duty as receiving the Lords Supper with too much
humility. Yea, I hold that Aetius did evil to condemn fasting before Easter, in
a time when fasting was not taken for a payment and satisfaction to God, and
was not imposed by a single ill-grounded authority. That meddling fellow ought
not to have troubled the Church about a question of meats, and opposed the
custom universally received, which was then observed without pride, without
tyranny, and without opinion of merit. For as the Apostle says, Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. And Romans 14.2. and 3.
one believes that he may eat all things, another who is weak eats herbs;
Let not him that eats despise him that eats not, and let not him which
eats not, judge him that eats. Where it is to be noted, that the Apostle
calls the abstinence of him that tyeth himself to eat nothing but herbs a
weakness, because it is a scruple arising out of weakness of faith, and
shortness of instruction. Whereas in our days using great abstinence from
certain meats, is held to be strength, and a great perfection. And although
distinction of meats was abolisht by the Gospel, as we are taught, 1 Cor.
10.25. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question, for
conscience sake; For the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: If any of
them that believe not, bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever
is set before you eat, asking no question for conscience sake. Yet the same
Apostle charge us to use that liberty to edification, which Christ has
purchased for us: And as he will not have us to enslave our liberty to the
tyranny of those that would lay a yoke upon our consciences, so he will have us
to bear with them that are weak, and ill instructed, and rather to comply with
them, then to give them offense with our meat.

Also we are very far from condemning fasting which is so many times Acts
10.30. Acts 13.3. Luke 2.37.
recommended in Scripture, and payred with prayer, that as prayer sanctifies
the fast, so the fast may add heat unto prayer, and bring down the insolency of
the flesh. Sobriety is the preserver of chastity, a bridle unto lust, a help to
vigilance. This life being the eve of the great and eternal rest, it must be
(as much as we can) a continual fast. So if any feeling that the use of wine,
or flesh, or sawces, or sweet meats, stirs up his blood, and kindles his
concupiscence, abstains from these things without scruple, without either
imposing it as a Law upon others, or thinking himself obliged to it by a Law,
it were an unjust part to check him for it. Our quarrel with the Roman Church
about fasting is not of that nature. But we complain, 1. That she has changed
fasting into a distinction of meats; 2. That Bellar. l. 2. de bonis operibus
cap. 13. Jejunium valet ad satisfaciendum pro p^ccatis, and ad merendum pro
aeternis.
she puts fasting among merits and satisfactions, making of an exercise of
humility an occasion of pride. For we are so far from pretending to merit
eternal life by fasting, that on the contrary by fasting we declare our selves
unworthy of this corporal life. 3. That the Pope has taken this occasion to
raise his Empire, to set a rule to the markets, to the kitchens, to the
bellies; reserving to himself the authority to dispense, having to that effect
multiplied fasting days to that number, that they are well nigh half the year,
taking upon him to give Laws to the universal Church, whereas in old times
Bishops gave orders every one in his Diocese without any dependence upon the
Prelat of Rome. 4. That of sins against Gods Law, as fornication, stealing, and
lying, the least Priests can give the absolution; But eating a bit of flesh in
the Holy Week, is a sin for which a man is sent to the Bishop, or to the
Penitentiary. 5. That in the Roman Church he that has eaten his belly full of
fish, is accounted to have fasted, but he that for want of other meat, has
eaten a little flesh, is thought to have violated the fast. 6. That in the
Roman Church one man fasteth for another, as if a Judge ought to release a
fellon, because his brother has not dined. 7. Can. Presbyter Did. 82.
Secundum feriam unum Psalterium canendo, aut unum denarium pauperibus dando, si
opus est, redimere poterit Et Glossa ibid. Denarium potest dare, ut se redimat
a jejunio. Ergo multo fortius per alterius jejunium poterit liberari.
That the penances of fasting imposed upon a sinner are redeemed with money,
and that corporal pains are changed into pecuniary. 8. That this opens a wide
gate unto traffic. So far that the book called the Taxation of the Apostolical
Chancery puts a certain price to the Letters of such dispensations in these
words, Quod Laicus non teneatur jejunare diebus quibus per Ecclesiam astrictus
existit, and quod possit, etc. Caseo. Gros. 20.
That a Layman may not be obliged to fast upon the days to which he is bound
by the Church, and may eat cheese, the letter costs twenty groats.

These are the causes, that have obliged us to reject the fasts of the Roman
Church, and to shut up that gate to Satan, having known by experience how many
abuses have got into the Church by that way. Knowing also that Christ has not
prescribed certain fasting days, we fast according to necessity and occasion,
and exhort Gods people unto sobriety. Of all these wherein consists the
substance of the error, the Cardinal speaks not a word, and dares not stir
that sink.

CHAP. 2. That as sobriety and fasting are recommended in the word of God, so
distinction of meats is condemned by the same.
AMong the Ancient Christians we find examples of very austere fasting,
Lucianus in Philopatride id exprobrat Christianis.
so far as to be ten, yea twenty days without any eating. But whether they
fasted little or much, they did it out of a voluntary exercise, being not tied
to it by any Law. So speaks Austin Epist. 86. August. ad Casul. Epist. 86.
Quibus diebus non oporteat jejunare and quibus oporteat, praecepto Domini vel
Apostolorum in jejunio non definitur.
I find it not determined by any command of the Lord or his Apostles upon what
days we must not fast, and upon what days we must. And Socrates in the fifth
book chap. 22. speaking of the diversity of customs in several Churches in
matter of fasting, (...).
Because (says he) no written precept about that is found, it appears that
the Apostles left it free that every one may do that which is good, not out of
fear, or out of necessity. And Tertullian in the second book contra Psychicos,
or against the spiritual (so he calls the Orthodox) says that they affirmed
that Sic and Apostolos observasse nullu^ aliud imponentes jugum certorum and in
commune omnibus obeundorum jejuniorum.
the Apostles had imposed no yoke of certain days of fasting, which ought to
be observed of all in common.

But as Scripture prescribes no certain fasting days, so it expressly forbids
the distinction of meats. The Apostle St. Paul calls the prohibition of meats,
a doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1. The spirit speaks expressly that in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits and
doctrines of Devils -- Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats which God has created to be received with thanksgiving.

And that one may not say, that there the Apostle speaks of those only that
esteemed meats to be polluted and evil by their nature, he adds that bodily
exercise profits little. And Romans 14.2. he calls that man weak that eats
herbs out of abstinence. But he would rather have called him ungodly and
injurious against God, if such a man had believed that meats created by God
were evil by their nature. The same Apostle Col. 2.20. condemns those that
prohibited meats, saying Touch not, taste not, handle not, out of humilty and
exercise of mortification, for St. Paul adds, Which doctrines have indeed a
show of wisdom in will worship and humility, and not sparing of the body, not
in any honor to the fulfilling of the flesh. Such was the excuse of the
Montanists inventors of fasts, for so they speak by the mouth of Tertullian
their Advocate. Tertul. adv. Psycheos Sp. S. praedamnans jam haereticos
perpetuam abstinentiam praecepturos ad destruenda and despicienda opera
Creatoris.
The Apostle condemns those that commanded to abstain from meats. For the
Holy Ghost by his foresight condemns those heretics before they were come,
that should command a perpetual abstinence to destroy and despise the Creators
works. Again, Abstinentes ab eis quae non rejicimus sed differimus.
We abstain from meats which we reject not, but we put off the use of them for
a time. And in the same place Ita sciebat quosdam castigatores and
interdictores victus incusare qui ex fastidio non qui ex officio abstinerent.
The Apostle would accuse some correctors and forbidders of meats who abstained
from them out of contempt, not out of office or exercise. It is plain that
those heretics spoke as our Adversaries do. As also did Eustathius Bishop of
Sebastia, Conc. Gangr. Praefat. and Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 13. (...).
who being condemned by the Council of Gangra for such observations, protested
that he did not bring in these things out of pride, but out of a religious
exercise, and according to God.

The same Apostle in the same chapter ver. 16 speaks thus, Let no man judge you
in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of
the Sabbath days. And 1 Cor. 10.27. If any of them that believe not bid you to
a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you eat, asking no
question for conscience sake. Now it might easily happen that one of those that
believed not, inviting a Christian a sevenight or a fortnight before Easter
should set flesh before him. And 1 Cor. 8.8. Meat commends us not unto God, for
neither if we eat are we the better, neither if eat not are we the worse.

It is true that in the fifteenth of Acts, the Apostles being assembled at
Jerusalem, for fear of offending the Jews newly converted, prohibited eating of
blood, and strangled things. Which order we should be bound to observe to this
day, but that the Apostle who writ the first Epistle to the Corinthians long
after the Council of Jerusalem, teaches us, that this prohibition was taken
off, saying, If any of them that believe not, bid you to a feast, whatsoever is
set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake. Which the Roman
Church acknowledging has left that custom, and permits eating of blood and
strangled things, according to Austins counsel in chap. 13. of book 32. against
Faustus the Manichean, although the most part of Christan Churches Vid. Tertul.
Apol. c 9. Conc. Gangr Can. 2. Conc. Trull. Can 7. Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. cap. 1.
Sixtum Senensem lib. 6. Annot. 173.
for the space of eight hundred years and above, kept that Law, and carefully
abstained from blood and strangled things.

In vain the example of the Rechabites is alleged, who abstained from wine in
obedience to the command of Jonadab their ancestor, Jer. 35. For in the Roman
Church neither the people, nor the Clergy abstain from wine. If the example of
the Rechabites must be followed, there must be neither building of houses, nor
dwelling in houses. It was a prophetical warning whereby Jonadab dying,
prepared his family for persecution, which soon after came upon the land. Yet
God dispensed them from that abstinence, and took off that prohibition by his
Prophet Jeremy.

CHAP. 3. Of the custom of the Ancient Church about distinction of meats.
THE first that brought in rigid fasting were the heretic Montanists,
followers of Montanus, who called himself the Holy Ghost, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5.
cap. 18. (...).
Eusebius says, that Montanus is he that made the Laws about fasting. For if
that which Clemens Alexandrinus says is true, that St. Matthew did eat nothing
but seeds, and small fruits, and herbs, that Apostle did so without any Law
imposed upon him, and for causes particular to himself.

Of that Sect was Tertullian, who writ about the year 200. of Christ. He made a
book against the Orthodox Christians, whom he calls in scorn (...), that is
spiritual. In that book in the first chapter he says that the other Christians
accused the Montanists of too much fasting, and blamed them for fasting till
the evening, and for abstaining in their fasts from all moist things, as flesh,
and the most humid fruits, Tertul. in Psych. cap. 1. Arguunt nos, quod jejunia
propria custodiamus, quod stationes plenumque in vesperam producamus, quod
etiam Xerophagias observemus, siccantes cibum ab omni carne and omni
jurulentia, and uvidioribus quibusque pomis.
which fasts were called (...) by the Montanists, which the Orthodox Christians
laughed at, saying that it was a new and affected name, Id. c. 2. Xerophagios
quoque novum affectati officii nomen and proximum Ethnicae superstitioni quales
castimoniae Apim and Isidem and magnam matrem certorum eduliorum exceptione
purificant.
relishing of Pagan superstition; That the Egyptians that worshipped the Ox
Apis, and the Goddess Isis, had the like abstinences and distinctions of meats.

Ignatius more ancient then Tertullian in his Epistle to Hieron the Deacon
advises him Vino and carnibus ne prorsus abstineas, nec enim abominandae sunt.
not to abstain from wine and flesh, thereby showing that some already labored
to introduce these observations into the Church.

But about six or sevenscore years after Tertullian, began the profession of
Monks in Syria and Egypt, which was unknown before, and went beyond the
Montanists in austerity of fasting, so far that they would pass many days
together without any eating at all. These were careful observers of those
Xerophagies, that is, eating of dry meats, which the Ancient Christians had
derided.

At the same time, and in imitataion of those Monks, fasts began to be more
frequent; and Christians to mortify their flesh, began to abstain from wine
and flesh and all dainties upon fasting days. Yet the customs were very
different. Chrysostom in the fourth Homily to the people of Antioch, upon
image-breaking. (...).
There are some (says he) that pass two whole days without eating any thing
at all; Some cutting off from their table, not only wine and oil, but also all
kinds of meats, pass the whole Lent with bread and water only. And Socrates in
the fifth book of his history chap. 22. (...), etc.
Christians have not the same customs of abstinence of meats, for some abstain
altogether from things that had life, Others of all living creatures eat
nothing but fishes; Some unto fishes add fouls, etc. Others abstain from fruits
of trees, and from eggs; Some live with dry bread only, others use none at all.
Some will fast nine hours, and after feed upon such meat as they can get,
without distinction. The customs in that point are very different. And because
we find nothing written about that by the Ancients, I think that the Apostles
have left it to every man's discretion. That diversity of custom shows that in
those days the Pope of Rome did not rule the Universal Church.

This shows also that fasts were free, and that every one fasted either
according to his strength, or according to his will, not by any necessary rule
imposed upon the Church.

Tertullian in the forealleadged place disputing against sound doctrine, says,
that the Adversaries (that is, true Christians) said, that Lex and Prophetae
usque ad Johannem. Itaque de caetero indifferenter jejunandum ex arbitrio, non
ex imperi novae disciplinae, pro temporibus uniuscujusque. Sic Apostlos
observasse, etc.
The Law and the Prophets were until John, and that after that we must fast
indifferently, not by the authority of any new discipline, but according to the
times and occasions of every one. That the Apostles did so practice it, having
not imposed the yoke of certain fast days, etc. Apostolo detestatore eorum qui
sicut nubere prohibeant ita jubeant cibis abstinere.
That as the Apostle detesteth those that hinder marriage, so he detesteth
those that command abstinence from meats, etc. That the Lord said, that which
enters in at the mouth defiles not man, but that which goes out, etc. That
the Apostle said, Meat make us not acceptable unto God, that neither if we eat,
are we the better, neither if we eat not, are we the worse. Thus as the true
Christians of those days used against heretics the same reasons that we use
against the Roman Church, so the answer of those heretics speaking by the
mouth of Tertullian, is the same as that of our Adversaries. That the Apostle
condemns those heretics that hold meats to be polluted and evil by their
nature, not those that abstain out of exercise to mortify and humble their
flesh. By the same Tertullian in the third chapter of the same book it appears,
Been autem quod Episcopi universae plebi mandare jejunia assolent, etc. ex
aliqua solicitudinis Ecclesiasticae causa.
that in the orthodox Church Bishops prescribed fasts, according to the
occasions and extraordinary necessities of the Church.

About a hundred and ten years after Tertullian, the Council of Ancyra being
informed that some Clarks out of voluntary devotion abstained from flesh, made
this Canon which is the fourteenth. (...).
It seems us good that the Clarks Priests and Deacons that abstain from flesh
should eat of it. After that if they will abstain from it, let them abstain.
This shows that the Greek Churches had no Ecclesiastical laws as yet to abstain
from flesh. But because it was doubted whether those that abstained from it,
did it out of scruple or only out of exercise, the Council commands them to eat
flesh once or twice, to show that they held not the use of flesh to be evil of
its nature.

The like rules are found in the Asceticks of Basil, which are rules given
neither to the Clergy nor to the people, but to certain Hermites of the deserts
of Pontus and Cappadocia whom Basil exercised with a hard abstinence. He tells
them. Definitionum latiorum Interrogat. 18. (...).
All meats must be eaten as occasions happen, as much as it suffices to show
them that look upon us, that unto the pure all things are pure, and that every
creature of God is good, and none of them is to be rejected. And in the
nineteenth interrogation, It is impossible to tie all persons to the same
rules, considering the diversity of natures, and the complexion of the bodies.
And in his Asketical Constitutions chap. 25. he commands his Askets or
Disciples (...).
not to make conscience to eat bread dipped in flesh-broth, which the Benedictin
Friars in our days would hold to be a great sin. But in those days the rigid
rules of abstinence were only for the Anachorets and Askets, that is, for
Hermites and Exercisers of austerity. But as for the people, as it would have
been unbeseeming not to fast at all, so of the public fasts every one observed
as much as he pleased, and there was no Law that obliged the people
necessarily, as it will be seen more evidently by the following proofs,
especially when we come to speak of Lent.

Theodoret in the last chapter of divine maxims, where he treats of abstinence
speaks thus: The Church embraces abstinence of wine and flesh, and other
abstinences, not as heretics do, for they command abstinence of those things
as of abominable things. But Theod. (...) Cap. (...).
the Church has made no Laws about that, and forbids not the use of these
things. For this cause some enjoy lawful pleasures without fear, others
abstain from them. And none of the wise condemns him that eats, for both
the abstinence and the use lie in the liberty of men's will. That place shows
evidently that many Christians abstained from wine and flesh, out of a
voluntary exercise; being not bound to it by any Law. The like things he says
upon Romans 14.

Austin likewise in the thirty third chapter of the first book of the manners
of the Catholic Church, speaking of the fasts of Monks, whose abstinences were
far more strict and austere then those of the common people and Clergy, says
nevertheless, Atque inter haec nemo urgetur in aspera quae far non potest.
Nulli quod recusat imponitur, nec in eo condemnatur a caereris, quod in eis
imitandis se fatetur invalidum, etc. Meminerunt omnia munda mundis.
None is urged to austerities which he cannot bear. None has a burden laid
upon him which he cannot carry, or is condemned by others, because he c
nfesseth himself too weak to follow them; for they remember that to the clean
all things are clean.

Cassianus in book 5. chap. 5. speaking of the fasts of the Monks of the
wilderness. Super jejuniorum modo haud potest facile uniformis regula
custodiri, Quia nec robur unum cunctis corporibus ineft, nec sicut virtutes
caeterae animi solius vigore parantur.
It is not easy (says he) to keep an uniform rule about the measure of
fasting; Because all have not the same strength of body, and one cannot attain
to these fasts by the vigor of the mind only, as to other virtues. And in the
twenty first Collation chap. 13. We read not that any were condemned only for
meat, And in the fourteenth chapter he calls the use of meats an indifferent
thing.

Hence I infer, that if the Monks of the wilderness, whose fasts were a hundred
times more austere, yet were not constrained, but had the liberty either to
fast or not to fast, how much ought the peoples liberty to have been greater?
And truly whosoever shall carefully read the ancient penitential Canons shall
not find any Canon or rule that prescribe any penance to him that has eaten
flesh upon a fasting day. This will be more clearly seen in the chapter where
we shall treat of Lent. Neither shall it be found in all Antiquity, that any
ever came to the Bishop of Rome, or to any other Bishop, to get a permission or
dispensation to eat flesh on fasting days.

Eusebius in the third chapter of the fifth book of his history relates, that
one Alcibiades mortified himself with fasting, living with bread and water. But
(says Eusebius) it was revealed to Attalas [since] a Martyr, that Alcibiades
did ill to abstain from Gods creatures, and thereby to scandalize others: (...).
Alcibiades believed him, and since did eat indifferently of all [meats] and
gave God thanks.

Sozomenus in the first book chap. 11. says, that a stranger being come to
Spiridion on a fasting day, he bad his daughter to serve before that stranger a
piece of Pork, which he had in store; and that the stranger (bred doubtless in
some superstitious Church) made a scruple to eat it, saying that he durst not
eat it because he was a Christian. Then Spiridion told him, But for that very
reason thou must eat it, because God says, To the pure all things are pure. He
said not to him, Eat of it, for there is nothing else in the house, but he
alleged to him the word of God, which is always of the like vigor, whether
there was other meat, or no other meat in the house. And himself, who had
purposed before not to eat all that day, did eat flesh with that stranger, to
take from him all scruple.

The same Sozomenus in the third book chap. 13. And Nicephorus in the ninth
book chap. 14. speaks of one Pachomius, to whom an Angel brought a writing,
prescribing among other Laws, to eat, drink, labor, fast, or not fast, as
every one should like best, without binding himself to any necessity.

Prosper in the second book of contemplative life, chap. 22. Sic abstinere vel
jejunare debemus, ut nos non jejunandi vel abstinendi necessitati subdamus, ne
jam non devoti sed inviti rem voluntariam faciamus. Si enim quoslibet
^dvenientes jejunio intermisso resicio, non solvo jejunium sed impleo
charitatis officium.
We ought so to abstain or fast, that we subject not our selves to the
necessity of fasting or abstaining; lest that we do not out of devotion, but
out of constraint, a thing that ought to be voluntary. For if I intermit my
fast to entertain all that come to me, I violate not my fast, but I do an
office of charity.

Hierom is the most severe in this point, according to his custom, to run
always to extremes, and to be hyperbolical both in counsels and words. That
Father in the second book against Jovinian sets forth all his eloquence to make
eating of flesh odious, and to dissuade Christians from it. He says that
Possumus dicere bestias, pisces, oves, non ad esum sed ad medicinam creatas.
the beasts which are commonly eaten, were created not for the use of food, but
for the use of Physic. That flesh may be fit meat for seamen or wrestlers
that knock one another down with their fists, or for mine-diggers; whereas
Christian Religion does not teach men to be diggers or wrestlers, but to follow
wisdom and consecrate themselves unto God. And a little after, Si vis perfectus
esse, bonum est vinum non bibere, and carnem non manducare.
If thou will be perfect, it is good not to drink wine, and not to eat flesh.
And to them that eat flesh, he applies these words of profane men related by
St. James, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. And in the Epistle
to Salvina, We know that the Apostle said, that every creature of God is good,
and nothing to be rejected, being taken with thanksgiving: Sed idem loquitur
bonum est vinum non bibere and carnem non manducare.
But the same Apostle says also, It is good not to drink wine, and not to eat
flesh. And a little after, Comedant carnes quae carni serviunt, quarum fervor
dispumat in coitum.
Let those women eat flesh, that serve the flesh, whose heat is froathing for
the works of the flesh, etc.

But St. Paul says not absolutely, that it is good neither to drink wine, nor
to eat flesh, as Hierom makes him say, but, It is good neither to eat flesh,
nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is made
weak, Romans 14.21. He will have us rather to abstain from flesh and from wine
then to give scandal to a weak brother. He chooses rather that we should
abstain from lawful things then to trouble a weak conscience for meat, which
of its nature is indifferent. Thomas Thomas in cap. 14. ad Romans ver. 21. Hoc
intendit Apostolus dicere, quod bonum est his non uti cum scandalo proximorum,
quod apparet ex hoc quod subditur.
the Prince of the School expounds it so. The Apostle means that it is good not
to use these things with scandal of our neighbors, and so much appears by that
which follows.

Note also that Hierom holds, that to be perfect one must drink no wine, and
eat no flesh, contradicting the Apostle who calls those men strong, that eat
all indifferently, and those weak and infirm that out of abstinence stint their
stomach to herbs only; and considering not that the same Apostle commands his
Disciple Timothy to drink wine because of the weakness of his stomach. Cassian
tells us that by such abstinences many were led into temptation. Among others
he speaks Cassian. Collat. 1. chap. 21.
of Abbot John, who having fasted two days together, saw the Devil presenting
himself to him in the shape of a little black Moor-boy, who told him, It was by
my counsel that thou did undertake this fast.

Superstition has no end. This sickness growing in the Church of Rome came to
this, that about the year of the Lord 730. Pope Gregory the second and his
successor Zachary declared some meats unclean, and of a polluted nature. That
Gregory in an Epistle to Boniface Bishop in Germany Agrestem caballum
aliquantos adjunristi comedere, plerosque and domesticum. Hoc nequaquam fieri,
sanctissime frater, sinas, etc. Immundum enim est atque execrabile.
prohibits eating of horses, both wild and homebred. For (says he) that is
unclean and execrable. And Zachary Zachar. Epist. ad Bonifac. Inprimis de
volatilibus and graculis, and corniculis, and ciconiis, quae omnino cavendae
sunt ab usu Christianorum, and fibri atque lepores, and equi sylvatici multo
amplius cavendi.
forbids eating Jays, Crows, Otters, Storks, Hares, and wild horses.

In the nineteenth book of the Decrees and Canons collected by Burchard th^se
Canons are found. Comedisti aves quas oppresseret accipiter, and non prius eas
ferro aliquo ^ccidisti? Si fecisti, quinque dies in pane and aqua poenileat.
Have thou eaten birds which the Hawk has beaten down, and have thou not
killed them before with some iron tool? If thou have done it, do penance with
bread and water. Again, Comedisti aves and animalia quae in retibus
strangulantur? etc.
Have thou eaten birds and beasts that were strangled in the net, and so were
found dead? Unless thou have done it, being pressed with hunger, if thou have
done it, thou must do penance sixteen days with bread and water.

The Church of Rome of our days professes to believe, that no meat is of its
nature polluted and unclean. Yet many things show that they believe the
contrary. For the Schoolmen, as Durand. Mimat. Rationali divin. Offic. l. 6.
cap. 7. Cum pisces sint caro, quare hoc tempore comedantur? Resp. Deus non
maledixit aquis, quoniam per aquam Baptismi futura erat remissio peccatorum.
Durandus, Alensis, and others, give this reason why in fasts they allow eating
of fish not of flesh, because in the flood God cursed not fishes as he did the
beasts of the earth, and that because by the waters of Baptism he was to give
remission of sins.

Of the same opinion, that meats are polluted by their Nature, traces are seen
in so many exorcisms and conjurations which are made in the Roman Church over
meats and other creatures, as it were to get them out of the Devils possession.
For example when salt is exorcised, the Bishop or the Exorcist says, In
Missali Romano Exorciso te creatura salis, etc.
I exorcise thee thou creature of salt, etc. that all fancy and wickedness and
craft of the Devil may fly from the place where thou shall be spread, and that
every unclean Spirit be adjured; These words are said with many signs of the
Cross; And in many places they bring cattle to the Church, to bless them
before they be eaten.

In this (as in all other things) the Roman Church has changed the ancient
customs. For now they keep forced fasts, whereas they were free in old time,
and every one observed as much as he would of them. The abstinences were made
without opinion of merit or satisfaction to Gods justice, either for ones self
or for another: And the observations were diverse in the several Countries by
the prescript of the several Bishops without expecting the decrees and
ordinances of the Bishop of Rome. And we shall see hereafter, that other
Churches not only were different from the Roman Church, but also condemned her
as contrary to the Apostolical tradition. The chief abstinence of ancient
Christians Fulgent de ^ide ad Petrum cap 42. Dei servos quia carnibus and vino
abstinent, etc. Basilius Hom, 1. de jejunio. (...).
was from wine upon fasting days, knowing that wine is like oil poured upon
burning coals, and that it is the greatest kindler of lust. But the Roman
Church permits the use of wine upon fasting days: And the Celestins and other
Benedict in Friars who never eat flesh, have in their meals of the most
excellent wine, to each his portion, as much as would serve three sober men.
They eat of the most exquisite fish in great plenty, and in markets they have
that privilege to take what fish they please, next after the King: Sweet
meats, dried fruits, and other dainties are permitted to them; yet after all
they say, that they keep a continual fast. They take wine largely to obey the
Apostles command to Timothy, to use a little wine for his stomachs sake. And
that serves for satisfaction to God. And when they have too much satisfied for
themselves, the Pope gathers in his treasure the overplus of that satisfaction,
and distributes it by indulgences. But in hunger and want to eat a little bit
of flesh in Lent is a great sin, and a case reserved to the Bishop, or to the
Penitentiary.

The Jesuits fast but little, and endeavor to moderate the rigor of those
Laws. For that the Jesuit Emanuel Sa gives many exceptions. These are some of
them. Emanuel Sa, Aphor. in verbo Jejunium. Jejunium non violant quae sumuntur
per modum medicinae vulgo electuaria; Nec cibi praegustatio ut fit a coquo and
pincerna, nec gentaculum ex more vespertinum vel ex causa sumptum mane.
Things that are taken for Physic as Electuaries, and the essay of meats, such
as Cooks and Cup-bearers make, and a breakfast taken at night according to
custom, or in the morning for some cause, do not violate a fast. Again, Excusat
a jejunio aetas minor anno vigesimo primo vel major sexagesimo. Ut plurimum
debilitas magna gravidam esse vel lactare, non habere sufficientem cibum ad
prandium, damnum aliquod notabile, occupatio melior ut concionando, etc. Vel
alioqui labor non ferens jejunium, ut artificium aut iter pedibus agentium,
causa reddendi conjugi debitum, vel non ei displicendi cum haec jejunio
impediuntur. Denique dispensatio Episcopi vel Parochi illo absente.
A man is excused from fasting, if he be under one and twenty years of age, or
above threescore. For the most part a great debility, being with child, or
giving suck, or if one has not meat enough to dinner, the fear of some notable
danger, or if one be employed about some better thing, as preaching, teaching,
hearing, confessions, etc. Then a labor that will not bear fasting, as that of
tradesmen, or of those that travel on foot, or if one must pay the duty to his
wife, or the fear of displeasing her when that duty is hindered by fasting;
Finally, the dispensation of the Bishop or the Parson in his absence; All these
excuse from fasting. Cardinal Tolet a Jesuit has the like exceptions in the
sixth book of the institution of Priests, chap. 1. and 4. To the excepted
persons he adds the beggars. According to these rules, of twenty persons
nineteen shall be excused from fasting.

CHAP. 4. Of ordinary fasts upon week days practiced in the ancient Church,
and of Saturday fast.
THE Pharisees would fast two days in the week, as the Pharisee says, Luke
18.12. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.
Theophylactus in hunc locum, (...). Drusius quaesitis per Ep. 35. Casaub. in
Baro. page 63.
Those two days were the second and the fifth of the week, which we call
Monday and Thursday. Their reason was, because (said they) Moses ascended into
the mount upon the second day of the week, and came down from it upon the fifth.

The ancient Christians near the Apostles time, burning with zeal, and studying
sobriety, would not be inferior to the Jews in that exercise, and fasted also
twice a week, upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes.

That custom was in Tertullians Tertul. contra Psychicos cap. 2. Proinde nec
stationum quae and ipsae suos quidem dies habeant quartae feriae and sextae,
passive tamen current, neque sub lege praecepti, neque ultra supremam diei.
time, which was two hundred years after Christ's birth: for he introduces the
Orthodox Christians speaking thus, The station days (so he calls the ordinary
fasts) which are constant, the fourth and the sixth of the week run
indifferently, not by the law of any commandment. And in the fourteenth
chapter, Stationibus quartam and sextam Sabbati dicamus. We dedicate to solemn
fasts the fourth and sixth day of the week. And Epiphanius in the heresy of
Aerius, which is the seventy seventh, Who is he that agrees not [with the rest
of the Church] that in all climats of the habitable world the fourth day of the
week, and the day before Saturday is a fast constituted in the Church? In the
life of Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspa in Africa, a disciple of St. Austin, Chap.
29. Per singulas septimanas omnes Clericos ac viduas, and quicunque potuisset
ex Laicis, quarta and sexta feria statuit jejunare.
He gave order that every week all the Clerks, and all the Widows, (...).
and all among the Lay People that could do it, should fast the fourth, and the
sixth day of the Week. That is, upon Wednesday and Friday. By these Widows he
means the Deaconesses. Clemens Alexandrinus speaks thus, Clem. Alex. Strom. 7.
(...).
The understanding man (whom he calls Gnostick) understands the Riddles of the
Fast, even of the fasts of the fourth day, and of the day of the Preparation:
For the one is called the day of Mercury, the other the day of Venus. See the
Roman Decree in the third Distinction of the Consecration, Can. de Esu, and
Can. Jejunia. And Austin Epist. 86. It is evident by the Testimony of
Tertullian, and by that of Fulgentius, that these fasts were ordinary, but that
none of the people was bound to keep them, but that every one kept what he
would or could of that custom, without the obligation of a Law. As in effect
the sixty ninth Canon of the Apostles binds none but the Clerks to fast. Whence
it follows, That the Roman Church has left the ancient customs, having made
those two fasting-days of necessary observation; whereas in old time they were
free, and none of the people was bound to keep them. And having left the fast
of Wednesday,, and brought the custom of fasting upon Saturday, and upon the
Lords day, against the ancient constitutions which were universally received.

Such then was the custom of the ancient Church in Tertullians time. But before
him it seems that this observation of fasting upon Wednesday and Friday was
practiced but some weeks before Easter. For Ignatius in the Epistle to the
Philadelphians speaks thus. (...).
After Passion week neglect not to fast the fourth day of the week, and the
Preparation, giving to the poor the remnant of your meat; Unless Ignatius mean
that after the fast of the week before Easter one must not leave fasting,
though they be days of joy. Which I say, because some Fathers affirm, that
there was no fast kept neither upon Wednesdayes nor upon Frydayes from Easter
to Whitsunday. Hierom in the Epistle to Marcella intimates so much. Not but
that it is lawful to fast all the year, but only in the Pentecost. Cassian.
Collat. 21. cap. 18. Numquid possunt filii Sponsi lugere quamdiu cum illis est
sponsus? etc. Quae verba proprie quinquagesimae tempus ostendunt.
Of which Cassian gives the reason in the eleventh and eighteenth chapters,
because (says he) those were the days in which the Bridegroom was restored,
and that it is written, Can the sons of the Bridegroom fast while the
Bridegroom is with them? But several ages have very much diversified the
customs. And in the same age the customs of several Countries were diverse.

CHAP. 5. Of the Fasts of Saturday, and the Lords day.
ALL the ancient Church almost with one consent held the fasts of Saturday, and
of the Lords day to be unlawful, yea to be great crimes before God.

Among the Canons which are called Apostolical, the sixty fourth is this, (...).
If a Clark be found fasting upon the Lords day or upon Saturday, one only
excepted, let him be deposed; But if he be a Layman, let him be
excommunicated; That only Saturday is Easter Eve.

Ignatius in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, (...).
If any fast upon the Lords day or upon Saturday, he is a murderer of Christ.

In Clements Constitutions in the seventh book, chap. 24. after the order that
all Saturdayes and Lords days be Holy days or Feasts, it is added, Vnum
Sabbatum servandum vobis est in toto anno quod pertinet ad sepulturam Domini,
in quo jejunare oportet, non festum agere.
There is one only Saturday in the whole year which ye must observe, as
belonging to the Lords burial; in that you must fast, and not keep it a Feast.

Cassian in the third book, chap. 10. disputes against the Roman Church, which
fasted upon Saturday, saying for excuse, that they did it after St. Peter's
example, who being at Rome fasted upon a Saturday, being the next day to fight
with Simon Magus. Which Austin in the eighty sixth Epistle to Casulanus, says
to be held a fable by most of the Romans. But Cassian says, Nec tamen ex hoc
canonica fuisset jejunandi regula promulganda, quod non generalis observatio
statuerat, sed ut semel fieret, ratio necessitatis extorserat.
that Peter did that out of necessity, not to give it as a rule.

Ambrose in the book of Elias and fasting, Quadragesimae totis praeter Sabbatum
and Dominicam jejunatur diebas.
There is a fast upon all the days of Lent, but only upon Saturday, and the
Lords day.

The Church of Milan in Ambrose's time, and many ages afer did not fast up-
Saturday, keeping comformity in that point with the Churches of Asia, Greece,
and Egypt, as Ambrose said to Austin, and as Austin relates it in the one
hundred and eighteenth Epistle to Januarius. Cum Roma venio, jejuno Sabbato,
cum hic sum non jejuno. Sic and tu ad quam forte Ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem
serva.
When I am at Rome, I fast upon Saturday; when I am here (that is at Milan) I
do not fast. Thou also likewise, what Church soever thou come to, conform thy
self to the custom of the same. The only Church of Rome opposed the general
custom of the Churches. Yet Pope Innocent in the Epistle to Decentius commands
very expressly fasting upon Saturday, and says Dementis est bidui [jejunium]
agere ad consuetudinem, Sabbato praetermisso.
It is a folly to do the contrary.

For these causes the sixth Universal-Council assembled again at the Palace of
Trull at Constantinople made an express Canon against the Roman Church in these
terms, Can. 55. (...).
Because we have learned that in the City of Rome they fast upon Saturdayes in
Lent, contrary to the Order constituted by tradition in the Church. It is
decreed by the holy Synod, that in the Roman Church also the rule shall
immutably hold, which pronounces, that if a Clark be found fasting upon the
Lords days or upon Saturdayes, one only excepted, he must be deposed, and if
he be a Layman, he must be excommunicated. All the Bishops of Greece, Asia, and
all the East were assembled in that Council. And by speaking so, they showed
that they held not themselves subject to the Roman Church.

CHAP. 6. Examination of the proofs whereby Cardinal du-Perron goes about to
prove that Lent is of divine institution.
FOR all other fasts in general, the Cardinal brings no other proof but
tradition, which yet we have showed to have been altogether changed and
disfigured by the Roman Church, and that she opposes the customs, and
constitutions and Canons of ancient Councils. Lent only he endeavors to ground
upon holy Scripture. For having said that the time before the passion of Christ
is the fittest for fasting, he adds, In the second observation of book 2. chapter
8. page 658.
That God made the waters of the flood to rain forty days and forty nights.
That the people of Israel was relegated forty years in the wilderness. That
Moses, Elijah, the Ninivites, and Christ himself fasted forty days. That in
the ancient Law the chastisement of those that were ^^aten with rods exceeded
not the number of forty blows. Whence St. Paul says 2 Cor. 11. I have received
forty stripes save one. That new born babes laugh not before they be forty
days old, as that number being designed by Nature it self for tears and
complaints. Also that whereas we give unto God the tithe of all our other
goods, we give him in Lent the tithe of our time, as Cassianus observes. For
taking from Lent the Lords days, upon which there is no fast, the remaining
thirty six days are the tithe of the whole year.

One should need a great deal of spare time to stay upon such absurdities. It
rained forty days (says this Prelat) therefore we must fast forty days
before Easter. Israel was forty days in the wilderness, then Christians must
fast out the Lent. Moses and Elijah and Christ were forty days without eating
at all, Ergo in the forty six days before Easter (for Lent lasts so long) we
must abstain from flesh, and eat fish, herbs, sweet meats, etc. Upon this let
us hear Chrysostom in the forty seventh Homily upon Matthew. (...).
Christ gave this institution, Learn of me that I am meek and humble of heart.
He says not, I have fasted, although he might have spoken to them of his forty
days; But he spoke not to them of that, but learn that I am meek and humble of
heart; For Christ will not have us to imitate him in his miracles, but in his
virtues. And they that think to imitate the miraculous fast of Christ by eating
fish, ought to be condemned not to eat at all, and to imitate him in drinking
vinegar.

That which follows is of the like absurdity. We must fast in Lent, for the
Jews gave not above forty stripes: He that disputes so, deserves fifty; But
for that which comes after, twice as many. Children laugh not before the
fortieth day, Ergo we must fast in Lent. What he says of children is false;
But though it were true; what does it for Lent? And if we owe no more unto God
but the tithe of our time, for whom shall the rest be? And is it impossible to
consecrate unto God a day upon which we eat a little flesh? But what is that
tithe? Thirty six days (says he) are the tithe of the year. Why then does
Lent last forty six days? We take the Lords days from that number says he,
as good as saying, that he will not have the Lords days of Lent to be
consecrated unto God; But there also he misreckoneth himself, for there are but
six Lords days in Lent, and in those Lords days no flesh is eaten. After the
mustering of these scientifical demonstrations, who can be so dull as to make a
doubt that Lent is well grounded upon the word of God?

CHAP. 7. That Cardinal du Perron was ignorant of the original of Lent, and in
what sense that word was taken in the Ancient Church. Diversity of ancient
customs in this matter.
THese words of Christ Matthew. 9.15. The days will come when the Bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast, gave occasion to the
Christians that lived next to the time of the Apostles to fast on the days
next before Easter, because in those days Christ was taken from his Disciples;
For having been put on the Cross upon Friday at noon, he remained in death the
rest of that day, and all the following day, until the first day of the week,
about two hours before Sunrising: All that time amounts to forty hours.
Wherefore the fast before Easter, was called (...) or Quadragesima, which word
in the first and most ancient signification was taken for a fast of forty
hours. Hence also it came, that the first Christians held it an unlawful
thing, yea a great sin to fast upon the Lords day, because it was the day upon
which the Bridegroom was restored, that is the day upon which Christ arose from
the dead. For the same reason the ancient Christians did not fast in the forty
days from Easter to Ascension day, because in those days the Bridegroom was
restored, and the Disciples enjoyed the Lords presence. Which term they made
ten days longer, even to Pentecost or Whitsunday; All which time it had been a
crime and a scandal among Christians to fast, or to sit, or to bow the knee in
the Church.

Some presently after the Apostles having begun to fast before Easter forty
hours, which are two whole days, others increased the number of the days,
some fasting three days, some four, some five, according to their devotion,
and the several customs of Churches; In which diversity the name of
Quadragesima remained nevertheless every where, and they that fasted four or
five days, would say that they had fasted the Quadragesima. Who so believes
that whenever there is mention of Quadragesima in the Fathers, the word must
always be taken for a Fast of forty days, is very much mistaken, whereas it
signifies only the Fast before Easter, which at the first was but of few days,
and that very diversely, according to the several customs of the several
Churches. Yet M. du Perron will take that word every where for a fast of forty
days.

In the end that name of Quadragesima gave occasion to some Churches to prolong
the Fast till forty days, which example was followed by other Churches, yet
diversely, and still with some variation.

Whereupon four things are to be observed. 1. That the Pastors and Deacons, and
other Ecclesiastical persons, were far more tied to these observations then
the people: and that the people took of Lent, or Quadragesima as much as they
listed, every one fasting as he thought good, some more, some less, without
incurring for that any Ecclesiastical censure. 2. That in the places where Lent
was most austere, yet they never fasted upon the Lords day, nor upon Saturday,
saving only the Saturday before Easter, because it is one of the days upon
which the Bridegroom was taken from his Disciples. 3. That these various
constitutions were made by the Bishops of the several places without expecting
Decrees from Rome, or the will of the Roman Bishop: whose Decrees did not cross
the Sea, and extended not beyond the limits of his Bishopric. 4. That times as
well as places have diversified the customs, which in the first and second age
were much different from those of the fourth and fifth ages.

Whence it follows that M. du Perron treating of the antiquity and original of
Lent, is very wide of the truth, and intangleth that matter, mustering up
testimonies of Authors of the fourth and fifth ages; For no other testimonies
does he allege (unless it be Tertullian who is against him) leaving behind
the true and first antiquity. All these things being unknown to the Cardinal,
it is no wonder if he confounds himself and the Reader, and speaks as not
seeing where he is. We look not to be believed without proofs, and will produce
a good number of testimonies of Antiquity upon that subject.

Sciendum sane hanc observantiam Quadragesimae, quamdiu Ecclesiae illius
primitivae perfectio inviolata permansit, penitus non fuisse.
In Cassian in chapter 30. of the twenty first Collation, old Theonas, whose
holiness Cassian admireth, says, that in the beginning of the Christian
Church, and when she was in her purity, there was no Lent at all, and no Law
about that point. But that the custom of Lent was brought in when the Church
began to be corrupted, to turn men away from covetousness and worldly cares.

The fifth book of Apostolical constitutions attributed to Clement the first
Bishop of Rome in the thirteenth chapter, gives order that the Fast of Lent
begin the Monday before Easter, and end upon Friday. Celebrate hoc jejunium
ante jejunium Paschae quod incipiens a secunda Sabbati desi^at in Parasceven.
Celebrate (says he) that Fast before the Fast of Easter, which may begin on
the second day of the week, and end upon the day of the Preparation, which is
Friday. And on the twenty fourth chapter, Monemus vos ut jejunetis per hos
dies, quemadmodum nos etiam jejunavimus, cum nobis ipse ereptus est usque ad
vesperam.
We exhort you that you fast upon these days, as we also have fasted, when
Jesus Christ was taken from us until the evening. But upon other days let
every one eat at the ninth hour, or in the evening, as he can. In which places
we see that when these books were written, the Fast before Easter in the place
where the Author lived was but of five days, and that the cause which moved
them to fast, was because in those days the Bridegroom was taken away. And
that of those five days, the three first were but half fasts, but that on the
two last they fasted with austerity.

Irenaeus who was near the time of the Apostles in his Epistle to Victor Bishop
of Rome, related by Eusebius, speaks thus of the diversity of customs of
fasting before Easter. Eusebius. hist. l. 5. cap. 23. (...), etc.
Some think that they must fast but one day; some will fast two; others fast
more: Others measure their fast day by forty hours of day and night. This place
is observable, For it shows that then there was no certain Law common unto all
Churches. Also that some fasted but one day, the day upon which Christ remained
in the grave a whole day, which is Saturday; and that others fasted upon Friday
also, because Christ dyed upon that day. But that such as used a more exact
observation, precisely fasted a Lent or Quadragesima of hours, even the forty
hours from the Lords being put on the Cross to his resurrection. The Reader may
also observe, how in the time of Irenaeus Lent was short in comparison of that
of our days.

That which Irenaeus adds, is no less considerable, Such a diversity (says
he) among the observers [of the Paschal Fast] did not begin in our time, but
long before; in the time of those (as it is credible) who having governed
without observing an exact rule, have turned afterward into custom that which
was done in simplicity, and by a particular observation. Nevertheless all of
them had peace among themselves, and we are still in peace among us. Which is
the same thing, as we said, that in the beginning there was no Law about the
fast before Easter, but that the voluntary abstinences of some private persons
by the lapse of time have been turned into customs, and from customs into Laws,
and those Laws different according to the diversity of places, yet so that
there was no quarrel for that diversity: So far were they from holding a Fast
of forty days to be of an absolute necessity, as the Cardinal does imagine,
putting forty days where there was but one or two, or forty hours; and an
absolute necessity, where there was liberty.

Tertullian in the second chapter of the book which he made against the
Orthodox, and truly faithful, whom he calls in scorn (...) spiritual. Certe
in Evangelio illos dies jejuniis determinatos putant, in quibus ablatus est
Sponsus, and hos esse jam solos legitimos Christianorum jejuniorum.
They hold (says he) that those days in the Gospel were determined for
fasting, in which the Bridegroom was taken away; and that those only fasts are
lawful among the Christians. Now those days are but two, Friday and Saturday
before Easter. For before those days Christ was with his Disciples, and was
not yet taken from them. They held then that Christians ought not to fast
before Friday, because before that day the Bridegroom was not yet taken from
them.

In the thirteenth chapter he reproacheth the Orthodox for saying that they
were not to fast but upon those days in which the Bridegroom was removed from
them, meaning Friday and Saturday before Easter, and that to that constitution
nothing was to be added, all innovations being unlawful, and yet that
themselves added fasts besides those days, Ecce convenio vos and praeter
Pascha jejunantes citra illos dies quibus ablatus est Sponsus, and stationum
semi-jejunia interponentes, and vos interdum pane and aqua victitantes ut
cuique visum est. Denique respondetis haec ex arbitrio agenda non imperio.
interposing stations, upon which they fasted half the day, sometimes feeding
upon bread and water, as every one liked best. In a word (says he) you answer
that those things ought to be done according to every man's will, not by
command. A very express testimony, out of which we learn that they that fasted
then above two days before Easter, did it not being obliged to it by any Law,
some more, some less, according to their will.

It is also to be noted, that the Orthodox accused the Montanists to be
excessive in their fasts, and to fast too many days in the year. Which
Tertullian excuses thus chap. 15. Quantula apud nos est interdictio ciborum!
duas in anno hebdomadas Xerophagiarum, nec totas exceptis Sabbatis and
Dominicis, offerimus Deo.
How small is the interdiction of meats among us! We consecrate unto God two
weeks in the year, in which we stint our selves to dry meats; Neither do we
consecrate them whole, for we except Saturdays and Lords days. By that account
they fasted ten days before Easter, and that was judgeed excessive by the
Orthodox. This was far from fasting forty days.

Cassian in the twenty first Collation, chap. 18. says that he had learned the
same from the Monks of the desert, namely Numquid possunt filii sponsi lugere
quamdiu cum illis est sponsus? Venient autem dies cum auferetur ab eis sponsus
and tunc jejunabunt. Quae verba licet ante resurrectionem dixerit corporis sui,
tamen proprie quinquagesimae tempus ostendunt in quo post resurrectionem 40.
dies Domino cum Discipulis epulante jejunare eos quotidianae ejus praesentiae
gaudium non sinebat.
that the sons of the Bridegroom cannot weep while the Bridegroom is with them;
But that the days come when he shall be taken from them, and then shall they
fast. Whence he infers, that the Disciples during the Quinquagesima, that
is, for fifty days after Easter were not to fast, because they had Christ with
them; grounding the fast before Easter upon this, that the Church must fast
upon the days in which the Lord was taken from them, that is two days only. For
although in Cassians time, that is 420. years after Christ's Birth, Lent was of
many weeks, Christians then fasting thirty six days, yet he shows thereby
the original of Lent, and that in the beginning they fasted only upon those two
days in which Christ was taken from his Disciples.

Dionysius Alexandrinus who flourished in the year 260. puts but six fast days
before Easter, and those diversely observed. Balsamon. in Canonib. Dionysii
Alexand. page 881. (...).
All (says he) do not equally distribute the six fasting days, nor in the
same manner, but some pass them all without eating, others pass two, others
three, others four, others never a one.

In Cappadocia in St. Basils time the Lenten fast was but of five days. For so
he speaks in the first Sermon of fasting, (...).
Let the belly grant us some truce. Let that continually craving petitioner
compound with us for five days. And in the second Sermon, (...).
This is a wicked thought, since a fast of five days is proclaimed unto us,
let us soak our selves this day in drunkenness.

In the sixteenth Homily of Chrysostom to the people of Antioch one may see
that in his time at Antioch they fasted forty days before Easter; Yet that the
people were not bound to fast the whole Lent, but that every one observed such
part of it as he liked best. (...).
The custom of all (says he) about Lent, is to ask one another, how many
weeks every one has fasted. And upon that you shall hear them say, the one
that he has fasted two weeks, the other three, the other all. But what profit
do we get by it, if being without good works, we fast out the whole Lent? If
another tells thee I have fasted the whole Lent, say thou to him, I had an
enemy, but I am reconciled; My custom was to detract, but I have left it. He
makes little account of Lent in comparison of amendment of life.

In that time many Churches began to extend Lent to many weeks, so that
nevertheless the people were not obliged to it, and the people fasted neither
upon the Lords day, nor upon Saturday, excepting only the last Saturday of
Lent. So that they that had a Lent of forty days, yet fasted neither Sundays,
nor Saturdayes, but one and the last, as we have proved: By which means Lent
had but thirty fasting days.

Sozomenus and Socrates, ancient Ecclesiastical historians, will give us more
light in this matter. These are the words of Sozomenus, book 7. chap. 19. As
for the Fast which goes before the Lords resurrection, and is called Lent; Some
reckon it to be six weeks, as the Slavonians, and the Occidental men, all
Lybia, Egypt, and Palestina; Others reckon seven, as Constantinople, and the
Nations about as far as Phenicia. Others in those six or seven weeks fast some
days here and there. Others fast three whole days together before Easter.
This Author writ about the year of Christ 445.

Socrates who lived but a few years before him, in the twenty second chap-of
the fifth book relates a great variety of customs in diverse Churches
concerning the observation of fasts before Easter. Then he adds, (...).
An admiration came into my mind, how these being different about the number of
the days, yet call that Fast Quadragesima, laboring to give a reason of this
word, some one way, some another.

As for the Roman Church, in the Latin traduction of the Chronicle of Eusebius
made by Hierom, these words are found in the year of Christ, 136.
Quadragesimale jejunium a Telesphoro per hoc idem tempus institutum ac
praeceptum quidam scribunt.
Some write, that in that time the Fast of Lent was instituted and commanded by
Telesphorus Bishop of Rome. But that clause is not found in the Greek Copies of
Eusebius. It is like enough it was added by Hierom, who meant not that
Telesphorus prescribed Lent to the Universal Church, but to the Church of Rome
only. The Pontifical of Damasus in the life of Telesphorus says the same. Hic
constituit ut septem hebdomadas ante Pascha jejunium celebraretur.
He constituted, that for seven weeks before Easter the Fast should be
celebrated. That Decree of Telesphorus, whether it be true or false, is found
in the first Tome of the Councils, in these words, Septem hebdomadas plenas
ante sanctum Pascha omnes Clerici in sortem Dei vocati a carne jejunent, quia
sicut discreta esse debet vita Clericorum a Laicorum conversatione, ita and in
jejunio debet fieri discretio.
That for seven whole weeks before Easter, all Clarks called unto the Lords
inheritance, fast from flesh; for, as the life of Clarks must be distinct from
the conversation of Laymen, it must be distinct also in matter of fasting.
That constitution declares expressly, that this fast was not prescribed but
unto the Clarks, not unto the people; and that the people at that time did not
abstain from flesh before Easter. But in effect the Decretal of Telesphorus
which instituteth Lent, is false and forged. That is justified by the
barbarousness of the style. In which these words are found, In Missarum
solemniis, also Episcopi sunt obediendi non detrahendi and non insidiandi. And
cavere se, for sibi, and many the like elegancies unsuitable with the time of
Telesphorus, when the Latin tongue was pure still. The falsehood appears also,
in that Telesphorus in that Decretal styleth himself Archbishop, a name which
began about the end of the fourth age, about 245. years after the death of
Telesphorus. The first place where we meet with that word, is the 21. Oration
of Gregory Nazianzen, who writ about the year of Christ, 375. And next in
Epiphanius, in the 68. and 69. Heresies, where Peter and Alexander are styled
Archbishops of Alexandria. Now Epiphanius writ about the year 400.

Whosoever will know what the state of the Christian Church was in the time of
Telesphorus, and how Christians hid themselves in Caves for fear of
persecutions, and the poor and persecuted Bishops of Rome were eminent only in
Martyrdom, will easily acknowledge that Telesphorus could not have written the
contents of that Decretal Epistle, wherein he forbids Laymen to bring any
accusation against a Bishop: An unjust Law, for if a Bishop had ravished a
Lay-mans wife, or killed his son, had it not been lawful for a Layman to call
upon the Magistrate for justice? And how could Telesphorus have hindered it?

That Epistle bears for date the Consulat of Mark, without adding any surname,
against the custom of all Dates of Consuls.

Out of all that we said, it is made evident that in vain Cardinal du Perron
labors, in the eighth Chapter of the second Observation, to heap up many
testimonies of Fathers that speak of the Fast before Easter, and of Lent, to
make the world believe, that every time that the fast before Easter or Lent are
mentioned in the books of the ancient writers, a fast of forty days must be
understood, seeing that we have showed that the fasts before Easter in the
first ages were of few days. That some Christians would fast one day, some
two, some three; and that the word Quadragesima, came first from the forty
hours, in which the Bridegroom was taken from the Disciples.

Observe also, that all the testimonies which he alleges, wherein it is
spoken of Lent, are out of the fourth and fifth ages, and by consequent
discover not the original and first observation of Lent. Note likewise, that in
all the Authors of the three first ages, that word of Lent or Quadragesima is
not found; neither in Justine, nor in Irenaeus, nor in Clemens Alexandrinus,
nor in Tertullian, nor in Origin, nor in Cyprian, nor in Arnobius, nor in
Lactantius, nor in Minutius. Which makes us doubt of the truth of the Epistles
of Ignatius, where yet the word (...), signifies not forty days, as we have
showed.

The 50. Canon of the Council of Laodicea, which du Perron alleges, speaks
indeed of Quadragesima, but says not how many days it lasted. We must know
also, that the Canon that follows, teaches us that then in Lent they fasted
neither on Saturday, nor on the Lords day.

Especially that which he maintains is most false, that the observation of
fasting forty days before Easter was of absolute necessity. For we have showed
by a multitude of testimonies, that the people were not bound to it. And that
great variety of customs of fasting, shows sufficiently, that Christians in
those days were not ruled by the Laws and customs of the Church of Rome.

CHAP. 8. How the discipline of Fasting in the Roman Church, is full of
absurdity and abuse.
THe Roman Church has made a multitude of Laws about the discipline of
fasting; to the observation whereof Tolet. de Instruct. Sacerd. l. 6. c. 3.
Praeceptum jejunii secundum omnium Doctorum sententiam obligat sub mortali.
the people are so bound, that to violate them is held a mortal sin, that is, a
sin that deserves eternal damnation; although of all those distinctions of
meat, in which fasting is made to consist, God has commanded none, and they
are even contrary to his Word, as we have proved; to say nothing of that
rashness whereby sinners make themselves judges of the merit of crimes, a
judgment that belongs to none but God.

In all fasts of the Roman Church flesh is forbidden. But in Lent, besides
flesh, it is prohibited also to eat eggs, butter, and all kinds of milkiness.
Yet on the first day of Lent, the people of Paris will go in procession to our
Ladies Church, to get leave to eat butter in Lent.

In the Indies subject to the King of Spain, the Law of Fasts is not yet
established, as Cardinal Tolet says, Id. ibid. cap. 2. sect. 4.
because (says he) faith is yet but new there; that is, of about eightscore
years standing. Yea in Spain, upon Fridayes and Saturdayes, one may eat the
feet and ears of Calves and Sheep. These they call Menudillos, and take them
for fish.

In the Roman Church they fast upon Fridayes and Saturdayes between Easter and
Whitsuntide; which in the ancient Church would have been a great crime, and
likewise fasting upon the Lords day in Lent, which not to do, is now become a
mortal sin in the Roman Church.

There they make fasting to consist, not in sobriety, but in distinction of
meats: So that he that upon a fasting day has but tasted flesh, is held to
have violated his fast. But he that on the same day has been drinking wine,
and eating fish and sweetmeats with great excess, is accounted to have fasted,
as Cardinal Tolet says in the sixth book of the Institution of Priests, chap.
2. Quamvis aliquis multum excedat, non ob id solvit jejunium. Although one make
great excess, he violates not his fast for that: In the same place Armilla,
verbo jejunium, sect. 12. Probat collationes quae fiunt Romae secundum
consuetudinem tinelli ob consuetudinem, and quia Pontifex tolerat cum sciat;
quamvis isti sint abusus hominum parum timoratorum.
he says that he dares not condemn Banquets which they use to make at Rome in
Lent, Secundum consuetudinem tinelli. According to the custom of the Tinel;
which is a custom to give the one to the other the Posie, to make banqueting go
from house to house. For (says he) the Pope knows that, and tolerates it,
although this be an excess of men that have little fear. In effect, the Pope
and the Cardinals of Rome, are they that least observe Lent, for they that give
dispensations to others, have reason to take as many dispensations for
themselves as their heart desires. They that make Laws, are not subject unto
Laws.

Upon the discipline of fasting, the Doctors made such gallant rules and jolly
distinctions, that one may see they had a mind to make themselves merry. They
dispute whether those persons keep the Fast, that take meat another way then by
the mouth, as they that take in Lent nutritive Clysters, made with flesh broth,
not for Physic, but for food and sustenance.

And because some will drink largely upon fasting days, even early in the
morning, the Doctors determine that Tolet. de Instruct. Sacerd. l. 6. c. 1.
Potus quamvis sit vinum, non solvit jejunium, sive sumatur ante prandium sive
post. Sed lac solvit jejunium.
drinking does not violate the Fast, whether one drink before or after dinner.
By this means one may be drunk, and yet fasting. There is no danger of being
drunk in drinking milk, yet milk is excepted; of which if one drink but a
spoonful, he has violated his fast. And that is the reason why Saint Catharine
of Siena, being yet in swaddling clothes, would not suck upon a Friday.

Yet these Gentlemen, by a fatherly compassion, have made exceptions for the
comfort of souls, whereby they make fasts void, and make the Laws of fasts
ridiculous. We have showed before, how they declare, that a man under one and
twenty years of age is not obliged to fast, Tolet. lib. 6. c. 4. sect. 7.
Excusatur a jejunio, qui non potest reddere uxori debitum jejunando. Eman: Sa
idem dicit Aphor. verbo jejunium.
nor he that by fasting is made less able to lie with his wife; nor he whose
wife is not satisfied; nor Tradesmen, Plowmen, Travelers, Pilgrims, Beggars,
Preachers, Women with child, etc. So that it will be found that the Law of
Fasting obliges no body.

The Jesuit Emanuel Sa, and Cardinal Tolet, after other Doctors, determine
Eman. Sa ibid. sect. 13. Qui semel jejunium violat non peccat postea saepe
comedendo. Tolet. l. 6. de Instruct. Sacerd. c. 3. sect. 5.
that he that has once violated the Fast, sins not afterward by frequent
eating of flesh: That is, that by once sinning, he has got liberty of sinning
for the whole Lent. As if they said, that a man by lying or stealing in the
beginning of Lent, may continue the same course till Easter. And that he is
never the more guilty for that.

The extremity of the disease, is, that the Roman Church places fasting among
the works that deserve eternal life, which is purchasing the Kingdom of heaven
at an easy rate. The proud Pharisee ( Luke 18.) boasted of his fasting twice a
week, and notwithstanding was rejected of God; although his pride was not come
to that height, to presume thereby to merit eternal life. Can any doubt but
that this language would delight God very much, if a man laden with merits
would tell him in the day of Judgment, Thou must give me eternal life, for I
have abstained from flesh in the Eves, in the Rogation weeks, and in Lent? Only
I have drunk wine somewhat largely, and filled my belly with fish and
sweetmeats. Is not this enough to satisfy God? For although he has not
commanded that distinction of meats, yea though he has prohibited it in his
Word, yet the Pope, who cannot err in the faith, has otherwise disposed of it.

This is not all, for they will have the Fast to serve to expiate sins that are
past, and to make a payment unto Gods justice; saying, This poor sinner has
indeed committed murders and adulteries, but in recompense he has kept Lent,
he has eaten neither flesh, nor eggs, nor milk, upon certain days; that must
be taken for payment, and accepted in Gods judgment for a full satisfaction.
Yea it may happen that such satisfactions will be an overplus of payment, and
that a man shall pay more then he owes. In that case, the overplus shall serve
for some other that has not satisfied enough. The Pope shall lay up that
overplus in his Treasure, and distribute it to others by his Indulgences, and
the living fasting for the dead, shall fetch them out of Purgatory, by the
grant and concession of his Holiness. Oh the height of superlative and abuse
and absurdity! It must needs be acknowledged that God is very angry with men,
since he has poured upon them such an horrible spirit of stumbling.

By these things it is evident, that the Popes have constituted Fasts, not for
an exercise of abstinence, but for marks of their Empire. For by these Laws
they rule the Tables and Kitchens, not only of the people, but also of Kings
and Princes, and lay a yoke upon consciences, from which Christ has delivered
his Church. And the more the Pope multiplyeth his Prohibitions, the more
suitors has he for Dispensations.

Sixth Controversy, OF THE SEVENH BOOK. OF Auricular Confession, and Of the
secrets of Confession.
CHAP. 1. Four sorts of Confession in our Churches. Answer to the Cardinal:
HIs Majesty of England had said, That Auricular Confession, as it is practiced
in the Roman Church, was not used in the ancient Church.

To which the Cardinal answers in these words, It is enough for us to say
that the ancient Church held the vocal and distinct confession of sins to the
Pastor, to be necessary to obtain remission of sins. And that whereas the
Church out of Indulgence, and to yield to the bashfulness of men, would be
contented with the secret and Auricular Confession instead of the public, she
does thereby not aggravate the yoke of Confession, but ease it. By this he
acknowledges that in old time there was no Auricular Confession, but that it
was introduced to spare sinners that were ashamed of confessing their sins
publicly.

He adds, that as for that vocal and distinct Confession, the Apostles
themselves did institute it, and that by virtue of their authority to forgive,
or retain sins, which they had received from Christ. That all the Fathers by
that authority, understand the judiciary absolution of sins, not the bare
Preaching of the Gospel. And that as one relative presupposes another, the
absolution presupposes a precedent revealing of sins, which cannot be done but
by Confession.

Page 643.
He says next, that both the Fathers and the Roman Church, hold not Confession
necessary to salvation, with an absolute necessity, but only with a necessity
of means, conditionate, and in case of possibility, and that contrition
supplyeth the defect of confession.

He says further, We hold not Confession to be a Sacrament, but only a
necessary and essential condition to a Sacrament, even to the penitential
absolution. Which he proves by August. de Bapt. contra Donat. l. 3. cap. 22.
Austin, who puts imposition of hands among the Sacraments, and says upon
Psalm 146. that the cloth and salves about wounds are the temporal Sacraments.
In which places he will have us to think that Austin means Sacramental
absolution.

Leaving for the present, that which the Cardinal says of penance and
Sacramental absolution, of which it will be spoken afterward, we will receive
that which he grants, that Auricular Confession has not been in use in the
ancient Church. Now it is not credible, that they that brought in Auricular
Confession to cover the bashfulness of sinners, were more prudent then the
Apostles, and the ancient Church in her primitive purity.

The Gloss of the first Canon of the fifth distinction of Penance,
acknowledges the same thing, and freely says, that the confession which is
made unto the Priest, is not instituted in the Word of God. These are the
words, Alii dicunt quod in Novo Testamento a Jacobo dicente Confitemini
alterutrum peccata; Sed melius dicitur eam institutam fuisse a quadam
Universalis Ecclesiae traditione potius quam ex Novo vel Veteri Testamento
authore.
Others say that the Confession was instituted in the New Testament by Saint
James, saying, Confess your sins one to another. But it is better to say that
it was instituted by some tradition of the Universal Church, rather then by the
authority of the New or Old Testament.

And a little after, Necessaria est in mortalibus confessio apud nos, apud
Graecos non, quia non emanavit ad illos talis traditio.
Confession is necessary among us in mortal sins, but not among the Grecians,
because such a tradition is not come to them. Beatus Rhenanus in the argument
of Tertullians book of Penitence, acknowledges that secret Confession is no
where commanded, and that the ancient Church did not practice it.

The Cardinal needed not to tell us that Confession of sins is necessary: We
believe it, and teach it. He that covers his transgressions shall not
prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them shall find mercy, Prove. 28.
But of Confession of sins there are four kinds, which are not all of equal
necessity. For sins are confessed, either to God alone, or to the Church
publicly, or to the Pastor privately, or to our neighbor whom we have
offended.

Confession to God is absolutely necessary. Of that Saint John speaks in the
first Chapter of his first Epistle, If we confess our sins, God is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity. Of that
confession David felt the fruit; for he says in Psalm 32.5. I said I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin. For God will sooner bear with sins followed with a penitent confession,
then with pretended righteousness, with pride and opinion of merit.

Public Confession, though it be not absolutely necessary for salvation, yet
the practice of it is necessary in the Church of God, to touch the sinner with
repentance, and fright others from vice by that example, and to make those that
are none of the flock to take notice, that vices are not suffered in the
Church, whereby they may be invited to embrace Christian Religion. The Council
of Trent in the fourteenth Session, chap. 8. approves public penances, Com.
Trid. Sess. 14. in reformatione. Apostolus monet public peccantes public esse
corripiendos.
as grounded upon the Apostles sentence, 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin, rebuke
before all, that others also may fear. It was the practice of the ancient
Church, and there was in every Church a place set apart for the penitent, that
they might be remarkable and discerned from the other Christians. They stood
for a while in the Church Porch, and that first degree of penance was called
(...).
Fore-weeping. About a year or two after they entered into the Church, standing
in the Portal or entry of the Temple: But they were not permitted to assist at
the prayers of the Congregation, and were called the Hearers, and their penance
Hearing: (...).
Having past a year or more in that second degree of penance, according to the
term assigned by the Canons, and according to the grievousness of the sin, they
were permitted to draw nearer, and to assist at prayers, but not admitted to
the holy Communion: These were called the Prostrate, and that third degree of
penance was called (...).
Prostrating, because they were prostrated on the ground, clothed with sacks,
with their hair foul, and their countenance sad. The term of that prostrating
being expired, they came nearer to the sacred mysteries, and might see the
celebration of the holy Communion, but were not admitted to it. That degree of
penance was called (...).
standing together. After which they were admitted unto the Lords Table.

Already in the time of the Council of Nice, those degrees of penance were
practiced, as it may be seen in the eleventh and twelfth Canon. And above fifty
or sixty years before Geregory, Thaumaturgus had made those Constitutions which
are found in Balsamon. The 59. Canon of the Epistle of Basilius to Amphilochius
is this, (...).
The fornicator shall be seven years without communicating of the holy things.
He shall be two years a Weeper, two years a Hearer, and two years Prostrate,
and one year only a Fellow-stander, and in the eighth year he shall be received
to the Communion.

The place or enclosure where the Penitents stood hearing the Sermon afar off,
was called (...). Of that public penance, mention is made in the book de
dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis, ascribed to Austin, chap. 53. Quem mortalia crimina
post Baptismum premunt, hortor prius publica poenitentia satisfacere, and ita
Sacerdotis judicio reconciliatum communioni sociari.
Him that is pressed with mortal sins committed since Baptism, I exhort, first to
satisfy by public penance, and after that, being reconciled by the Priests
judgment, to be adjoined unto the Communion. Where the Author speaks of
reconciliation to the Church. Of that public penance Tertullian and Ambrose
speak, in the books which they have written of penance.

As for private Confession of the sinner to his Pastor in old time, if the sin
was not known, the sinner that felt a load on his conscience, before he came to
the public penance, would come privately to one of the Pastors; not to ask
absolution, or to undergo the penances and satisfactions, either corporal or
pecuniary, which his Pastor would lay upon him, as it is practiced now in the
Roman Church; but to receive counsel and comfort from him. Then it was the
Pastors part to judge whether the crime was of such a nature as to require a
public Confession and penance. Upon which we have a very express testimony of
Origin, Hom. 2. upon Psalm 37. where he speaks thus unto the sinner, who has
purposed in his heart to confess his sin privately to one of the Pastors.
Circumspice diligentius cui debeas confiteri peccatum tuum. Proba prius medicum
cui debeas causam languoris exponere, qui sciat infirmari cum infirmante, flere
cum flente, qui condolendi and compatiendi noverit disciplinam. Vt ita demum si
quid ille dixerit, qui se eruditum Medicum ostenderit and misericordem, si quid
consilii dederit, facias and sequaris. Si intellexerit and praeviderit talem
esse languorem tuum quo in conventu totius Ecclesiae exponi debeat and curari,
and quo sortassis and caeteri aedificari poterunt, and tu ipse facile sanari,
multa hoc deliberatione and satis periti medici illius consilio procurandum est.
Look diligently to whom thou should confess thy sin. First try the Physician
to whom thou must declare the cause of thy sickness, one that knows how to
become weak with the weak, and weep with him that weepeth; one that understands
the manner of fellow-mourning and fellow-feeling; That thou may after that
follow the counsel given thee by him that will show himself a learned and
compassionate Physician. And if he has known and foreseen, that thy sickness
is such that it needs to be declared and remedied in the Assembly of the whole
Church, that others may be thereby edified, and thy self cured; that must be
executed with careful deliberation, and by the counsel of that skilful
Physician. That counsel is both holy and wholesome, and it is that which we
endeavor to practice in our Churches. For if it be a thing both commendable
and profitable for an afflicted man to pour his bitterness into the bosom of a
godly friend, and to show him our wounds, to receive counsel and comfort from
him: How much more when that grief is communicated unto those whom God has set
to be Heralds of Peace, and Ministers of Reconciliation, and who are
authorized by God to announce to the repenting sinner the remission of sins by
Jesus Christ? Of that nature were the Confessions of those that came to John
the Baptist in the desert, confessing their sins: And the confessions of those
that are mentioned, Acts 19.18. Many that believed, came and confessed and
showed their deeds.

The last sort of Confession is that which sinners do mutually among themselves
after they have offended one another. Of that kind of Confession spoke Saint
James, chap. 5.16. Confess your faults one to another. (...).
There is in the Greek, Confess your sins reciprocally or mutually; that is, I
to you, and you to me; which cannot be referred to Auricular Confession. Note
also the coupling of these two things, Confess your faults one to another, and
pray one for another. For as James understands not that we must pray for the
Priests only, so he understands not that we must confess our sins to the
Priests only. So Austin understands it in the fifty fourth Epistle to
Macedonius, Scriptum est confitemini invicem peccata vestra, and orate pro
vobis. Has sibi parts humanitatis, ubi potest, omnis homo apud hominem
vindicat.
It is written, Confess your sins one to another, and pray for you [mutually.]
Every one attributes to himself that part of humanity to his neighbor when he
can do it. And Cardinal Cajetan in his Comment upon Saint James Epistle. Nec
hic sermo est de confessione Sacramentali, ut patet ex eo quod dicit
Confitemini invicem. Sacramentalis enim Confessio non fit invicem, sed
sacerdotibus tantum. Sed de confessione qua mutuo fatemur nos peccatores ut
oretur pro nobis, and de confessione hinc inde erratorum pro mutua placatione
and reconciliatione.
It is not here spoken (says he) of the Sacramental Confession, as it appears
in that he says, Confess one to another; for Sacramental confession is not
made one to another, but to the Priests only. But that confession is meant
whereby we confess one to another mutually that we are sinners, that we may be
prayed for, and the confession of faults which is mutually made for a mutual
pacification and reconciliation. These four kinds of Confessions are good and
holy, and practiced in our Churches. But that which is made unto God is the
principal, and must be done every day, and is absolutely necessary to
salvation: The other sorts as time and occasions require, and according to
possibility. Wherefore there was no need for the Cardinal to expatiate with his
moral eloquence upon the necessity of Confession, which we acknowledge and
teach. He grounds the necessity of Sacramental Confession, upon the power which
the Lord has given to his Apostles to forgive sins: Which Confession he says
to be understood by the Fathers of absolution of sins, not of the mere
preaching of the Gospel. All which he says to impose calumniously upon us,
that by the power of forgiving or retaining sins, we understand no more but the
Preaching of the Gospel. For we know that Pastors exercise that power not
merely by Preaching, but also by using Censures, Suspensions, Excommunications,
Relaxations, and Reconciliations of sinners that have satisfied the Church. Of
which we shall speak in the right place.

CHAP. 2. That the testimonies of the Fathers which Cardinal du Perron
objecteth to us, to establish Auricular Confession, are to no purpose. Some
falsifications observed.
Page 644.
CArdinal du Perron makes three sorts of Confessions practiced in the ancient
Church. 1. Public confession for public sins, upon which he acknowledges
that his Church and ours are agreed. 2. Secret confession for secret sins. 3.
And public confession for secret sins; upon which two last sorts of confession
he brings many testimonies of the Fathers, presupposing against truth, that
they are not received in our Church; but we have showed already, that we
receive and teach those two sorts of confessions, as well as the first.

He alleges Basil, who in his short rules, 229. rule.
says, that Confession of sins must be made only before them that can heal
them. And in the fifth Chapter of the same Observation, which is the second,
the Cardinal alleges the same Basil, Qu, 288. saying, that sins ought to be
discovered to those only to whom the dispensation of mysteries is committed.
These two places are falsified by the addition of the word only, which he puts
in of his own, to exclude any other confession but that which is made to the
Priest. In the first place, there is according to the Greek, (...).
Confession of sins must be made before those that can heal them, as it is
written, You that are stronger, bear the infirmities of the weak; which is a
text of Saint Paul, where by the strong he understands not the Pastors of the
Church, but the godly that are more proficient in the faith: So that M. du
Perron, besides the addition of the word only, corrupts the sense of that
place, attributing unto the Priests alone, that which is said of all the godly
people. The second testimony is this, (...).
It is necessary to confess sins unto those to whom the administration of the
holy mysteries is committed. The word only is not in the Greek.

In the same place he alleges Leo ad universos Episc. per Camp. Epist. 80.
Leo, in the 80. Epistle, saying, it will suffice that the sins of consciences
be showed unto the Priest by a secret confession. This also is false, for Leo
says not sacerdoti, but sacerdotibus; that is, to the company of Priests. The
Cardinal has thus corrupted that place, because confession made to a company,
did not seem to him secret enough, or having any thing common with Auricular
Confession.

But when all is said, To what purpose does he go about to prove to us private
Confession made to the Pastor of the Church, since we approv^ it? In that point
he mistaketh the Fathers, thinking that when they speak of Confession made
privately, they mean that Auricular or secret Confession, whereby all adult
Christians are obliged once a year to make an enumeration unto the Priest, of
all the sins they can remember which they have committed since their last
confession, that they may receive the absolution of them. Only they speak of
sinners, who being grieved in their conscience with the sense of their sins,
make their private address unto their Pastor, and confess unto him their sins,
that the Pastor may bring the comforts, and apply the remedies which the word
of God affords, announcing them the remission of their sins through Jesus
Christ. These private confessions were voluntarily done by sinners, without any
obligation by Ecclesiastical Laws. The sinner represented to his Pastor some
sin that stung him most, but made not an exact enumeration of all the evil
desires, words and actions of the whole year, with the circumstances of time,
place and persons, as every man is required to do in the Roman Church. And if
the sin was such, that it deserved or needed public repentance, as public
scandals, then the Pastor disposed the sinner to public penance, which is
called by the Fathers, a second plank after Shipwreck, and a second cure after
Baptism. That penance, according to the judgment of Tertul. lib. de Poenit. c.
4, 5, and 9.
Tertullian and Ambros. lib. de Poenit. c. 10.
Ambrose, might not be done above once in a man's life; making thereby man more
merciful then God, who will have us to pardon our brethren, not seven times
only, but seventy times seven, that is, infinite times.

The same I say of the testimonies of Fathers, which the Cardinal brings after,
to show that even for secret sins they required a public acknowledgement. What
is that against us who do not contradict that? Knowing that there are some
hidden sins so horrible, that no penance can be too severe or too public to
humble the sinner.

Truly in that point we differ not from the ancient Church, but that the
degrees of public penance, prescribed by the ancient Canons, are not practiced
among us, no more then in the Church of Rome, where they are altogether
abolished. But instead of them, the Pope has laid a heavier yoke upon the
consciences, and established a politic tyranny upon them, of which we shall
hereafter speak.

CHAP. 3. Of the Penitentiary Priest abolished by Nectarius. How Cardinal du
Perron alters and corrupts that history. How he disguiseth and concealeth
the Doctrine of Chrysostom about Confession.
Under Theodosius the great, about the year 388. of Christ, a memorable thing
to this purpose happened at Constantinople. The Emperor Decius in the year
250. had raised a hard persecution against the Christians, which persecution
made many to bow, and to deny the Christian profession, to save their lives.
The persecution being over, they desired to be received to repentance, and
sought to make their peace with the Church, which was not denied them. But an
African Bishop called Novatus, and a Roman Priest called Novatianus, made a
schism upon this, saying, that such persons ought not to be received to
repentance, and they would not communicate with them; but separating themselves
from the Church, carried away great numbers with them, who made a Sect apart.
For which cause, the Orthodox Bishops, being loath to fright the people, and
scandalize the Church by a multitude of penitents, brought to public penance,
established in every Church a Penitentiary Priest to hear secretly the
Confessions of those Christians fallen to idolatry, and seeking their
reconciliation. That order being established at the first, only for those that
were fallen to idolatry, was soon after used for all sorts of penitent sinners.
For before that time, the custom had been to receive, no otherwise, sinners to
the communion, but after a public confession of their sin. But when the
Penitentiary Priests were once established, many being ashamed to be made
public examples, began to address themselves to that Penitentiary Priest, who
having heard their confession, dispensed them from the public confession, if
he judged the sin to be of that nature that the sinner might be dispensed from
it, without doing harm to himself, or giving scandal unto the Church. But in
the time of the Emperor Theodosius, Nectarius being Patriarch of
Constantinople, such an accident happened at Constantinople, as caused the
abolishing of that office. It is related by Socrates, in the nineteenth Chapter
of the fifth Book of his History, in these words. A noble woman came to the
Penitentiary Priest, and confessed unto him part of the sins she had committed
since her Baptism: Upon which the Priest enjoined her to fast and pray with
assiduity, that with the Confession she might show works worthy of repentance.
But the woman going further, accused her self of another sin, and confessed
that the Deacon of the Church had lain with her. Which being declared, was the
cause that the Deacon was deposed from the Office which he had in the Church;
and the multitude was stirred, being angry not only for that deed, but also for
the scandal and disgrace which that action had cast upon the Church. And
Ecclesiastical persons being upon that occasion reproached and reviled, a
Priest called Eudemon born in Alexandria, gave counsel to Nectarius to abolish
the Penitentiary Priest, and to permit every one to be partaker of the holy
mysteries, according to the dictate of his own conscience: Because that was the
only way to exempt the Church from scandal. I did the more boldly write this
relation, because I have it from Eudemon himself.

Sozomenus relates the same history in chap. 16. of the seventh book, where he
says, that Bishops judging the custom of confessing sins publicly, as upon a
stage, to be too severe, appointed in every Church a Priest of good life, (...).
discreet, and no babbler, to hear sinners, and to enjoin them what satisfaction
they were to make in private; and he says, that the same custom was still in
the Roman Church in his time: Of which he describes the public penances, the
tears, the fasts, and the form of reconciling the penitent. But of all that
discipline, no trace now remains in the Church of Rome. Sozomenus says
further, that Nectarius abolished that Office of Penitentiary Priest in the
East, and that he left to every persons conscience to participate the Sacred
mysteries, as he should find himself disposed; whereupon the Author complains
that the rigor of the discipline which already was relenting, grew thereby
more loose and slack. Which we must not understand, as if at Constantinople and
in the East public confessions had been abolishtby Nectarius, but only that
they became less frequent when it was left to the liberty of sinners whose
faults were not known, to receive the holy Communion without making any other
confession, penance, or satisfaction, but such as they judged themselves in
their own conscience to be bound to do.

This history being clear and easy to be understood, In the third chapter of
the second Observation, page 647.
Cardinal du Perron does so strangely confound and disguise it, that one would
say that he understood it not. He says that the Penitentiary Priest charged
that woman to confess her faults in the public audience of the Church, and
that she confessing her faults publicly, went beyond that which the
Penitentiary Priest had enjoined her, declaring in the face of the Church, the
sin she had committed with the Deacon. A thing of which neither Socrates nor
Sozomenus make any mention, and say not that the Penitentiary had enjoined her
any confession in public, or forbidden her to declare in her public
confession the heaviest sin of all. Wherefore it is with good reason that the
Jesuit Petavius in his Notes upon Epiphanius, disputes against the Cardinals
opinion, and maintains that it was apart and in secret that this woman
confessed the crime to the Penitentiary Priest, not in public.

Also the Cardinal being not able to concoct the words of Socrates and
Sozomenus, that it was put to every man's conscience to present himself to the
Communion according to the dictate of every man's conscience, by this word every
man, understands the public penitents, whereas it signifies every person that
feels his conscience pressed with some sin. Again, he understands these words, as
if Socrates and Sozomenus had said that Nectarius permitted every one to
present himself to the Communion as his own conscience should indite him, after
every one had undertaken the penance, not before they had undertaken it: And
that the words mean, that after men had embarked themselves in the course of
the solemn penance, it was left to their conscience to judge when they had
sufficiently performed it. That indeed is altogether false and impossible. For
not only before Nectarius, but since also, several Councils have regulated
public penances, and prescribed unto every sin deserving public penance, the
prefixed time how long one should stay upon every degree of penance. How
ridiculous would have been the Canons of Councils made since Nectarius which
prescribe that the murderer or the adulterer be so many years performing his
penance, if it had been lawful to him after he had one day begun his penance,
to let it fall and end the next day? and to communicate when he would, with the
Communion of the holy Sacrament? Certainly the Cardinal has here taken his
measures amiss, and quite mistaken the history.

To this Nectarius succeeded in the Bishopric of Constantinople, John a Priest
of Antioch surnamed Chrysostomus or golden mouth, because of his eloquence. He
did not content himself to continue the suppression of the office of the
Penitentiary Priest, who kept the depositum of all the secret confessions, but
besides he dissuaded his hearers in his Sermons to confess themselves to any
man, saying, that it was enough for them to confess themselves to God alone.

In the fifth Homily of the nature of the incomprehensible God, he speaks thus,
(...).
For this cause I exhort, and beseech, and require you, that you confess your
sins unto God continually. For I do not bring thee forth into a stage of thy
fellow servants, I constrain thee not to discover thy sins unto men. Uncover
thy conscience before God, and show him thy wounds, and ask him remedies. Show
thy sins to him that upbraideth not, since although thou should hold thy
peace, he knows all things.

And in the one and thirtieth Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, (...),
etc. (...).
He that repents must not discover his sin [unto men] but let him pray to God
that he may not remember it. And a little after, I say not to thee, that thou
set forth thy sins publicly, nor that thou accuse thy self. But obey the
Prophet that says, Lay open thy way unto the Lord. Confess them unto God.
Confess thy sins to thy Judge, praying, if not with thy tongue, yet with thy
thought, and so obtain mercy.

The same upon Psalm. 50. (...).Edit. Frontonis page 1004.
Art thou ashamed to say that thou have sinned? say that to him every day in
thy prayer. What? Do I say thee, that thou should say it to thy fellow
servant that upbraideth thee? Say it to God that brings remedy to it. For
though thou do not say it, yet God takes notice of it.

The same Father in the fourth Homily upon the parable of Lazarus (for he calls
it always a parable) speaks thus, (...), etc. (...).
Tell me why thou art ashamed, or why do thou blush to declare thy sins? For
do thou confess them to a man that he may upbraid thee with them? or to thy
follow servant, that he may set them forth? To thy Master, to the tender, to
the gracious, to the Physician, thou discoverest them. For does he not know
them though thou say nothing of them to him, he that knew them even before thou
did them?

And a little after, he personates God speaking thus to the sinner, I constrain
thee not to come to the midst of a stage, nor to have many witnesses about
thee. Say thy sin unto me alone privately, that I may heal thy wound.

And in the twenty eighth homily to the people of Antioch, (...). Edit. Savil.
p. 608.
God does not constrain us to declare our sins publicly, but commands us to
make our apologies to him alone, and our confessions to him alone.

And in an other place, Chrysostom. Hom. de Poenitentia and Confessione, Tomo 5.
Edit. Latinae Colum. 901. Edit. Basil. an. 1558.
Let that judgment be made without witnesses. Let none but God see thy
confession. Upon which the Jesuit Petavius in his notes upon Epiphanius page
244. chideth Chrysostom with an unbeseeming bitterness.

The Cardinal Chap. 3. of the second Observation page 648.
speaking superficially of Chrysostom, takes no notice of these places, by
which it is evident that not only Chrysostom did not require a public
confession from sinners, but that he did not so much as oblige his people to
any particular confession, and that therefore his advice was contrary to that
of the Fathers of the Council of Trent, Council. Trid. Sess. 14. Can. 6. Si quis
negaverit confessionem Sacramentalem vel institutam vel ad salutem necessiariam
jure divino, etc. Anathema sit. Et Can. 7. Si quis dixerit in Sacramento
poenitentiae ad remissionem peccatorum necessarium non esse jure divino
confiteri omnia and singula peccata mortalia quorum memoria cum debita and
diligenti praemeditatione habeatur, etiam occulta and quae sunt contra duo
ultima praecepta Decalogi, and circumstantias quae peccati speciem mutant, etc.
anathema sit.
who in the fourteenth Session anathematize them that say, that to have
remission of sins, it is not necessary by divine right to confess in the
Sacrament of penitence, all ones mortal sins that can be remembered, and all the
circumstances that alter the nature of the sin; and that the confession of the
Church, which is called auricular, is not instituted by God, and is not
necessary to salvation, by divine right. For that holy Doctor, who was versed
in Scripture as much as the Fathers of Trent, or more, did not find in it that
Law which obliges every one, before he do his Easter-devotions, to confess all
his mortal sins unto a Priest, and all the circumstances of sin, upon pain of
damnation.

All that the Cardinal answers to these testimonies of Chrysostom is this,
that Chrysostom taught, that it was enough for a man to confess unto God, that
is, in respect of the satisfactory, not of the judiciary confession.

By the judiciary confession he understands that which is made unto the Priest:
By the satisfactory, that which is done in public. Whence the absurdity of
that Distinction is made evident: For neither the private, nor the public
cenfession can be called judiciary, seeing that it is not the action of a
Judge, but that of a sinner appearing as guilty. Wherefore the Council of Trent
acknowledges no other judiciary action in the Sacrament of Penitence, but the
absolution, calling it Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. cap. 6. Sed ad instar. actus
judicialis quo ab ipso velut a judice sententia pronunciatur.
a judiciary act whereby the sentence is pronounced by the Priest, as by a
Judge. Besides Chrysostom in the forealleadged places does expressly dissuade
confession in that respect of confessing to a man as to a Judge, and will have
it made unto God alone, because unto him it belongs to be Judge. As in the
one and thirtieth Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, Confess thy sins unto
God, Confess them to thy Judge. And the words of that Father take away all
distinction, when he personates God speaking thus, Tell thy sin unto me
privately. And Let none see thy confession but God.

Wherefore the Cardinal has cut off these last words, and clipped Chrysostoms
tongue. But he alleges other words of his out of the thirtieth Sermon to the
people of Antiochia, It is enough for thee to confess to God alone, not to thy
fellow servant that upbraideth thee with it. Again, I do not constrain thee to
come up upon a stage before a great multitude of witnesses. But he suppresseth
the following words, (...).
It is against me that sin is committed; Say it unto me alone in private.

Chrysostom was not alone of that opinion. Austin in the tenth book of
Confessions, chap. 3. speaks thus, Quid mihi ergo est cum hominibus ut audiant
confessiones meas quasi ipsi sanaturi sint omnes languores meos?
What have I to do that men hear my confessions, as if they ought to heal all
my diseases.

And Hilary upon Psalm 51. Confessionis causam addidit dicens, Quia fecisti
authorem universitatis hujus Dominum esse confessus, nulli alii docens
confitendum quam qui fecit olivam, etc.
David gives a reason of his confession, saying, because thou have done it,
acknowledging that it was God, the Author of this Universe, teaching that we
must confess to none else.

Cassian in the twentieth Collation, chapter 8. Quod si verecundia retrahente
revelare ea hominibus erubescis, illi quem latere non possunt confiteri ea jugi
supplicatoine non desinas.
If being kept back by bashfulness thou art ashamed to reveal thy sins unto
men, cease not to confess them by continual prayers unto him to whom they
cannot be hidden.

The Canon Petrus, Dict 1. Can Petrus, Lachrymas Petri lego, satisfactionem non
lego.
in the first distinction of penitence, alleges these words of Ambrose, I
read that Peter wept, but I read not that he made satisfaction. And the
following Canon says Lachrymae lavant delictum quod pudor est confiteri.
Tears wash away the sin which a man is ashamed to confess. The Gloss of those
Canons says Ibid. Glossa. Forte tunc non erat facta constitutio confessionis
quomodo est.
Perhaps in those days the custom of confession as it is now, was not yet
instituted. Ibid. Glossa, Lachrymae interiores, id est, in quo habet tantam
erubescentiam ut ad lachrymas veniat occulte etiam non coram sacerdote.
The Gloss adds, These tears are inward, that is, he is so ashamed that he
weeps in secret, not before the Priest.

Yet the Cardinal to prove that Chrysostom approved auricular confession, says
that it has persevered and persevereth still in the Church of Constantinople.
If it were so, he would have brought us a cloud of witnesses. But he brings
none but the last Canon of the sixth Council of Constantinople, which says,
that they that have received of God the power of binding and loosing must
consider the quality of the sin. But he is mistaken, if he think that in that
Canon auricular confessions are meant. The Canon speaks of the absolutions of
those that did public penance, for the public penances, and the diverse
degrees of penance were still observed at Constantinople at that time, as it
may be seen in the eighty eighth Canon of the same Council whereby the ancient
Canon is confirmed, made against those that forsake their lawful wives. That
(...).
such men be Weepers a year, Hearers two years, Prostrate three years, and the
seventh year be Fellow-standers with the faithful, and then be admitted to the
oblation. For Nectarius had not abolisht the penitents and public confessions,
but in such faults as were not public, he had taken away the necessity of
submitting ones self to that public confession, and had left it to every man's
conscience. The same I say of the Nomocanon of the Grecians which the Cardinal
alleges, but produces not, where auricular confession is neither mentioned
nor understood. Likewise that testimony is false, which he brings from the
Patriarch Jeremy in his answer to the German Doctors, chap. 11. The Cardinal
says, that the German Protestants had said, That auricular confession is not
necessary for penitence, and that Penitence is not a Sacrament; but that the
Patriarch Jeremy does censure them for these two assertions. But rather these
are two untruths of the Cardinal. For I find not that in any of the three
Treatises of these Germans, they do so much as speak of auricular confession,
or that they deny that Penitence is a Sacrament, whence it follows, that the
Cardinal falsely affirms that the Patriarch Jeremy does censure them about
these two points. I find only that these Germans say, that Page 12.
private Confession ought to be retained in Churches, although it be not
necessary in the Confession to make an enumeration of all our sins. That is no
otherwise contradicted by the Patriarch Jeremy, but that he maintains that
Page 87.
sinners ought to confess all their sins as far as they are able. Upon that
only he insisteth, and I wonder how the He cites in the 651. page the
fourteenth Epistle of the fourth book in the second new Edition.
Cardinal dares thus forge things that are not. In the fifth chapter of his
second Observation.
He uses the like false dealing with Cyprian, whom he makes to say, That
penitence is done by a set time, and the confession whereby the life of him
that does penance is discovered. And [Penitents] cannot come to the communion
unless hands be laid on them by the Priest or the Clergy. He has taken away
the word Bishop, and put or instead of and, because these words show that
Cyprian speaks of public penitence and confession, in which the Bishop, not
the Priest did reconcile the penitents, and which only was used in the first
ages of the Church. As Beatus Rhoenanus acknowledges in the argument of
Tertullians book of penitence, Ne quis admiretur Tertullianum de clancularia
ista admissorum confessione nihil locutum, etc. Nec enim usquam praeceptam olim
legimus.
Let none wonder that Tertullian said nothing of the secret confession of sins,
etc. For we read not that in old time it was commanded in any place.

The Council of Cabillonum (now Chalons upon Saone) held in the year eight
hundred and thirteen in the thirty third chapter, speaks of that secret
confession, as of a point not yet agreed upon, Council. Cabillonens. Quidam
solum modo Deo confiteri debere dicunt peccata, quidam, vero Sacerdotibus
confitenda esse percensent.
Some say that sins ought to be confessed unto God alone, others say that we must
confess them unto the Priests also. The judgment of the Council is, that both
are done with fruit.

Yet in Lombards time, who writ about the year 1160. of Christ, auricular
confession was not yet held necessary, many holding that it was enough to
confess sins unto God alone, without any confession to the Priest. For these
are his words; Lombard. Sentent l. 4. Did. 17. litera C. Quibusdam visum est
sufficere, si soli Deo confessio fiat sine judicio sacerdotali and confessione
Ecclesiae; quia dixit David, Dixi confitebor Domino, etc. Non ait sacerdoti and
tamen remissum sibi peccatum dicit, etc.
Some are of opinion, that it is enough to confess unto God alone without the
Priests judgment, and the confession of the Church; because David said, I said
I will confess unto the Lord. etc. He says not unto the Priest, and yet he
says that his sin was forgiven him, etc. He had said before. Litera A. In his
enim docti diversa sentire inveniuntur.
Upon that the Learned are found to be different in opinion, because upon these
things the Doctors seem to have taught diverse, and welnigh contrary things.

In the same time Gratian writ, who in the first Distinction of Penitence,
after he has represented the diversity of opinions about the necessity of the
confession made unto the Priest, concludes thus, Did. 1. de Poenit. c. 89.
Quamvis: Quibus authoritatibus vel quibus rationum firmamentis utraque
sententia initatur, in medium breviter exposuimus. Cui autem harum potius
adhaerendum sit, lectoris judicio reservatur.
We have briefly declared upon what authorities, and upon what reasons both the
one and the other opinion is grounded. But which of these two opinions one
should rather adhere unto, it is left to the Readers judgment, for both are
maintained by wise and religious persons. Upon which the Jesuit Gregory de
Valentia, in the third chapter of the necessity of Confession, severely
rebukes Gratian, as having erred as well in that point, as in many others.
Yet, next to the Councils approved by the Pope and the Decretals of the Roman
Church, there is nothing more authentical then the Decree of Gratian.

But shortly after came the Council of Lateran under Innocent the third, held
in the year 1225. which has decided that difference, and has laid an absolute
necessity, by express command upon all to make a secret Confession unto the
Priest, upon pain of excommunication all their life time, and of being deprived
of burial among Christians after their death. Council. Later. c. 21. Omnis
utriusque sexus fidelis, postquam ad annos discretionis pervenerit, omnia sua
solus peccata confiteatur fideliter, saltem semel in anno, proprio sacerdoti,
etc. Alioqui vivens ab ingressu Ecclesiae arceatur, and moriens Christiana
careat sepultura.
Let every faithful person, (says that Council) both of the one and the other
sex, when he is come to years of discretion, confess all his sins alone
faithfully to his own Priest, at least once in the year; and let him endeavor
to fulfill with all his power, the penance that shall be laid upon him, at
least when he shall reverently receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist, etc.
Otherwise let him be forbidden the entry of the Church all his life, and when
he dies, let him be denied Christian burial. These four things we owe to that
venerable Council. 1. That it was the first that established the Word of
Transubstantiation by an Article of Council. 2. That it gave power to the Pope
to give and take away Kingdoms. 3. That it put an absolute necessity upon
Auricular Confession. 4. And that in it the Pope promised to the Pilgrims of
Syria a degree of glory in Paradise above the common sort.

CHAP. 4. Why Cardinal du Perron contradicts the Councils of Trent and
Florence, making Confession not to be part of the Sacrament of Penitence. That
Penitence cannot be called a Sacrament.
OUr Adversaries hold that the Universal Councils approved by the Pope cannot
err. This goes for a prime principle and a fundamental maxim of the Church of
Rome. If any thing has been concluded in the Universal Councils which the Pope
approves not, it is not received. Now the Popes approbation comes only after
the Council is done. Whence it follows, that the Council could err while it
sat, because the Pope had not yet approved it: But when it sits no more it
cannot err, and becomes infallible when it is dissolved. Which is speaking
against common sense.

Nevertheless, although opposing that maxim be justling against the foundation
of Papacy, yet Cardinal du Perron made bold to contradict the Council of Trent,
which is approved by so many Popes. That Council in the fourteenth Session,
makes an enumeration of the parts of the Sacrament of penance. The title of the
Chapter is, De partibus and fructu hujus Sacramenti: Of the parts and use of
this Sacrament. These parts according to the definition of the Council are two,
the form and the matter: The form consisting in the absolution, the matter
consisting in contrition, confession, and satisfaction. The Catechism of the
Council speaks yet more clearly in the chapter of the Sacrament of Penitence.
For after they had said, In cord ejus contritio, in ore confessio, in opere
tota humilitas vel fructifera satisfactio. Hae autem parts ex earum partium
genere esse dicuntur, quae ad aliquod totum constituendum necessariae sunt.
Contrition is in the heart of the penitent, confession in the mouth, humility
or fruitful satisfaction in the work. They add; Now these parts are of that
kind of parts which are necessary to compound a whole. And a little after, Let
us come now to confession, which is the second part of penitence. In the end of
the Council of Florence, there is a Decree directed to the Armenians, where the
Pope determines that Quartum Sacramentum est Poenitentia, cujus quasi materia
sunt actus Poenitentis, qui in tres distinguuntur parts; Quarum prima est
cordis contriti^, etc.
Penitence is a Sacrament whose matter has three parts, Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction.

But Cardinal du Perron, in the third Chapter of the second Observation, made
no difficulty to oppose these Councils and Popes, teaching that Confession is
only a condition both necessary and essential unto the Sacrament, namely to the
Penitential Absolution, which he says to be a true Sacrament. He makes the
Sacrament to consist in the Absolution alone, and as for the Confession, he
will have it only a necessary and essential condition, which may also be said
of faith, and of the knowledge of God, and of his love, which are necessary and
essential conditions, because without these things there can be no true
contrition, nor true penitence. Truly, whosoever says, that Confession is only
a condition of the Sacrament, denies it to be a part of the same. That man
should be very ignorant that would call the body or the soul conditions of man,
or the foundation and the walls the conditions of a house.

Which I say, not to correct the Cardinal, but to commend his prudence, for
acknowledging that neither contrition, nor confession, nor satisfaction can be
Sacraments, or parts of a Sacrament. For Sacraments, both for the matter and
the form, are administered by the Pastors, not by the people: Now these three
things are done by the Penitent, not by the Priest. And yet the Priest must
guess or presuppose the sinners contrition, and presume that his confession is
true, not hypocritical, for if it be false it shall be no part of this
Sacrament, it being very unlikely that lies can be part of a Sacrament. Thus
that Sacrament is a presumptive Sacrament; and the Priest knows not whether
it be a Sacrament, but by conjecture only. Besides, contrition being either a
virtue, or an affection of the spirit, or a sorrow, there is nothing more
remote from right reason, then to make a virtue or sorrow part of a Sacrament.
As if one made repentance or faith part of the holy Communion. And our
Adversaries say, that a Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace. Now
contrition is not a visible sign, seeing that it is hid in every man's heart.

By the same reason Confession cannot be part of a Sacrament, for it serves
not to signify grace, but to ask for it: It is not a signification of Grace,
but of sin. And some Absolutions are given without satisfaction, so that
satisfaction is neither part of the Sacrament, nor a necessary condition to it.
There are also some satisfactions of many years imposed upon sinners, and
satisfactions with many pauses and intervalls, whereby the celebration and
administration of a Sacrament shall last many years. All that being a Chaos of
absurdities, it is not without reason that M. du Perron opposes in that point
both Popes and Councils.

Perhaps also, he considered that in holy Scripture no Sacrament is found made
up of such pieces, nor any text where satisfaction is enjoined after confession
and Sacramental absolution: Unless they think to find it in David, contrite and
confessing his sin, and making satisfaction by his humiliation, to whom Nathan
announceth the remission of his sin. But our Adversaries will not have that
penitence of David to be a Sacrament; neither did Nathan lay any satisfactory
pain upon him.

Yet the Cardinal did not see, that by avoiding an inconvenience, he cast
himself into another far worse. For by giving the title of Sacrament to the
Absolution only, he strips that pretended Sacrament naked, and leaves nothing
to it but the name: For Absolution cannot be called a Sacrament, no more then
the other three parts of Penitence: Seeing that the word Penitence is fit to
represent the nature of contrition and confession, but cannot be proper at all
to absolution. How can the name of Penitence fit Absolution, seeing that in
Absolution there is no Penitence? Absolution is no penitence, but an ease of
the Penitent, and a plaster to his sore. These men give to the remedy the name
of the sickness; as if one would call Rhubard a Fever, and a Diuretic potion
the Gravel. They speak as if the Grace given by the King unto a Felon sorry
for his offense, were called sorrow. If they say that Absolution is called
Penitence, because it comes after penitence; by the same reason night may be
called day, because it comes after day. And yet Absolution goes before the
penances which the Priest imposes, and which are not fulfilled but after the
Absolution.

Besides (according to the rule of our Adversaries, borrowed from Austin) in
every Sacrament August. Tract. 80. in Joh. Accedit verbum ad elementum and fit
Sacramentum.
the word must be joined unto the Sacrament, that it may be made a Sacrament.
Now in this absolution there is no element: For words are no element, otherwise
preaching also shall be an element. Unless we will believe Bellarmine, who to
avoid that objection says, that Bell. lib. 1. de poenit. c. 10.. nam cum.
Verbum autem signum corporale ac sensibile est.
the word is a corporal sign.

If these words, Absolvo te, etc. are an element, in Baptism also these words,
Baptizo te, are an element.

The Council of Trent puts the form of the Sacrament in the Absolution; now in
the Sacraments, the element is not the form of the Sacrament, but the matter.

The laying on of hands in the Absolution can no more be an element, since it
is an action; otherwise we should say also, that the action of baptizing is an
element. And Thomas proves fully, Thom. 21. Opusc. c. 4.
that the imposition of hands is not necessary in this Sacrament: But the
principal reason against it, is, that elements and outward signs in Sacraments
ought to be instituted by Christ; but Christ did not institute that imposition
of hands, nor the words of the Absolution neither. So here is a Sacrament,
where no outward sign can be produced, nor any element instituted by Christ.

It is very considerable, that the Council of Trent in the fourteenth Session,
and Page 642.
Cardinal du Perron, find the institution of this Sacrament of penance in these
words of Christ to his Apostles after his resurrection, John 20.22. Receive ye
the holy Ghost, Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and
whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained; where it is not spoken of
contrition, nor of confession, nor of satisfaction. If they say that these
things are requisite to obtain absolution, the same I will say of the knowledge
of God, and of his love, and of faith in Christ, for without these things God
grants no pardon.

But that which is most to be noted, is, that these words in which the
institution of the Sacrament of penance is made to consist, were said by Christ
after his resurrection. Whence it follows, that this Sacrament was instituted
since Christ rose from the dead. This being once granted, it will follow, that
not only under the Old Testament Penitence was no Sacrament, but also that
Penitence preached by John the Baptist, and by Christ, and by his Apostles
before Christ's resurrection, was no Sacrament. As for our part, we cannot be
blamed if we be contented with the Penitence which John the Baptist and Christ
and his Apostles preached before Christ's resurrection: For it is not likely
that they preached another penitence after Christ's resurrection then before.

Observe also, that in this text Christ gives power to his Apostles, as to
preach the Gospel, so to remit sins to persons not baptized, and to Pagans
converted unto the Faith, who according to the doctrine of the Roman Church,
were not capable to receive the Sacrament of Penitence.

This also is observable that of other Sacraments we have in holy Scripture,
not only the institution, but also the practice. But here they forge unto us an
institution of a Sacrament without practice, a Sacrament, the practice whereof
is not found in the Word of God.

It is true that Saint Peter, Act. 2. said to the Jews Repent, and according to
the vulgar version, Agite Poenitentiam; and that the Spirit of God, Rev. 2.5.
exhorts the Ephesians to repent, or to do penitence. But that penitence
cannot be the Sacrament of the Roman Church, because that Sacrament is
administered to every man privately, but these texts are exhortations unto a
multitude, and give no absolution: Then that Penitence which they make a
Sacrament, is administered to Baptized persons only, as Tertullian says in the
Book of Penitence, chap. 2. Praeire intinctionem Poenitentiae jussit.
The Lord commanded that Baptism should go before Penitence. But these Jews to
whom Saint Peter speaks, were not baptized.

Here is then a Sacrament compounded with four parts, whereof three are
rejected by Cardinal du Perron, and the fourth has nothing agreeing with the
nature of a Sacrament. In a word, it is a Sacrament, of which neither the
institution nor the practice is found in the Word of God.

Yet to defend that imaginary Sacrament, the Cardinal brings two testimonies of
Austin. The one says, Aug. de Baptismo contra Donat. l. 5 c. 20. Si ad hoc
valet quod dictum est in Evangelio, ut per peccatorem Sacramenta non
celebrentur, quomodo exaudit homicidam deprecantem vel super aquam Baptismi vel
super oleum vel super Eucharistiam vel super caput eorum quibus manus imponitur?
If out of this, that God hears not sinners, it follows that the Sacraments
cannot be celebrated by a sinner, how does God hear a murderer praying over
the water of Baptism, or over the Eucharist, or over the laying on of hands?
And the same Father Aug. in Psalm. 146. Qui sanat contritos cord and alligat
contritiones illorum. Quae sunt ista alligamenta? Corporalia Sacramenta.
expounding this text of Psalm 146.3. He heals the broken in heart, and
binds up their wounds, says, What are these swathes? The temporal
Sacraments. I answer, that Austin by the imposition of hands, understands that
which is done in the Ordination of Ecclesiastical persons, which imposition is
done with prayers; and God hears those prayers, although he that conferreth the
Ordination be a murderer. And as for those temporal or corporal Sacraments,
who told the Cardinal that by them Austin understands rather the Sacrament of
Penitence, then that of Baptism and the Lords Supper? For God by them swatheth
wounds, and blotteth out sins, and heals consciences wounded with the sense
of their sin. And Austin justifies that exposition, adding, Quicquid in
Ecclesia geritur temporaliter, alligamenta sunt contritionum.
All that is done temporally in the Church, is swathing of bruises. But though
I should grant that Austin calls Penitence a Sacrament, who knows not that it
is ordinary with the Fathers to call every mystery and every sacred thing a
Sacrament? They call the Ark of the Flood a Sacrament, and Christ's Incarnation,
and Trinity, and Redemption, Sacraments. And so the vulgar Bible calls the
Doctrine of Piety a Sacrament, 1 Timothy 3.16. And the will of God revealed in his
Word, and the benefit of Christ, and the mystical union of Christ with the
Church are called Sacraments, Ephesians. 1.9. and 3.3. and 5.32. And the mystery
of the seven Stars, Rev. 1.20. and of the great harlot, Rev. 17.7. are in the
same version called Sacraments.

But when it is questioned of speaking of the sacred signs of Gods Covenant
which Christ has instituted to be administered in his Church, Austin makes them
but two, as in the third Book of Christian doctrine, chap. 9. Hoc tempore
postquam resurrectione Domini nostri manifestissimum indicium nostrae
libertatis illuxit, ne eorum quidem signorum quae jam intelligimus operatione
gravi onerati sumus; sed quaedam pauca pro multis eademque factu facillima, and
intellectu augustissima, and observatione castissima ipse Dominus and
Apostolica tradidit disciplina, sicuti est Baptismi Sacramentum, and celebratio
corporis and sanguinis Domini.
In this time, after that a most evident sign of our liberty has appeared by
the resurrection of the Lord, we are not charged with the painful exercise of
signs, not so much as of those which we understand. But the Lord, and the
discipline of the Apostles, have given us a few signs instead of many, and
those most easy to do, and whose intelligence is most venerable, and the
observation most chaste; such as is the Sacrament of Baptism, and the
celebration of the body and blood of the Lord.

Tertullian made a book of Penitence, where he treats of the public
satisfactions which the Penitents made in the Church, and of their public
Reconciliation and Absolution; but he never calls Penitence nor Absolution a
Sacrament. Yea in the last Chapter he brings for an example of Penitence King
Nebuchadnezzar, in whose time according to our Adversaries doctrine, that
Sacrament was not yet instituted.

I find indeed in the Word of God, that Baptism is called Mark 1.4. John
preached the Baptism of repentance.
the Baptism of Penitence or Repentance. No other Sacrament of Penitence do I
find in Scripture. I find also that repentance or penitence is often
recommended in the Word of God. But that penitence is not a Sacrament, but a
virtue: As for the power of remitting or retaining sins, wherein they make the
form of this Sacrament to consist, we shall speak of it hereafter. Only I
cannot forgive p. 642.
a childish ignorance in Philosophy unto the Cardinal, when he says that as
one relative presupposes another, so the judiciary absolution presupposes the
revelation of sins, which cannot be made but with confession. He makes
absolution and confession relative, which yet have no relation: For there may
be a confession without absolution, and absolution without confession. It is
false also that a relative presupposes another, for relatives are together by
nature. One relative affirms another, but does not presuppose it. That which
is presupposed goes before both in order and nature.

CHAP. 5. What we find amiss in the Auricular Confession of the Roman Church.
IT is ordinary with our Adversaries, when we find something amiss in a
doctrine or practice received in the Roman Church, to say that we take it quite
away. But there is great difference between correcting and abolishing, between
killing a man and dressing his wound. If we find fault with them for teaching
that works are meritorious, thence they take occasion to say, that we abolish
good works, and hold them to be superfluous. If we blame distinction of meats,
and fasting with opinion of satisfaction, they infer thence that we reject
fasting altogether. Likewise because we note many abuses in Confession, as it
is practiced in the Roman Church, they cry out that we reject Confession
utterly, and expatiate upon the praises of Confession and proofs to maintain it.

By that I said before, it is evident enough that we praise and approve the
confession of sins, and hold it altogether necessary, and therefore that the
Cardinal did in vain labor to prove unto us the necessity of the same. It was
expected from him, that he should clear the aspersions laid upon Auricular
Confession, whereby it is made odious, not to us only, but to great part of the
Roman Church: But he durst not enter upon that matter, as being ashamed of his
Religion. We will make bold to enter upon it, and to give the reasons why that
Auricular or Sacramental Confession is not practiced in our Churches.

I. First, Whereas we find our selves obliged by the Word of God, to confess
our sins unto him, and to our neighbors, and to the Pastors that feed the
flock; we find not every Christian obliged by the Word of God to present
himself (when he is come to years of discretion) at least once a year unto his
Parson, and to confess unto him all his mortal sins, with all the circumstances
that carry the nature of the sin, as much as he can remember; or that a sinner
without that cannot obtain the remission of his sins. God in his Word did not
lay that yoke upon the consciences, neither is there any example of it found in
Scripture. He never promised to pardon the sinner upon that condition. If any
discover all his sins to his Pastor, without retaining or concealing any thing,
we blame him not for it, for it is a testimony that he is touched with a
serious repentance: But God says not, that without such a punctual declaration
unto the Priest, a sinner cannot obtain pardon. Yea there be many things, the
particulars whereof cannot be honestly related, and which are better expressed in
general. A virtuous and chaste Pastor will choose rather not to know them, then
to foul his ears with them.

The Apostle exhorting the Corinthians to prepare themselves worthily for the
holy Communion, will have every one to prove his own self, and examine his
conscience, but sends him not to be examined by his Pastor, and obliges him
not to a punctual confession of his sins in the Priests ear.

In vain do they reply that the Priest must know all the particulars and
circumstances of sins that aggravate or diversifie them, that being well
informed of the quality of the fact, he may impose upon the sinner a
satisfaction proportionate unto the nature of the sin. For these satisfactions
are humane inventions. God gave not to the Ministers of his Word the power of
imposing corporal or pecuniary punishments upon the sinner, or to oblige him to
the labor of a Pilgrimage, leaving his family or trade, or to bind him unto
private fasts. It is a tyranny brought in to establish a temporal domination
over the people, and more yet upon Kings and Princes, from whom the Pope by
that means has drawn great emoluments, and subjected their Crowns unto his
See; so far as to cause them to be beaten and whipped, as we shall see hereafter.

II. The second cause why we reject that absolute necessity of particular
Confession of all the mortal sins that the sinner can remember, to obtain
absolution from them, is because sinners thereby are brought to great scruples
and agonies, and engaged in a greater sin. It being certain, that many would
rather suffer all extremities, then confess all that sin, of which they are
conscious to themselves, and discover to any man the dishonor of their house,
or the crimes which being known would bring them to the gallows. And so they
return from their Confessor with a belief that their sins are not forgiven,
because they have not confessed all.

III. And if it be so, that Catech. Trid. cap. de poenit. Sacram. Neque pecca
torum veniam a Domino impetramus, nisi ea poenitentiae Sacramentum per
poenitentiam deleat.
none can obtain of God the remission of his mortal sins without that
Sacramental Confession, what will become of the confessing sinner, if he forget
some of them? If gaming, or multitude of businesses has put part of his
actions out of his memory, Must those sins remain for ever without remission?
Is it not in derision that Tolet a Jesuit and a Cardinal Tolet. de Instruct.
Sacerd. l. 3. c. 15. Unde fit ut qui in villis and pagis confitentur non
teneantur tam exact scire omnia sicut in civitalibus. Rursus non tenentur
Confessarii simplicium civium, sicut mercatorum negotiatorum, judicum. Debet
igitur scientia major esse pro poenitentium qualitate.
will have the inhabitants of Cities to confess their sins more exactly and
particularly then Peasants: And the Confessors that hear the simple people to
be content with a lighter and less exact Confession, then when they hear the
Confessions of Judges and Merchants. For (says he) the knowledge of sins must
be according to the quality of the persons.

IV. I add in the fourth place, that the Council of Trent obliging not the
sinner with absolute necessity to confess venial sins, but mortal only,
consciences find themselves very much perplexed upon that distinction: For, how
can a simple man of the lowest sort discern venial sins from mortal? He has in
his Hours the enumeration of the seven mortal sins, among which idolatry is not
comprehended, nor heresy, nor treason, nor atheism; nor scorning, nor the life
of a juggler or tumbler. Neither is reviling put in that list, although Saint
Paul says, 1 Cor. 6.10. that revilers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
Nor the ordinary ill words that railing neighbors bestow one upon another, as
calling their brother a fool, of which Christ, Matthew. 5.22. says that
whosoever shall say to his brother thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
In that judgment of discerning mortal sins from venial, if it be put to the
conscience of confessing sinners, it may easily happen, that he that committed
a mortal sin, will flatter himself, and imagine that his sin is venial. Truly,
if it belong to any to define how many mortal sins there be, it belongs not to
men who are all guilty, but unto God who is the judge of sins. It belongs not
to Felons to prescribe unto Judges what sins they ought to punish with death.
Seeing then that the Word of God defines not what sins are mortal and what
sins are venial, it belongs not to the Roman Church to define the number of
them, and to give Laws unto God.

One thing makes that distinction harder between mortal and venial sins, that
by repentance mortal sins become venial, that is pardonable, and by impenitence
venial sins become mortal, because the sinner persevereth in them till death,
and dying impenitent, is punished with eternal death. And still any sin,
whatsoever it be, makes the sinner to fall from the perfection of this rule,
Cursed be he that continues not in all the words written in this Law to do
them. Yea, I find by the rules of the Roman Church, that Emanuel Sa in verbo
Absolutio ab excommunicatione. Ab excommunicatione minori quam quis incurrit ob
peccatum veniale.
a man can be excommunicated for a venial sin, that one may not think that a
venial sin is such a light thing. So the poor simple people are put to an
impossibility, when their Doctors bind them to discern venial sins from mortal,
since by the Laws of the Roman Church, the people are bound only to confess
mortal sins.

V. And since Synod. Trid. Sess. VII. Can. 2. Si quis dixerit in Ministris dum
Sacramenta conficiunt and conferunt non requiri intentionem saltem conficiendi
quod facit Ecclesia, Anathema sit.
by the Laws of the Council of Trent, the Sacraments are void and are not
conferred, unless he that administreth them has intention to conferr them, and
that especially concerning the Sacrament of Penitence, the same Council Et
Sess. XIV. c. 6. Non debet poenitens adeo sibi de sua ipsius fide blandiri ut
etiam si multa ipsi adsit contritio, aut sacerdoti animus serio agendi and vere
absolvendi desit, putet tamen se propter suam solum fidem vere and coram Deo
esse absolutum. Nec enim fides sine poenitentia remissionem ullam praestaret.
declares that the sinner, what faith or contrition soever he may have, ought
not to persuade himself that God has pardoned him, unless the Priest who has
given him the absolution, had intention so to do, seeing that (says the
Council) by Faith without Penitence (meaning the Sacrament of Penitence) one
cannot have the remission of sins: how can a Penitent be certain of the Priests
intention, without which the absolution is void? Is not that doctrine injurious
against God, seeing that it subjecteth God to a wicked man's intention? teaching
that a profane Priest whose mind is wandering abroad, can hinder the grace of
God toward a sinner that has a serious repentance. True it is, that by faith
without repentance one cannot get the remission of sins. But that God will not
pardon without the Sacrament of Penitence, as the Council of Trent will have
it, that is, without Auricular Confession, and without the Priests absolution,
it is more then Scripture says. It is a tyranny and impiety which tyeth the
Grace of God to the ministry of man; as if God could not pardon, unless the
Priest put his hand to the work. For these causes and others Pelagius Alvarez
de planctu Ecclesiae, l. 2. Art. 78. Vix aut rarissime aliquis talium
confitetur, nisi per verba generalia and vix unquam aliquid grave specificant.
Quod dicunt una die, dicunt and altera, ac si in omni die aequaliter offendant.
Pelagius Alvarez, a famous Doctor among our Adversaries, says; that many in
the Roman Church content themselves with a general Confession, without a
particular specification of sins, and will not say their greater sins; and
confess themselves always much in the same manner, as if they had led always
the same kind of life, and sinned alike every day.

VI. One of the main abuses of Auricular Confession, is that we see by the
books of Confessions and of cases of Conscience, the multitude whereof is
infinite, what that Law tends to, which obliges sinners to confess to the
Priest all the circumstances of mortal sins which diversifie the nature of sin.
For by this means, Confessors will search into the secrets of the marriage bed,
and enquire of things which ought not to be named: And under color of
examining the consciences, they play with libidinous interrogations, and teach
all kinds of vices, even the most horrible and extravagant. You shall find
there a thousand sorts of charms, philters, vices against nature, and
meretricious tricks, under color of awaking benumbed consciences, and bringng
them to confession. Whosoever will learn some of that impure science, let him read
the book of Benedict's Confessions, Cardinal Tolet of the Institution of
Priests, Navarrus, Sanchez, the Roman Penitential, and the Decree of Burchard.
lib. 39. sic interrog. mulierem. Fecisti quod quaedam mulieres facere solent?
Tollunt piscem vivum and eum mittunt in puerperium suum, and tamdiu ibi
detinent donec mortuus fuerit, and decocto pisce vel assato maritis suis ad
comedendum tradunt. Ideo faciunt ut plus in amorem earum exardescant: si
fecisti, duos annos per legitimas ferias poeniteas. Idem Ibid. Fecisti quod
quaedam mulieres facer^ solent? Prosternunt se in faciem, and discoopertis
natibus jubent ut super nudas nates conficiatur panis, and eo d^cocto tradunt
maritis suis ad comedendum. Hoc faciunt ut plus in amorem earum exardescant. Si
fecisti, duos annos per legitimas ferias poeniteas. Idem ibid. Concubuisti cum
u^ore tua vel cum alia aliqua retro canino more? Si fecisti, december dies in pane
and aqua poeniteas. Idem ibid. Concubuisti cum uxore tua die Dominica? Quatuor
dies in pane and aqua poenitere debes. Idem ibid. Fecisti fornicationem cum
matre tua? etc. Idem ibid. Si cum masculo inter co^as, etc Ibid. Fecisti
fornicationem ut quidam facere solent? ita dico, ut tu in manum tuam veretrum
alterius acciperes, and alter tuum in suam, etc. Ibid. Fecisti fornicationem in
lignum perforatum? etc. Comedisti scabiem corporalem and pediculos? etc. Idem
ibid. Fecisti quod quaedam mulieres facere solent, ut faceres quoddam molimen
aut machinamentum in modum virilis membri ad mensuram tuae voluntatis? etc.
Idem ibid. Fecisti quod quaedam mulieres facere solent; quando libidinem se
vexantem extinguere volunt, quae conjungunt invicem puerperia sua? etc. Si
fecisti, tres quadragenas per legitimas ferias debes poenitere. Idem, Fecisti
quod quaedam mulieres facere solent, ut succumberes jumento? etc. Idem,
Gustasti de semine viri tui? etc. Idem, Fecisti quod quaedam mulieres facere
solent ut cum filiolo tuo parvulo fornicationem faceres, ita dico ut filium
tuum supra turpitudinem tuam poneres? etc. Tolet de Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 5.
c. 13. Peccatum est inordinatus concubitus, cum nempe foemina in copula est
desuper aut cum mas retro accedit vase non mutato. Hoc autem peccatum ex se non
est mortale. Navarrus Consiliorum, lib. 5. Consil. 6. de Poenit. and remiss.
peccatorum. Maritus qui antequam naturali in sexu uxoris seminet prius membrum
in vase non naturali ad delectationem citra animum sodomiam complendi immittit,
peccat peccatum tactus illiciti.
Burchard Bishop of Worms. I will not bring that sink of odious ordure into the
text of this Book, and will not translate any part of it into our natural
tongue. Only that I may not be thought to slander them, I have put some
passages of their books in the margin, as scantlings of the whole pieces.
Benedicti who made a great volume of the doctrine of Confessions, was not
ashamed to publish them in French, that women might learn that doctrine. The
Jesuit Sanchez has made a great Book of Questions upon matrimony, with a
wicked subtilty and an abominable curiosity. He disputes whether for lying
with a woman over the roof of the Church, the Church be polluted* and whether
it ought to be newly consecrated, and many things far worse, and not to be
spoken. All that discipline could not be forged but upon Satan's anvill. And I
cannot conceal that some virtuous women of the Roman Church are come to me,
declaring that they could live no longer in the Roman Church, being offended
with the licentious and filthy interrogations made to them in Confession.

To these Laws and Rules of interrogations the Doctors have added others for
the Confessors themselves, because of the accidents and pollutions that happen
to them, while they are confessing women; which Laws are to be seen Tolet.
Instr. Sac. l. 5. cap. 13. Confessarius si forte dum audit confessiones, in
tales incidit pollutiones, non ob id tenetur non audire alios, nisi sit
periculum complacentiae in pollutione, etc.
in book 5. of Cardinal Tolets instruction of Priests.

VII. By the same Confessions Priests make themselves formidable unto Kings,
and Princes, and Princesses, whose secrets they discover by that means, and
know their weaknesses, and learn their intentions, of which they will be sure
to inform the Pope. Scire volunt secreta domus atque inde timeri. Did not that
Spanish Confessor understand himself, who hearing the King confessing his sins
on his knees, said that such a man is not to be despised who has God in his
hands, and a King at his feet?

VIII. The tumults of the League which brought France into a woeful condition
in the time of two Kings, Henry the third, and Henry the fourth, have made the
world to know what powerful means Confessions are to make a Nation rise
against their King. For Parish Priests by Confessions would pour blood and
rebellion into the spirits of the people, and the heads of that rising made
those Priests their confiding friends, and by them knew how many, and what men
they had on their side in the Kingdom. No wonder that Confessions were employed
for that, since the keys of his Holiness were employed for the same end. For
over all the Kingdom Indulgences were seen set against the Church-doors,
granting nine years pardon to every one that would side with the League against
the King.

IX. By the same Confessions the Popes have usurped a power over the temporals
of Kings, and over their persons, imposing satisfactory penances upon them
after confession, and not granting them absolution but upon conditions
burdensome to their Crowns, and ignominious to their persons. Of which we will
give instances hereafter.

X. I pass by the sordid traffic of taking ten or twelve pence for a
confession. It seems they hold it unreasonable that a man should forgive sins
for nothing; or foul his ears with all the ordure of a Town, and get nothing by
it.

XI. One of the great abuses in this point, is, that our Adversaries put
Confession among meritorious works, as if a murderer deserved recompenses for
freely confessing his crime. By that reckoning it will prove an useful and a
salutary course to commit a multitude of sins; to get multitudes of merits by
confessing them.

XII. I leave out a thousand rules given by the Doctors and Casuists who have
written of Confession. Cardinal Tolet has made a Collection of them in his
third book of the instruction of Priests. Tolet. lib. 3. de Instruct. Sacerd.
c. 5. Contritionem non esse necessariam venialium, haec enim absque contritione
remitti posse, etc. Quorum homo putat se habuisse contritionem and
confessionem, non est necessaria contritio nova.
He says that contrition for venial sins is not necessary, and that a man may
have the remission of sins without that. And that it is not necessary for a man
to have new contrition for sins, which he thinks he has already been contrite
for. Id. Ibid. Probabilius dico cum aliis, quod non teneatur statim conteri,
etiamsi recordetur saepius commissi peccati. Solum eorum tenetur tunc in ipso
non complacere, tamen non tenetur tunc poenitere, sed potest mentem alio
divertere.
(k) That a man is not obliged to be contrite for his sins presently after he
has sinned, although he remember that he has often committed that sin, and
that it is enough at that time to take no delight in it; but that he is not
obliged to repent at that time, but may divert his mind about something else.
And Contritio vera licet remissa potest delere quodcunque peccatum quamvis
gravissimum, nec homo tenetur magis conteri de uno peccato quam de alio,
dummodo conteratur.
that contrition, though slack, can blot out any sin, though never so grievous.
That a man needs not to have more contrition for one sin then for another, if
only he may have contrition. Si etiam est in statu peccandi, sufficit exprimere
tempus, videlicet si meretrix est, se per duos aut tres annos fuisse expositam
cuique accedenti.
That he that confesses, must say how many times he has sinned, but yet for a
person which is in the state of sin, it is enough to express the time. As if it
be an harlot, it is enough for her to say that since two or three years she was
exposed unto all comers. But the Jesuit Emanuel Sa Em. Sa voce Confessio
speaks against that, saying, Ego vero non essem tam generali confessione
contentus. As for me, I would not be content with such a general confession.
This is of the same vein, and of the same Cardinal, in the seventh chapter:
Isti qui peccatum mollitei patiuntur propriis se polluentes manibus, tenentur
exprimere personam quam mente concipiebant si aliquam tenebant mente mulieris
speciem, and tenentur etiam exprimere in uno actu successive si plures
intendebant, and Confessarius debet ista exigere. And in the eighth chapter, Si
quis occidit fratrem Confessarii and timet, etc. non tenetur tale confiteri,
sed dissim^lare.
If any has killed his Confessors brother, etc. he is not bound to confess
such a fact, but must conceal it. And in the same place he says Si est foemina
quae confitetur. (quia nimirum Confessarius illam sollicitabit) debet
dissimulare tale peccatum.
that if a woman has sinned carnally, she must conceal that in her confession,
when it is likely that the Confessor will solicit her. And in the ninth
chapter Mentiri in confessione grave peccatum est, quamvis non semper sit
mortale.
Lying in the Confession is a great sin, yet it is not always a mortal sin. In
the same place he rejects Cardinal Cajetans Cajetanus tenet, quod potest
poenitens non acceptare poenitentiam a Confessario and dicere se velle eam in
Purgatorio a Deo accipere.
opinion who says that the Penitent that confesses himself may refuse to
accept the penance imposed upon him by the Priest, saying I choose rather to
satisfy in Purgatory. The same tenth chapter Iteranda est confessio, si fuit
tam ignarus, Confessarius ut debitam absolutionis formam ignorarit, quod
superioribus diebus de quodam audivimus qui absolvendo dicebat Pater Noster.
will have the Confession to be reiterated when the Confessor is an ignorant,
as I have heard (says he) of one but lately who when he gave the absolution,
said Pater Noster.

The Jesuit Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms in the words Confessio and Confessor
gives us some no less gallant rules, Mentiri in confessione de peccatis
venialibus aut de alias confessis mortalibus veniale tantum peccatum est.
Lying in the Confession about venial sins, or about mortal sins already
confessed, is but a venial sin. Again, Mutum teneri ad perficiendam
confessionem nutibus putat Navarrus and Angles, ex communi Theologorum
sententia, Thomas, Soto.
A dumb man is obliged to confess himself by signs, according to the common
opinion of Divines. That rule seems to be made to make the Readers merry: For
there are some sins which must not be represented by gestures, for such
gestures might be more contrary to good manners, then words. Again, A woman
though she be a Virgin, must confess a mental fornication. And a little after,
Cum quis in necessitate plures simul audit, potest simul absolvere dicendo, Ego
vos absolvo, etc.
A Confessor who in case of necessity hears many together, may absolve them
together, saying, Ego vos absolvo, etc. Meretrices non comprehenduntur Statutis
Synodalibus excommunicantibus non confitentes aut non communicantes in Pascha,
itaque tales nunqaum denuntiantur.
The same Jesuit tells us in the same place, Harlots are not comprehended
within the statutes of Synods, whereby those that confess not themselves, and
receive not the Sacrament at Easter, are excommunicated; wherefore they are
never denounced. He says that, because in places where the inquisition
reigns, and where Brothel-houses are set up by the Popes or the Princes
authority, as at Rome, Venice, Sevil, etc. every man that goes neither to the
Confession, nor to the communion at Easter, makes himself susspect of heresy,
and is presently denounced to the Inquisition. Public harlots only have that
privilege, that they are not obnoxious to the Inquisition, nor to
excommunication, though they neither confess nor receive at Easter; because
they exercise that trade, by the permission of his Holiness. I have searched and
inquired whether when those harlots go to Confession, their Confessors forbid
them to continue that sin, and I could not find that they forbid it. For should
they be so bold as to forbid that which the Pope permits, who (as Bellarmin
Bell. in Barckl. cap. 31. In bono sensu Christus dedit potestatem Petro
faciendi de peccato non peccatum, and de non peccato peccatum.
says) can make sin to be no sin, and no sin to be sin?

It is also a rule of these Doctors, Eman. Sa verbo Absolutio. Potest per
parts absolvi, etc. and partem uni partem alteri explicare and partem
omittere. Corona p. 4. and p. 156.
that a sinner may confess part of his sins to one Confessor, and part to
another, and so have from each of them a demi-absolution.

These considerations made Cassander a Divine of Collen to speak these words in
the eleventh Article of his Consultation. Equidem credo de hac re controversiam
nullam fuisse futura, si non salutaris haec confitendi medicina ab importunis
and imperitis medicis multis inutilibus traditiunculis infecta and contaminata
fuisset, quibus conscientiis quas extricare and levare debebant laqueum
injeccrunt, and tanquam tormentis quibusdam excarnificarunt.
I believe that there would be no controversy about this matter, if this
wholesome medicine of Confession had not been infected and polluted by many
troublesome and ignorant Physicians with many petty useless traditions: whereby
they have ensnared the consciences, and wracked them with cruel torments,
whereas they should rather have untangled and eased them.

Beatus Rhenanus in his Preface before Tertullians book of Penitence, says
that Thomas and Scotus homines nimium arguti confessionem talem reddiderunt, ut
Johannes ille Gilerius gravis ac sanctus Theologus testatus sit juxta illorum
deuteroses impossible esse confiteri, etc. Erat Carthusianus quidam qui
propter confessionem quae ei semper ob inexplicabilem circumstantiarum vim
imperfecta videbatur, sed ipse perfectissimam esse f^ustra contendebat, huc
miseriarum venerat ut omnem salutem desponderet, and apocarteresim cogitaret.
Thomas and Scotus by their subtilties have made Confession to become an
impossible thing in our days. Then he describes the wracks whereby they
torture consciences in Confession. He says that both the Monks and the the
Nuns complain of it, and speaks of a certain Carthusian, who by Confessions was
fallen into despair, and into a purpose of eating no more.

This matter might be extended to an endless discourse, for the abuses are
numberless. But that I may not tire the Reader I will stay only upon that which
Cardinal du Perron brings us to, namely to the secret or secrecy of Confession,
whereby the life of Kings has been exposed to destruction, as France has
found it by experience not long since, and England was thereby brought to the
brink of an horrible ruin, when the King, and all the Royal house, and the
Parliament should have been blown up with Gunpowder. Which plot had been
revealed in Confession to some Confessors that were Jesuits. This is justified
by the process of the conspirators, and by their own Confession.

CHAP. 6. Examination of the sixth and the seventh Chapters of the second
Observation, wherein Cardinal du Perron treats of the secret of Confession, and
of the danger thereby created unto the life of Kings.
HIS Majesty of Great Britain having had an experience in his own person, what
danger is created unto the life of Kings by the secret of auricular
confessions, puts this among the fruits of secret Confession, as it is
practiced in the Roman Church in our days, that this doctrine is gone so far,
that in our age killing Kings, and suffering them to be killed, seems to be
nothing in comparison of revealing the seal of Confession. In the same place,
the famous Casaubon, who sent his pen unto the King, witnesses that the Jesuit
Binet affirmed to him at Paris, that it was better that all Kings should be
killed, then to reveal one Confession, because the institution of Kings was but
of humane right, but Confession was of divine right. The same Casaubon in the
Epistle to the Jesuit Fronto, says that the said Jesuit Binet maintained that
doctrine to him in the Kings Library. The Jesuit Eudemonojohannes says the
same in chap. 13. of his Apology for Garnet. Nullum tantum malum esse potest,
cujus vitandi causa confessionem prodere liceat.
No evil can be so great, that to avoid it, it should be lawful to reveal a
Confession, that is, although the danger were no less then to suffer our own
Father, or our King to be slain. The Jesuit Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms Voce
Confessor. Neque ad probationem matrimonii (ut indocti quidam dixere) neque ad
vitandam gravissimam Reip. perniciem frangi potest sacrum sigillum peccatore
prodito.
says, that the holy seal of Confession cannot be broken by discovering the
sinner, no not to prove a marriage (as some unlearned have said) or to avoid
the most grievous ruin that can happen unto a State. And he adds, that this
is according to the common opinion of Divines. And because upon suspicion a
Confessor may be apprehended, and urged to reveal the Confession, to avert the
danger of the Kings life, the same Jesuit in the same place sets down this
rule, Potest Confessor jurare se nihil scire, imo nihil se audivisse tale in
confessione, subintelligendo, sic ut dicere teneatur. Eodemque modo potest
poenitens jurare se nihil aut nihil tale dixisse in Confessione. Gabriel Biel
in 4. Did. 21. says that the Priest may confidently swear that he knows
nothing of it, because he knows it as God, not as man.
The Confessor may swear that he knows nothing of it, yea that he heard no such
thing in Confession, secretly meaning so that he be bound to tell. The Penitent
likewise may swear that he said nothing, or no such thing, in Confession. And
he defends that doctrine with the authority of Navarrus, and of the Jesuit
Gregorius de Valentia. By that reason it shall be lawful to deny Christian
Religion in judgment, saying, I am no Christian, but meaning reservedly, to
tell it you. According to that goodly doctrine and discipline of parricide,
Cardinal Bellarmin in his Confutation of the Kings book of the Oath of
Allegiance, commends the Jesuit Garnet, because having known the conspiracy
against the Kings life, and against the States of the Kingdom, he would not
reveal it. For this cause was Garnet put in the list of Martyrs. Which opinion
Cardinal du Perron also defends, returning that recompense for the great
benefits which he had received from the King his Master.

His Majesty of Great Britain adds, that another Jesuit in France, but
lately had the confidence to say, that if our Lord Jesus Christ was yet living
upon earth, passible and subject unto death, and one had revealed to the same
Jesuit in confession that he intended to kill Jesus Christ, rather then he
would reveal the Confession, he would suffer Jesus Christ to be slain.

Here our Cardinal is miserably put to his shifts, yet so, that under pretense
of providing for the safety of Kings, he leads them straight to the slaughter.
He would persuade us that it is for the safety of Kings that the Confession of
a parricide be not revealed, because no man shall ever confess such an
enterprise to his Confessor, when he knows that it is lawful to reveal his
confession. That Kings get this benefit thereby, that Priests dissuade their
secret enemies from undertaking any thing against the Sovereign, and give to
the King a general warning that he look to himself, yet without naming the
person or revealing the Confession. That if Ravaillac had not believed that his
confession should have been revealed, he would have confessed himself about his
design, and had heen diswaded from it by his Confessors, and the King had had a
warning to stand upon his guards. That Barriere having undertaken to kill King
Henry the IV. of glorious memory revealed it to a Jesuit, who labored to
diswade him from it. He would not add, for fear of offending the Jesuits, that
the Jesuit that heard that confession, gave no warning about it; But he says,
that Barriere having addressed himself since to a Dominican to confer with him
about it by way of consultation, Note that the Cardinal calls that conference a
consultation not a Confession, because it shall not be said that any of the
Roman Clergy has revealed or might reveal a confession.
the said Dominican presently gave advice of the same to an Italian Gentleman
named Brancaleon. But still this Prelat stands stiff upon that assertion, that
for nothing in the world, whether it be to procure some good, or to avoid some
evil (by that evil, understanding the Kings death, for that is the thing in
question) a confession ought to be revealed. He says that it is a mortal sin
to reveal it, and a crime against the Law of Nations, and against the right of
nature, and that evil must not be done that good may come. He approves that
Jesuits saying, who maintained that rather he would suffer Christ to be killed,
then to reveal a confession, and says that Christ would not have any of his
Disciples to commit that sin to preserve him from death. He adds (to what
purpose I know not) that Chrysostom affirms that such as make schisms, and
divide the mystical body of Christ, which is the Church, are more guilty, I say
not then they that suffered Christ to be slain, but then those very men that
slew him. Yet he says that such rumors ought not to be lightly believed, and
that Casaubon having told him how the Sorbon held, that in case of High Treason
those that confess themselves may be revealed, he had since learned the
contrary from the chief Doctors of that Faculty.

I could have wished that the Cardinal, having spoken of Kings, and of Christ
himself, and declared his opinion that a Confession must not be revealed,
though the Kings life, or Christ's life should hang upon it, would also have
told us his opinion about the Popes life: For the Doctors avoid that question,
whether it be because they will exempt the Pope from the common rule, or
because they are afraid of offending and disparaging his Holiness, by putting
his life in the same rank as that of Kings, or that of the Son of God. Matthew
Paris in the life of Henry the third of England page 702. speaks of a Confessor
who having learned in confession a conspiracy against the Popes life, did
presently reveal it.

In all this discourse the Cardinal does as he did in the full Assembly of
States at Paris the fifteenth of January 1615. The third State [that is, the
House of Commons] did remember the parricide committed on the person of Henry
the third by James Clement a Dominican, and how John Castle a Disciple of the
Jesuits had stabbed Henry the IV. and how the same King was tragically
murdered by the hands of a monster. By whose interrogatories it was made
evident that he was instructed in the cases of conscience, and in the
Discipline of the Jesuits, and that he had confessed himself to Father d' Aubigni
a Jesuit.

Emanuel Sa Aphorism. in verbo Tyrannus. Tyrannice gub^rnans just acquisitum
dominium non potest spoliari sine publico judicio. Lata vero sententia potest
quisque fieri executor. Potest autem deponi a populo. Bellarm in Barklaium cap.
21. Pontifex potest dispensare in votis and juramentis, quae Deus ipse jussit
reddi, and quorum solutio de jure divino est. Idem cap. 7. Papa Consuererunt
subditos eorum a juramento fidelitatis absolvere, and authoritate regia si opus
est privare. executio ad alios pertinet. Suarez lib. 6. lib. in Reg. Jacob.
cap. 4. Si Papa Regem deponat, ab illis tantum poterit expelli vel interfici
quibus ipse id commiserit. Papa Urbanus Causa 23. qu. 5. Can. Excommunicatorum.
Non enim eos homicidas arbitramur, quos adversus excommunicatos zelo matris
Ecclesiae ardentes aliquos eorum trucidasse contigerit. Toletus lib. 1. de
Institut. Sacerdotis cap. 13. Excommunicatus non potest exercere actum
jurisdictionis absque peccato. Imo si publica excommunicatio est facta,
sententiae nullae sunt. Idem. lib. 3. cap. 16. Obligatio sigilli est tanta, ut
nulla prorsus causa, neque etiam propter salvandam vitam propriam nec propter
salutem totius. Reip. possit Consessarius peccatum poenitentis revelare, etc.
Quod si aliquando contigerit Confessarium ab iniquo judice compelli ut revelet,
and sub juramento, po^est Confessarius dicere se nescire tale peccatum, quamvis
enim sciat, non tamen scit ut revelet. Mariana lib. 1. de Rege and Regis
institutione cap. 6. agens de Jacobo Clemente. Supra ves^cam altum vulnus
inflixit, insignem animi confidentiam, facinus memorabile. etc. Coeso Rege
ingens sibi nomen fecit: caede caedes expiata, ac manibus Guisii Ducis perfide
perempti regio sanguine est parentatum. Ibid. Tyrannicidae si evaserint, instar
magnorum heroum in omni vita suspiciuntur. Si secus accidat, grata Superis,
grata hominibus hostia cadunt, nobili conatu ad omnem posteritatis memoriam
illustrati. Eman. Sa in verbo Clericus in Edit. Antwerp. Clerici rebellio in
Regem non est crimen laesae Majestatis, quia non est subditus Regi. Becanus
lib. de Controv. Anglicana p. 123. Jojada Pontifex prius privavit Athaliam
regno, deinde vita. Itaque privavit eam regno, ut Reginam and publicam
personam: Privavit autem vita ut privatam personam. Et page 125. Quicquid
potestatis and jurisdictionis permissum fuit Pontifici in Veteri Testamento,
hoc etiam in Novo permissum est. Bellarm. lib. de Clericis cap. 28. Summus
Pontifex Cicricos exemit a subjectione Principum; Non sunt amplius Reges
Clericorum superiores. Antonius Santarelli Jesuita Tractatu de haeresi,
schismate, etc. Papa sine consilio deponit Imperatorem, quia Papae and Christi
unum est tribunal. Idem. Papa potest Reges movere and mortis poena punire, etc.
They remembered also so many books published by the Jesuit Mariana, Francis
Verona, Bellarmin, Ribadenera, Becanus, Gretser, Emanuel Sa, Eudemonojohannes
all Jesuits, and by many others; In which books the execrable parricide of
Henry the third committed by the Dominican James Clement is exalted and praised
as an heroic action, and maxims fatal unto the life of Kings are taught; That
the Pope has power of deposing Kings, and causing them to be killed (as
Jehojadah the High Priest caused Queen Athaliah to be put to death) and to
transfer their crowns unto others. That the Pope has power either direct or
indirect over the whole temporal of Kings. That the rebellion of a Clark
against the King is no Treason, because he is not the Kings subject. That
killing a King deposed by the Pope, is not properly killing a King, but a
private man. That the sentences, writs, and judgments of a secular Judge
excommunicated by the Ecclesiastical Judge, are void, and without authority.
That it is better to suffer a King to be killed, then to reveal a confession.
That a man being taken when he is about such an attempt, may use equivocations
in justice, to save himself. That he is no murderer, that kills an
excommunicate person, being moved with zeal toward the Catholic Church. That
the Pope can absolve subjects from the Oath of Allegiance made to their King,
and give Commission to some one to kill the King, and give his Kngdom to
another or to put an interdict upon it, and expose it as a prey to the next
Conqueror. Which books were indeed condemned by the Court of Parliament of
Paris, and publicly burnt by the hand of the hangman, yet without doing any
harm to the Authors of the books, or to the approvers of the Maxims.

The same third State knew that Pope Gregory the VII. had made bold to degrade
the Emperor Henry the IV. That in the year 1212. Innocent the III. had
degraded John King of England, and given his kingdom to Philip August King of
France for the remission of his sins, upon condition that he should conquer it
with his own danger and cost. And after the said Philip had raised a mighty
army with great cost, the same Pope gave absolution to King John, upon
condition that he should become the Popes vassal, and his crown tributary; And
that England and Ireland from that time forward should be fees of the Roman
Church, paying for his homage a thousand marks of silver for an acknowledgement
of subjection. Which was punctually executed. But of that more hereafter.

The same third State knew that in the year 1225. the same Pope assembled a
Council at Lateran, in which Significetur hoc summo Pontifici ut vassallos ab
ejus fidelitate denuncies absolutos and terram exponat occupandam.
power was given to the Pope to absolve subjects from the Oath of Allegiance
sworn to their Lord, and to give their lands to other Catholic Lords. And that
his Successor Innocent the IV. in the year 1245. in full Council at Lions,
declared the Emperor Frederick the second deprived of the Empire. And that in
the year 1302. Pope Boniface the VIII. (because Philip the Fair of France
retained the right of investitures and collations of benefices as his
predecessors had done) excommunicated the said King, and gave France to the
Emperor Albert, if he could get it. And that in the year 1511. Pope Julius the
second deposed John d' Albert King of Navarra, and gave his Kingdom to
Ferdinand King of Castilia, and that at the same time the good King Lewis the
XII. was excommunicated by Julius the second, and his kindgdom exposed to
conquest, because he would defend himself against the invasions of Julius, who
from a Pope was become a Captain. And that of late Henry the third of France
had been deposed by Sixtus the fifth and excommunicated, whence followed
afterward the murder of that King, and the desolation of that Kingdom. And
that in the year 1592. Monitorial Bulls of Pope Gregory the fourteenth came
from Rome, whereby Henry the fourth was declared incapable of the Crown of
France. Which Bulls by the authority of the Court of Parliament then residing
at Tours were publicly torn and burnt, the fifth of August, by the hand of the
hangman.

For these causes, the said third State the representative of all the people of
France being frighted still with the late parricide of their good King Henry
the fourth of glorious memory, and acknowledging that all these funest
disasters proceeded from these maxims fatal unto Kings, and tending unto the
subversion of Kingdoms; and from the secret of confession, and from that
doctrine of perjury, required that in the States then sitting, a course should
be taken for the securing of the Kings life, and setting his Crown free. And
that it might be declared by an express Act that in temporal things the King is
subject to none but God alone; That his life and Crown are independent from any
man, and that it is not in any man's power, whosoever he be, to dispose of it,
for any cause whatsoever. That proposition of the third State tended to no
other end, but that the King might be acknowledged to be truly King, and
Sovereign in his kingdom. To that proposition, as directly regarding the Pope,
the Clergy of France made a vigorous opposition, speaking by Cardinal du
Perrons mouth, who since published his speech, the sum whereof is this.

That it belongs not to the third State, to make Laws against the murderers of
Kings, because they are Laws of conscience. That the Council of Constance has
sufficiently provided for that, having made a Decree against murderers of
Kings; but that it must not be laid for an undoubted maxim, that a King
violating the oath made unto God, may not be deposed; thereby acknowledging a
power above the King. That the doctrine which makes the King not subject to be
deposed, is a doctrine that causes schism, and opens the gate unto all
heresies; And that thence it would follow, that since many ages there has been
no Church in the world, and that the Pope is the Antichrist. He exhorts the
hearers to hold at least that doctrine as problematick, not necessary; and in
the mean while to submit themselves to the Popes judgment. He offers to suffer
martyrdom rather then to subscribe that doctrine, which makes Kings not
obnoxious to be deposed by the Pope, which doctrine yet he says that the Pope
suffers the French to hold as problematick. He denounces anathema and curse
to the murderers of Kings; But in the same speech he says that he speaks of
Kings while they are Kings, and before their deposition.

Whence it follows, that James Clement by killing Henry the third, did not
kill a King, because the Pope had deposed him. He likes not indeed that any
should kill a King; but he would have him stripped of his Royal dignity, that he
may not defend himself when his enemies will have a mind to kill him. He
approves not the stabbing of a King, least that his soul be lost with his body,
but he approves that he be killed in battle, when he will maintain himself in
the kingdom after his deposition. He says that a deposed King retains still an
habit to the Royal dignity, and a politic character, which (when he comes to
amendment) brings him again to the lawful use of his Royal power. For he
presupposes that he to whom the Pope shall transfer the kingdom will suffer
the deposed King to live, and that if he sees repentance in him, he will leave
him the room, and quietly restore him the Royal Throne. He acknowledges no
other cause of the deposition of a King but heresy, apostasy, and infidelity.
Yet to prove that, he brings examples of Emperors and Kings excommunicated or
deposed, not for heresy, but for incapacity, or for matrimonial causes.

With the like untruth he alleges Scripture, saying that Samuel deposed
Saul. That the Prophet Ahija deposed Rehoboam from his royal right over the ten
tribes. That Azariah the Priest expelled King Vzziah from the conversation of
the people, whereby the administration of the kingdom was taken from him. All
which allegations in great number out of Scripture and Histories were convinced
of falsehood by the late King James, in his answer to the said speech. The
quality of a great King, and the importance of the matter deserved that the
Cardinal should reply. But the case was so clear, and the Cardinals soul
dealing so evident, and his ungratefulness to the King his Master, so odious,
that he chose rather not to answer, and to swallow that affront without noise,
although he lived five years after the publishng of the Kings book.

Other considerations then the strength of the Cardinals reasons made his
opinion to prevail. So that the third State got no other provision for the
safety of the life of Kings then the order of the Council of Constance, a
Council which the Popes approve not. And after all, when one looks into that
Council, it is clear that he speaks not of Kings, and of securing their life:
But only that the Council rejects the propositions of John Petit, who
maintained that it was lawful for a private man, either by wiles or by
strength, to kill a subject that rises against his King, which subject he
calls a Tyrant. For the said John Petit by his propositions went about to
justify the murder committed by John Duke of Burgundy on the person of Lewis
Duke of Orleans, who in those propositions is unjustly called a Tyrant. The
Council rejected those propositions, holding it unjust that a private man
should stab one of the Kings subjects without any form of Law, under color
that some call him a Tyrant, or because he goes about to trouble the State,
and is disobedient to the King. So that the Council instead of providing for
the safety of Kings, diminishes their safety, forbidding private men to kill a
subject that would attempt against his Kings life, or trouble his State. So did
the Cardinal secure the Kings life, openly abusing the Assembly of States, when
he turned them over to a Council which the Pope approves not; and to a Decree
of that Council, where nothing is found of that he says, yea, to a Decree that
puts the life of Kings in greater danger.

That heroical act having been successful to the Cardinal, it is no wonder
that he goes on in the same strain in his book, maintaining that it is better
to suffer the King to be killed, then to reveal a Confession. In an age in
which the crowns of Kings should not be in bondage, as they are now, and where
some breathings of liberty should remain, any Priest made Secretary of such a
confession that would not reveal it, and all men speaking as the Cardinal does,
should be proceeded against as guilty of high treason, and conscious, and
partakers of the parricide. But in our days the Majesty of Kings being become
contemptible to Clergymen, who deny themselves to be subject unto Kings, and
Popes ascribing to themselves the power of disposing of their crowns and their
lives, these propositions are impunedly maintained, although the death of so
many Kings lately slain by Clergymen, oblige Kings to think on their own
preservation.

How plainly does our Cardinal abuse Kings? saying that a Confessor to whom
some enterprise against the Kings life was discovered, must give warning to the
King that there is an enterprise against his life, but must not name the
person, nor reveal his confession. Certainly by speaking thus, he forgeth to
himself a King wanting common sense, or weary of his life: For in that case
should not a King prove himself to be out of his wits, or angry against his own
safety, if he did not cause that Confessor to be apprehended, and put to such a
trial as would make him confess the name of the conspirator against his life,
and in case of obstinacy in silence use him as a conspirator? It is enough
(says the Cardinal) to advertise the King to stand upon his guard. But what
must be done, if he that will kill the King is one of his guards, and lives
near his person? Who knows not, that he that despises his life, is Master of
any man's life? and that a King may be stabbed in the midst of an Army?

But (says the Cardinal) it is a mortal sin, and a crime against the right of
Nations, and against nature, to violate the public faith which the Church
gives unto all penitents that come to Confession. I answer, that the Church
never made that promise to penitents to keep any confession secret, and that
though the Church had made such a promise, it ought not to be kept, when it
cannot be kept without violating the faith due unto God, and disobeying his
word. No promise ought to be kept, which derogates to a promise made before,
which is just, and holy, and conformable unto the word of God. Obeying our
parents and the Princes to whom God has subjected us, are obligations which
lie on us from our birth grounded upon the word of God, and not to be broken by
any promise made since. Now for a man to suffer his Father, or his King to be
slain when he may save his life, is not only disobedience, but parricide,
prodigious treason, and unnatural disloyalty. All promises that oblige us to
violate Gods commandment are void. It is a disloyal and cruel fidelity, which
for fear of breaking promise to a penitent, breaks the faith due to God, and
violates the natural obligation, more ancient, not only then that pretended
promise made unto penitents, but also then the Roman Church. That man cannot
but be very wicked, into whose bosom counsels of treason, and enterprises of
parricide are safely poured and deposed: Who that he may be faithful to a
villain and a traitor, himself becomes a traitor to his Father or his King.
That man is very cruel, who by a pertinacious silence suffers ruin to fall
upon a country, and the destruction of whole Provinces, and his own Father to
be killed, rather then reveal a confession. Why does not the Confessor in that
occasion use at least the Jesuitish flight, saying, I have revealed that
confession, because I took it not for a confession, but for a consultation?
Which was the language of the Jesuit Garnet conscious and partaker of the
Gun-powder-treason to blow up King, Prince, Counsel, Parliament, and an
innumerable quantity of men, women and children.

One thing clearly discovers the wickedness. For these Gentlemen that keep to
the rule so strictly when the question is of the Kings life, or of the life of
the Confessors Father, and will not have the confession revealed in those
cases; yet will abate of that strictness in far lesser things. For this is one
of the Aphorisms of the Jesuit Emanul Sa. Si nequeas tuum crimen confiteri
sine revelatione auditi criminis in confessione, dubium est an id explicandum.
Probabilius quod sit. Navar. Soto.
If thou can not confess thy crime without discovering the crime which thou
have heard in confession, some doubt is made whether it must be discovered. It
is more probable that it must. See in Navarrus many cases Navar. in cap. pen.
Sacerdos de poenit. Did. 6. page 577. Quaero an sit aliquis casus in quo
liceat Confessario auditam confessionem revelare, and videntur multi esse,
primus quando crimen haereseos det^gi tur etc.
in which the Doctors hold that confession ought to be revealed, the case of
heresy especially, of which he affirms that the common saying is, Haeresis
est drimen quod nec confessio celat.

The last refuge of these Doctors of parricide, is to say that Confession is
instituted by God, and of divine institution, but the Royal power is but an
humane institution, and is but of humane right; and therefore it is better that
a King should be killed, then to reveal a Confession. I answer, that although
Confession were of divine institution, yet it would not follow, that the secret
of Confession is also of divine institution. But the clean contrary of that
they say is true. For auricular Confession, and the secret of that Confession
are humane institutions, of which the word of God says nothing: Whereas the
power of Kings and Princes is instituted by God, and recommended in his word.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God, the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. Romans 13.1. And a little after He (meaning the Prince)
bears not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil; Wherefore ye must needs be subject not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, that is, not only for fear of
drawing upon you the wrath of the Prince, but for fear of offending God. And 1
Pet. 2.17. Fear God, Honor the King, joining the honor due to the King with
the fear of God. Moses and Joshuah were the two first Princes of Gods people,
both established by name by the ordinance of God. And the three first Kings in
Israel, Saul, David, and Solomon were promoted to the kingdom by an oracle, and
by express declaration of Gods will. The Prophet Daniel, chap. 2. speaks thus
to Nebucadnezzar, though a persecutor of the Church, Thou King art the King of
Kings, for the God of heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, and strength,
and glory. Christ himself appearing before Pilats judicial seat acknowledged
that Pilate had received that power from God, saying to him John 19.11. Thou
could have no power at all against me except it were given thee from above.

This is not contradicted by St. Peter when he says 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King
as supreme, or to the Governors, etc. For he calls the power of Kings and
Magistrates an ordinance of man, because that order is received among all
Nations by a natural instinct, and is not an ordinance proper unto the Church
of God, such as the ordinance of the Ministry of the Gospel. Also because many
Kings attain to the Kingdom by humane means, as by conquest or by election, and
because they establish Laws about things civil and humane, which concern not
the service of God, as the prohibition of hunting in a certain season of the
year, or to go in the streets in the night without a light, or to walk near the
walls of a Citadell. But all this proves not but that the people is obliged by
Gods commandment to obey the King. Yea, if God command us to obey some
ordinance of man, the obedience to that humane right is of divine institution.
Wherefore Peter will have us to submit our selves to that ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, that is, because God will have it to.

In vain it is answered, that there is no commandment of God that injoyns us to
obey Lewis or Henry. For they that hold that the Popes power is of divine
right, cannot find a commandment in Gods word that obliges us to obey Urban or
Boniface, whom (though promoted to the Papal dignity by factions, and ways
worse then humane) they hold to be established by divine right. By the same
reason it would follow that neither William nor Anthony, nor any private man,
is obliged to believe in Jesus Christ, for there is no text in Scripture that
obliges them to it by name. But it is enough that they are comprehended under
the general rule, which obliges every private person without naming. Thus then
Gods command to obey the King, binds us to obey Lewis and Henry, because they
are Kings. Neither is the question here of the means whereby a Prince attains
to the Crown, but whether God will have him obeyed, when he has got it, and
when he is settled in the throne. We obey not Lewis because he is Lewis, but
because he is King.

All that the Cardinal adds, deserves no answer. He tells us stories, which
if the world will believe, it will never trouble us, although we know the
contrary to be true. It is nothing to us whether the Dominican that accused
Barriere, had heard the said Barriere in consultation or in confession. Nor
whether the Jesuit that heard him, labored to dissuade him. Nor whether the
Sorbonists agree among themselves about the secret of confession. Who so will
examine them severally, shall find them of different tenants in that point. But
when they all speak in a body, it is no wonder that the power of the Jesuits
and the servitude which other Clergymen are brought to, makes them speak
against their own sense.

Against that fraudulent shift whereby a Jesuit questioned by the Magistrate
whether he has learned any thing in confession about a plot against the Kings
death, answers swearing, that he knows nothing of it, and that he heard
nothing of it, with this reserved meaning, to say it to you; we have the Law of
God saying, Thou shall not bear false testimony: For the thought is no part of
the testimony. There being nothing then that bears testimony but the mouth, it
follows that such a testimony is false. Yea, the forgers of such a perjury
confess that by that proceeding the Judge that examineth them is deceived, and
that it is done purposely to deceive.

Seventh Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. OF The Authority and Power of the
Pastors of the Church to pardon Sins. And of Sacramental Absolution.
CHAP. 1. How negligently M. du Perron treats of Sacramental Absolution. A
summary answer to that he says of that subject. Many falsifications are
observed.
OF all the Articles of Christian faith, that of remission of our sins by Jesus
Christ is the most necessary, and the most comfortable. In the chain of Gods
Graces that Article is the first ring, from which depends Justification,
Sanctification and Eternal Life. That happiness which conscience seeks before
all things, is to have peace with God. No wonder then that Satan has used all
his strength and policy to corrupt by the depravation of that one Article, the
whole Christian Religion.

Wherefore it is much to be wondered at, why the Cardinal, who in his book
makes so many long digressions, so far as to employ (in chap. 48. of his first
book) forty one pages to dispute against Baronius about a thing of no use,
passes so slightly over the most important point of Christian Religion, as
being afraid to meddle with it, contenting himself to bestow upon it little
above half a page.

They that have conversed with this Prelate or perused his books, may have
observed that he did carefully abstain from some Controversies, and avoided
them as dangerous shelves. He was willing enough to dispute of prayer for the
dead, by the Fathers, but he fled from the dispute of Purgatory and
Indulgences. He would be large upon the real presence of Christ's body, but
meddled as little as he could with the transubstantiation of the bread, and with
the denying of the cup in the Communion unto the people, and with Masses
without communicants. He would discourse of the images of Saints, but never of
the images of God and the Trinity. He spoke of the representation of Saints by
images, but forbear speaking of the adoration of those images. He would heap up
many testimonies of Fathers of the first age, about the intercession of Saints,
but past lightly over the invocation of Saints. He extended himself much upon
the Popes primacy over the Bishops of the Roman Empire, but meddled not with the
divine institution, whereby the Pope pretends to be Peter's successor in the
quality of Apostle or Head of the Universal Church. Neither did he ever take
the pains to bring any example or any action whereby it appeared that the Pope
governed the Churches without the Roman Empire. In the same rank I put the
Sacramental Absolution whereby Priests give the absolution of sins, which the
penitents have confessed. Of which he would have said never a word, had not the
words of his Majesty of Great Britain extorted from him some few words about it
by the way.

The King had said, that to the confession followed with the absolution, the
Roman Church attributed a virtue well nigh equal unto that of Christ's blood,
and that men were subjected to it upon unavoidable necessity.

To that the Cardinal gives an answer, which may be reduced to very few words.
He says, that as to the iron of the cautere, the same effect is attributed as
to the fire; and to the water where the drug was infused, the same virtue as to
the drug; and that as Scripture ascribes the same virtue to Baptism, as to the
blood of Christ, saying that Christ has Ephesians. 5.26.
cleansed his Church by the washing of water by the word, and that Baptism Tit.
3.5.
is the washing of regeneration; by the same reason one may attribute the
remission of sins to penitential absolution: Of which the same that washes our
sins in his blood said, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins soever you remit,
they are remitted. And that Ambros. l. 1. de poenit. cap. 7.
Ambrose and Hierom disputing against the Novatians (who believed not that men
could remit sins) say that both in Baptism and in Penitence Priests forgive
sins. He denies also that the Roman Church holds the Sacrament of penitence to
be of absolute necessity, that being proper to the Baptism of children.

I pass by his comparisons, for similes prove nothing. The texts which he
alleges out of St. Paul's Epistles are false in some part, and are even
contrary to him. For there St. Paul says not that the washing of water
cleanses the Church, but that Christ purges his Church by the washing of
water, by the word. Would to God that the Doctors of the Roman Church would tie
themselves to speak so, and would say only that Christ forgiveth sins by the
Pastors of the Church, that is, by their Ministry. Besides, he takes it for
granted that by the washing of water, St. Paul understands Baptism, not knowing
that Scripture calls so remission of sins and regeneration, even before Baptism
was instituted. As Psalm 51.4. David says, Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. And Isa. 1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes. And Zechariah chap.
13.1. prophecieth of a fountain that should be opened to the house of David,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness, meaning the
saving grace by Christ. Yea, in the new Testament, as 1 Cor. 6.11. after a long
enumeration of vices, the Apostle adds, But you are washed, but you are
sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of your God. And
Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood.
In which places it is not at all spoken of the Sacrament of Baptism. Whereas
when the text means that grace of God figured and conferred by Baptism, the
Apostle Peter in chap. 3. of the second Epistle, ver. 21. says expressly, that
these graces are not conferred upon us by the bodily Baptism, for having spoken
of Noah's flood, he says, The like figure whereunto even Baptism does also now
save us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Hereby the fraud committed by the Cardinal is discovered in the allegation of
his second text. He makes St. Paul to say, Tit. 5.5. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the
washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
that Baptism is the washing of regeneration; But in that text there is never a
word of Baptism. The whole contexture of the place speaks of other things, and
that word washing signifies only cleansing, according to the style of
Scripture, as we have justified it by many texts. It is certain that the
Apostle speaks there of a washing necessary to salvation; Now our Adversaries
confess that without the Baptism of water many are saved.

Neither is the text of John 20.23. any more to his purpose to prove the
sacramental absolution. Christ after his resurrection said to his Apostles,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and
whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. That text gives indeed to his
Apostles, and to his successors, all faithful Pastors of the Church, power to
pardon sins, we have no controversy about that. Retaining sins is exempting
sinners from punishment. Whence it follows, that as much as the Pastors can
punish, so much can they pardon. For, as Ambros. de poenit. l. 1. cap. 2.
Dominus par jus and folvendi esse voluit and ligandi, qui utrumque pari
condition permisit. Ergo qui solvendi jus non habet, nec ligandi habet, etc.
Quomodo potest alterum licere alterum non licere?
Ambrose says, the power of binding, and the power of loosing are of equal
extent. The Pastors then can remit those punishments of sins which they can lay
upon the sinner. Now they can punish the sinner with Ecclesiastical pains,
censures, suspensions and excommunications, of which pains they may release the
repenting sinner, restoring him to the communion of the Church. It may be said
also, that they forgive sins, even as for the eternal pain, in the same manner
that Scripture says, that they save souls, as James 5.20. He which converteth
the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall
hide a multitude of sins. And 1 Cor. 9.22. I am made all things to all men,
that by all means I might save some. And 1 Timothy 4.16. In doing this thou shall
both save thy self, and them that hear thee. Not that to speak properly, the
Pastors be able to save souls, or ought to be called Saviors, but because God
conferreth remission of sins unto penitent sinners by their ministry. It is a
metonymie, a tropical expression, whereby that which is proper unto the
efficient cause is attributed unto the instrument. As if a rich man having sent
a sum of money by another to redeem a prisoner, we said that the bearer of
that money has delivered the prisoner. Thus although to speak properly, it be
meat that has the feeding virtue, yet we say that our hands feed our body. Our
Adversaries do not understand it so, but their sense is, that Priests pardon a
sinner, not only by remitting unto him the Ecclesiastical censures, but also by
absolving him by authority of Judges in Gods judicial seat; pardoning (as they
speak) not only at the outward bar, but at the bar of conscience, so far as to
say, that for sins committed after Baptism none can be reconciled unto God, but
by the judgment and absolution of Priests, as Bellarmin says, Bellarm. de
poenit. l. 3. cap. 7.. Propositio. Christus constituit sacerdotes judices super
terram cum ea potestate ut sine ipsorum sententia post Baptismum lapsus
reconciliari non possit. Et Sect. Qu^re. Nemo cui coelum ob culpam sit clausum,
in illud ingredi poterit, nisi Sacerdotum Ministerio aperiatur.
Christ has constituted the Priests to be Judges upon earth, with that power,
that none that has sinned after Baptism can be reconciled without their
sentence. And that none to whom heaven is shut for his sin can enter into
heaven, unless it be opened unto him by the Ministry of Priests. Wherefore
also M. du Perron calls Sacramental Absolution, a judicial act; as the
Council of Trent says Sess. 14. cap. 6. That the absolution by the Priest is
as a judicial act whereby sentence is pronounced by the Priest as by a Judge.
And Bellar. l. 3. de poenit. c. 2. Sect. Sed haec: Pec^^^a omnia causae sunt
quas cum Deo ipso habemus, and ideo cum Deus judicium de peccatis Sacerdotibus
permiserit in Ecclesia sua, non possunt qui in Ecclesia sunt, si ejusmodi
causas habeant, sine Sacerdotum judicio cum Deo reconciliari.
Cardinal Bellarmin makes no difficulty to say, that there being a suit
depending, or a difference between God and man who has sinned, the Priest is
Judge in the cause of God. Whence it follows, that the Priest in that regard is
above God, because the Priest is Judge, and God is a party. The issue of the
suit is, that God is condemned to forgive man. But it is pity that the Priest
who pronounces that judgment is himself a sinner and guilty, and he must
plead his own cause before some other Priest, who many times is more guilty
then he: And all must in the end appear together before God to be judged about
all their words, actions, and thoughts; yea, for that very Absolution
especially they must give account; whereby (as our Adversaries acknowledge)
they judge many times against Right and Justice, and bind themselves while they
are binding others.

Truly, on what side soever you turn that Text of John 20.23. you shall find no
trace in it of the institution of that pretended Sacrament, and no mention of
Auricular Confession, or of Satisfaction, or of remission of sins which
exempteth a man from Gods judgment; but only of that remission of sins which
may be administered by a man, of which we spoke before. Whosoever will consider the
text and context of Matthew. 18.18. where Christ gives the binding and loosing
power unto his Apostles, will easily acknowledge that he speaks of
Ecclesiastical censures, and of the power of binding the refractories to the
Church, and loosing those that return to their duty. And why shall we not take
the power of forgiving and retaining sins given to the Apostles, John 20.23. in
the same sense?

If we understand it, as Cyrillus upon John 20. that Christ gives there a power
to his Disciples, which they were to use both toward those of the household of
faith, and toward the infidels and not baptized, whenever they should be
converted to God, this Sacrament of Penitence vanishes away. For our
Adversaries hold that this Sacrament of Penitence cannot be administered, but
unto baptized persons, not to those that turn Christians, being out of the
Church before.

The testimonies of Ambrose and Hierom are such, that the Cardinal could not
have picked any more express to condemn himself. Hierom says Hier. adv.
Pelagium, lib. 2.
That which is written, that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin,
must be understood both in the Confession of Baptism, and in the clemency of
Penitence. And Ambrose, Ambros. lib. 1. de poenit. c. 7.
Why do you baptize, if men have not the power to forgive sins? For in Baptism
the remission of sins is. Is it any whit material, Whether Priests challenge
that power given to them, either by Baptism or by Penitence? For in both it is
the same Ministry. These Fathers put the remission of sins both in Baptism and
in Penitence, and make the power given to Pastors of forgiving sins, to consist
in that they baptize and reconcile sinners after Penitence. As then in Baptism,
Pastors forgive not as Judges, and do no judiciary act whereby sins be blotted
out before God, but that Grace is conferred by God through Baptism; likewise
when after Penitence is done, Pastors receive sinners to the Communion and
forgive sins, they absolve not the sinner in Gods judicial seat, but God makes
use of their Ministry to assure the sinners conscience that his sins are
forgiven him. Wherefore Ambrose says, that in both (that is, in Baptism and in
Penitence) it is the same Ministry. He speaks of a Ministry or Service, not of
a judicial power.

The worst legerdemain of the Cardinal in this allegation, is that he would
make the world believe, that both Hierom and Ambrose when they speak of
Penitence, mean that pretended Sacrament of Penitence of the Roman Church,
whereby the Priest after a secret and punctual Confession, gives Absolution,
and imposes satisfactions. For that Penitence of which those Fathers speak, is
public Penitence, whereby the sinner after he has past through all the
degrees of Penitence, was reconciled unto the Church publicly, and received to
the Communion. Of Absolution given in secret to a sinner after Confession, the
Fathers of the first ages make no mention. In those days, if a sinner had
confessed his sin privately to his Pastor, the Pastor, if he judged it
expedient, disposed him to satisfy by public Penitence. But of secret
absolution, after a secret confession, no mention or trace is found in
Antiquity. The custom was to fulfill the Satisfaction before Absolution: For
the sinner was to satisfy the Church by Penitence, before he could be
reconciled to the Church. But in the Roman Church of this age, the Priest
giving absolution, imposes satisfactory pains, which are fulfilled after
absolution. He loses the Penitent by absolution, and at the same time binds
him, obliging him to satisfactory pains, either corporal or pecuniary, which
were altogether unknown among the ancients. In a word, all the ancient practice
is overthrown and contradicted in the Roman Church. Of that public penance all
those testimonies speak, which the Cardinal brings in the following Chapter
Chap. 2. page 651.
. Such is that of Lactant. de vera Sapient. l. 4. c. 30.
Lactantius, Because the Congregations of Heretics hold themselves all of them
to be principally Christian, and think their Church to be the Catholic Church,
we must know that the true Church is that where there is Confession and
Penitence, etc. And the second Canon of the Council of Laodicea, which the
Cardinal calls an Oracle. To those that are run into diverse sins, and give
themselves to prayer, showing a perfect conversion from their faults, a time
must be prescribed according to the quality of the sin. Such is also the
testimony which he alleges in the same place out of Cyprian, Cypr. Ep. 4. l.
4. according to the Cardinals allegation, p. 651.
For the least sins that are committed, yea such as are not against the Lord,
Penitence is done by a set time, and the confession whereby the life of him
that does the Penitence is discovered: And they cannot come to the Communion,
unless hands be laid upon them by the Priest or the Clergy.

In this place of Cyprian, it is evident that Cyprian speaks of public
Confession, whereby the life of the Penitent is discovered, and that he speaks
not of the Sacramental absolution which is given in the Roman Church, but of
the reconciliation of the sinner excluded from the Communion of the Church,
which reconciliation was done in public, with the laying on of hands of the
Bishop and of the Clergy there present. Which that the Reader might not
perceive, the Cardinal has falsified that place, putting by the Priest or the
Clergy, instead of by the Bishop and the Clergy.

With the like fraud, he alleges in the same place a testimony of Ambrose.
That Father speaks thus, Ambros. l. 1. de poenit. c. 16. Si quis occulta
crimina habens, propter Christum tamen studiese poenitentiam egerit, quomodo
istic recipit, si ei communio non rependitur? Volo veniam reus speret, petat
eam lachrymis, petat gomitibus, petat populi totius fletibus, etc.
If any having secret crimes, yet does Penitence carefully for Christ his sake,
how shall he receive here [an hundred-fold] if the Communion be not restored
unto him? There the Cardinal stops, and suppresseth the rest, which shows that
Ambrose speaks of public Penitence and Confession, and of receiving the sinner
again to the Communion, which also was publicly done. Ambrose then adds, I
will have the guilty to hope for pardon, let him ask it with tears and
groanings, and with the tears of all the people, etc. He adds also, that he
has seen some who in their Penance caused themselves to be trodden under the
peoples feet. So this has nothing common with Auricular Confession, or with
Sacramental Absolution which is done in secret; and the Cardinal is found
guilty of forgery, corrupting the Fathers with a License almost beyond all
examples.

Of the same kind is another allegation of his out of Ambrose in the Treatise
of exhortation to Penitence. For that place speaks only of public Penitence,
which the Roman Church holds not to be a Sacrament. Besides that Treatise
Possevinus in recensione operum Ambrosii. Exhortatio ad poenitentiam agendam
extat ^omo primo Editionis Romanae, and rejicitur inter opuscula Ambrosio
ascripta quae non sunt ejus.
is not of Ambrose. To which if two places be added out of Basil, and one out
of Leo, alleged by the Cardinal in the same place, and falsified, as we
showed before; eight testimonies of Fathers will be found in one page of his,
all wrested and taken in a contrary sense, and five of them falsified in the
words, or pared and clipped with notorious fraud.

Whereas then in the writings of the Ancients, the Confession which sinners
made in private is often mentioned, it is no where found, that in that private
confession Priests gave the judiciary absolution, saying, Absolvo te, etc. Or
that the said action was put among the Sacraments of the Church. Austin is
express upon that, August. de dogm. Eccl. c. 53. Nam quem mortalia crimina post
Baptismum commissa premunt, hortor prius publica poenitentia satisfacere and
ita sacerdotis judicio reconciliatum communioni sociari.
Those (says he) that are pressed with mortal crimes, I exhort to satisfy
before by public penance, and so being reconciled by the Priests judgment, to
be associated unto the Communion. It is then a great abuse of the Readers,
which all our Adversaries that write of this matter are guilty of; to bring
expressions of the Fathers which speak of private confessions made to the
Priest, to infer from thence, that a private absolution was given after that
private confession; yea a judicial absolution belonging to the Sacrament of
Penitence. For of sins also that were confessed in private, a public penitence
was made, as the Bishop judged it expedient, or as the sinner was disposed. But
of that secret absolution, and of the Sacrament of Penitence, the Fathers speak
not. It appears also by the alleged place of Austin, that he exhorted those
that were guilty of great sins to public penance, but did not constrain them
to it.

It remains that we say something of the necessity of that Sacramental
absolution, which the Cardinal says to be necessary in case of necessity; that
is, he that having opportunity to confess himself, and to receive absolution
from the Priest, does it not, cannot be saved, and shall not obtain of God the
remission of his sins. This Bellarmine says in the third book of Penitence, in
the second Chapter. Christus instituit sacerdotes judices super terram cum ea
potestate ut sine ipsorum sententia nemo post Baptismum lapsus reconciliari
possit:
Christ instituted Priests to be Judges upon earth with that power, that
without their sentence none that is fallen after Baptism can be reconciled. This
he says according to the doctrine of the Council of Trent, which holds the
absolution by the Priest to be so necessary to salvation, that Conc. Trid.
Sess. 14. c. 6. Atque ideo non debet poenitens ad. o sibi de sua ipsius fide
blandiri, ut etiam si multa illi adsit contritio aut sacerdoti animus serio
agendi and vere absolvendi detur, putet tamen se propter suam fiedm vere and
coram Deo esse absolutum.
even when a sinner has confessed himself with a serious contrition, yet if
the Priest gave him the absolution without an intention to give it, the Council
forbids that man to believe that his sins are forgiven him. So necessary is (if
we must believe them) not only the absolution of the Priest, but his very
intention to absolve, to obtain forgiveness of sins before God. And the
Catechism of the Council of Trent, Catech. Trid. c. de Sacram. poenitentiae.
Neque veniam peccatorum a Domino impetramus, nisi ea Poenitentiae Sacramentum
per confessionem deleat.
We obtain not of God the Remission of our sins, unless the Sacrament of
Penitence blot them out by confession. And Bellarmine in the third book of
penitence, chap. 2. Bell. l. 3. de Poenit. c. 2. Negatur remissio illis, quibus
noluerint sacerdotes remittere.
Remission is refused to those to whom the Priests will not remit. He means
that remission is denied them by God. And in the same place, Vt flatus
extinguit ignem and dissipat neb^las, etc.
As the wind puts out the fire and scatters the mist, so the absolution of
the Priest scatters sins and makes them vanish. And he told us before, that
none that sinned after Baptism, is reconciled without that, and that heaven is
not opened to him without the Priests sentence. In a word, by their reckoning,
in case of possibility, unless a man go through the hands of the Priest, unless
he punctually confess all his sins to the Priest, unless he receive absolution
from the Priest, he cannot be saved. That yoke was laid upon the Consciences
without any Word of God to make the superstition of the people tributary to the
covetousness of the Clergy, and to raise their power. For we find not that the
Apostles ever said, Unless we forgive you your sins, you cannot be saved; but
they said, Act 10.43.
Whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins through his name.
He then that has a true faith in Christ, before he confess his sins to a
Priest, has already remission of sins. Yea the Council of Trent, compelled by
the force of truth, declares that Conc. Sess. 14. c. 4. Et si contritionem
hanc aliquando charitate perfectam esse contingat hominemque Deo reconciliare
priusquam hoc Sacramentum actu suscipiatur.
contrition, when it is perfected with Charity, reconcileth a man with God,
before he receive the Sacrament of Penitence. Only the Council will have the
vow of the Sacrament joined with that contrition. And the Catechism of that
Council is yet more express to that purpose, Contrition cannot but be
acceptable unto God, for (says the Prophet) a broken and a contrite heart, O
God thou will not despise. Moreover, these words of the same Prophet declare,
that as soon as we have conceived contrition in our spirits, the remission of
sins is granted to us of God. I have said, I will confess mine iniquity against
my self, and thou have forgiven the iniquity of my sin. And of that we see a
figure in the ten leprous men, who being sent by Christ unto the Priests, were
delivered from the leprosy before they came to them. Whereby one may perceive
that the virtue of true contrition is such, that thereby we presently or
immediately receive the remission of all our sins. So then, when the truly
contrite sinner comes to a Priest, his sins are already forgiven: And if that
Priest gives him Absolution, that Priest shall do a thing already done, and
shall give a sentence in authority of a Judge, about a thing that God has
judged already. And if a man truly contrite, and whom God has already
pardoned, come to confess himself to a Priest that says to him, Absolvo te,
etc. but without an intention of giving absolution, what will become of the
sentence of the Council of Trent, whereby such a man is forbidden to believe
that God has forgiven him his sins? For God having already forgiven the sinner
before he confessed himself to the Priest, shall the impiety and profane spirit
of that Priest alter the will of God, or make God to revoke the pardon which he
had granted before? Shall Gods goodness be made subject unto the wickedness of
men? Can his grace already granted to a faithful soul, be made void by the
perverseness of a wicked Confessor?

In vain to establish the necessity of that penitential absolution, these words
are alleged, Whose soever sins ye remit, they shall be remitted: For hence it
follows not, that all the sins which Priests shall not forgive, shall not be
forgiven. If I say, that all those whom the King has condemned to death are
dead, does it follow that none of those whom he did not condemn are dead?
Besides, we have proved, that the pardon of which Christ speaks in that text is
not the Sacramental absolution, nor a judicial act or sentence of a Judge
absolving sinners before Gods judicial seat: That belongs to none but God,
for the reasons which we will show in the following Chapter.

CHAP. 2. What is that pardon of sin which the Pastors of the Church grant, and
how far their power to forgive sin extends. And of the power of the Keys.
OUR Savior Jesus having given to his Disciples the power to forgive sins, who
so teaches that this grace is dead with the Apostles, thereby deprives the
Church of the following ages (as far as in him lies) of a great comfort, and
enervates altogether the Ministry of the Gospel. God indeed gave to his
Apostles the gift of Miracles, and an universal power not restrained to a
particular Church, in which power they had no successors. But as for the graces
which serve to give peace unto the Conscience, and to reconcile sinners with
God, and to maintain the Church in good order, they ought to be perpetual, and
the Apostles did not receive them but to transmit them unto posterity. For God
intends no less in this time, then in the Apostles time, the salvation and
conversion of his Elect: And God put not the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven in
the hands of the Pastors of his Church, to take them out of their hands soon
after. The miracles made by the Apostles in the birth of the Church, serve us
yet to this day, and are so many confirmations of the doctrine of the Gospel;
Therefore it is not necessary that the Apostles should have successors in that
virtue. But as for the power of forgiving sins, if the Apostles alone had had
that power, the Church of the following ages should thereby receive no benefit,
because the pardon of sins is a personal grace, which every private person has
need to apply unto himself, and which comes not by succession: It being
certain, that by the remission of sins which the Apostles granted to men of
their time, the sins of men of our time are not pardoned.

But as we ought to be careful keepers and good husbands of the graces of God,
which he would have to be perpetual unto his Church, so ought we to take heed
that they be not abused in our keeping, and that this power be not changed into
tyranny, or into an occasion of pride and dishonest gain. Lest then we fall
into that contrary extremity, it is necessary to know what the power of Pastors
is to forgive sins, and what limits God has set to it in his Word.

Christ said unto Peter, and in his person to all the Apostles, Matthew. 16.19. I
will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Of which promise
expressed in the future-tense, the fulfilling is found in the fore-alleadged
Text, John 20.23. where Christ gives to his Disciples the power of remitting
and retaining sins. In which power the use of the Keys, about which we now
dispute, consists. What those Keys are, and what their nature is, the Word
of God teaches us.

Scripture speaks of two sorts of Keys, the one the Key of knowledge, the
other the Key of Authority or Government. Of the Key of Knowledge, Christ
speeaketh, Luke 11.52. saying, Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the
Key of Knowledge; meaning that they had taken away that Key of Knowledge from
the people, challenging to themselves the office of opening the intelligence of
Scriptures, and to bring others into it. Of the Key of Authority, God speaks,
Isa. 22.22. where God promises to Eliakim to lay the Key of the house of David
upon his shoulder, that is, to charge him with the Government of the Kings
house. Which is applied to Christ, Rev. 3.17. where himself says, that he has
the Key of David, and it is he that opens and no man shuts, and shuts
and no man opens; because he has in his hand the Government of the Church of
God.

According to these two significations of the word Key, Christ has given to
his Apostles two sorts of Keys, the Key of Knowledge to open the entry of
Scriptures, and bring the people into the true knowledge of God: And the Key of
Authority to govern the Church, which in the New Testament is commonly called
Matthew. 3.2. And 11.32. and 13.11.24.31.33.32. and 20.43. and 23.13. and in many
other places.
the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of heaven; for it were unreasonable
thereby to understand the heavenly Paradise, whose government belongs not to
the Pastors of the Church, although the last Council of Lateran in the X.
Session, say by the mouth of an Archbishop, that Quapropter Bernardus ad
Eugenium tanquam ad summum Hierarchicum in coelo Ecclesiae virum, in quo erat
omnis potestas supra omnes potestas tam coeli quam terrae, recte scripserat;
Tibi data est omnis potestas, in qua qui totum dicit nihil excludit.
the Pope has all power over all the powers of heaven and earth; and that
Bernard said very well, speaking to Pope Eugenius, All power is given thee in
heaven and in earth: For (says he) he that says all, excludes nothing.

It does not belong to the Pastors of the Church to bring souls into Paradise,
or to exclude them from it. This belongs to God only, who before we were born,
yea before the Creation of the world, defined in his counsel who are those whom
he will save by pardoning their sins, and who are those whom he will not
pardon. They shall be judged in the last day, as they shall be found written in
the Book of life, not according to the sentences and judgments of Absolution
that have been pronounced by the Priest. He that will bring those sentences for
his Apology in Gods judgment, saying, I have indeed committed such and such
sins, but my Parson has absolved me, and although I be none of thine elect, I
must be saved nevertheless, for my Parson has given me Absolution; such a man,
I say, shall find himself ill grounded. And the Parson himself who has
forgiven another, giving Absolution in quality of a Judge, shall have enough to
do to get Absolution for himself in Gods judgment.

These words then, whereby Christ promises to his Apostles the Keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, are as much as if he said to them, I will give you the
Government of my Church. Which government Pastors exercise two ways; By the
preaching of the Gospel, the Scepter of that Spiritual Kingdom, which is the
Church of God; and by Ecclesiastical discipline.

These two ways they remit and retain sins. For, as for the preaching of the
Word, they announce unto the penitent sinners the remission of their sins, and
to the unbelievers and impenitent, condemnation; not as a private person should
do, but as persons purposely sent by Christ to announce the good news of Gods
reconciliation with authority, as Heralds of Grace, and as 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors for Christ, to whose word Christ himself gives efficacy, using
them to touch the hearts with repentance, and powerfully to print in their soul
the sense of their reconciliation, and the certainty of the remission of their
sins. In that sense they do not pronounce sentences in authority of Judges, but
are Heralds of peace, and Ministers of reconciliation. Wherefore also their
charge is called by the Apostle the ministry of reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5.18.
All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself in Christ, and has
given unto us the Ministry of reconciliation. In that respect then their charge
is a Ministry, not a Judicature to judge the causes depending between God and
men, in authority of Judges. Their Office is a Ministry of reconciliation, not
a Judicature of absolution. Wherefore the next verse, their word is called, a
word of reconciliation; and the bearers of that word are called, not Judges in
Christ's cause, but Ambassadors for Christ, that exhort and beseech men to
receive the reconciliation with God by Jesus Christ. We are (says the Apostle)
Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you by us, we beseech you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

But that Embassy is addressed as well to the Infidels and not baptized persons,
as to the faithful, seeing that unto all alike the Apostles propound the
remission of their sins, that remission cannot be a Sacrament of Penitence,
which the Roman Church conferreth only upon baptized persons, nor an act of
Judicature, but is a Ministry of reconciliation. Yet as the Word of God says,
that faithful Ministers save souls, (as we have proved) because God makes use
of their Ministry to save them, so they pardon sins, in as much as God
employeth them, and makes use of them to announce and conferr pardon upon
sinners. Make no doubt but that when a faithful Pastor having heard the
confession of a repenting sinner, or comforted a sick person, says to him, I
announce thee the remission of thy sins by Jesus Christ; or, I declare unto
thee that thy sins are forgiven thee; these words are very effectual toward a
repenting sinner, and are powerful to strengthen his faith in the assurance of
the remission of his sins, although these words be no sentence of absolution.

The like cannot be said of the second point, wherein the power of the Keys
consists, which is the government of the Church by Ecclesiastical discipline,
whereby they punish sins in quality of Judges, by censures, suspensions, and
excommunications, and remit sins by releasing those pains, and reconciling the
sinner unto the Church, and receiving him to the Communion. It is easy to
comprehend how far that Judicature extends. For every Judge pronounces
judgments, imposes punishments, grants graces, according to the nature of
his charge. A Judge that sits upon life and death, judges not causes that are
merely civil. A secular Judge judges not of spiritual causes, nor of the
decisions of faith. A Judge merely spiritual, ought not to judge of pecuniary
or criminal causes. In a word, every Judge, unless he be Sovereign, has
certain limits which his Judicature must not exceed. Now the Office of Pastors
is to govern the Church in this world. Whence it follows, that the judgments
which they pronounce, and the punishments which they impose upon the sinner in
quality of Judges, are punishments which go not beyond the present life; and
reach not so far as to give order that he be either in Paradise or in Hell
after this life. They cannot give sentence that men's sins be pardoned in the
day of Judgment. That would be giving Laws to God. It is true that God
punishes, even after this life, such as despise the judgment of the Pastors
of the Church, and shake off the yoke of Discipline: But that punishment after
this life, is done, not by the judgment or sentence of Pastors, but by the
Judgment of God avenging the contempt of the order which he constituted in his
Church.

Besides, a Judge cannot remit any pains, but such as he can impose. For the
saying of Ambrose in the first book of Penitence is most true, Amb. de poenit.
l. 1. c. 2. Dominus par jus and solvendi esse voluit and ligandi, qui utrumque
pari condition permisit, ergo qui solvendi jus non habet, and ligandi non
habet.
that the power of binding and the power of loosing are equal, and extend the
one as far as the other. God would have the right of loosing and that of
binding to be equal. He permitted both upon the like condition. That man then
who has not the right of loosing has not the right of binding, etc. Since
then Pastors cannot impose the pain of damnation upon any man, but only pains
of Ecclesiastical censures, it appears also, that the pardon of sins which they
may grant as Judges, exceeds not the release or remission of pains, and
Ecclesiastical censures. It is so that Pastors as far as in them lies, and as
much as sins and sinners are in their jurisdiction, pardon sins. For pardoning
sins, is nothing else then not to punish them, when he that pardons has the
power to punish. The Judge cannot exempt the guilty from any punishment, but
that which he may inflict by virtue of his Office. It is in that sense that
Saint Paul advises the Corinthians to forgive the incestuous man whom they had
cut off from the Communion of the Church, and himself joining with them,
forgiveth him also, 2 Cor. 2.7. and 10. Which he does not to absolve him before
Gods judicial seat, but presupposing that God had accepted his repentance, and
had pardoned him, he voteth that the Church also forgive him the Ecclesiastical
punishment, receiving him to the Communion. Yea private persons will forgive
offenses one to another, not meaning thereby to prejudicate the judgment of
God, but only remitting the revenge, and declaring that they will not return
any punishment for it. Such remissions of sins done by the Pastors, and the
opposite retentions when they are just, are approved of God, and ratified in
his Counsel; Which is Christ's meaning when he says, that, Whatsoever shall be
bound in earth by the Pastors of the Church, shall be bound in heaven; that is,
the suspensions and excommunications wherewith Pastors shall justly bind
sinners, shall be ratified in heaven, and such men shall be held justly bound
with Ecclesiastical bonds and censures. And though the Ecclesiastical censure
were unjust, and not hurtful at all to the excommunicated person as for the
conscience, yet the Lord will have him to undergo that Ecclesiastical
punishment, rather then to run into contumacy, and to thrust himself by force
or tumult to the holy Communion.

The summary of this discourse is, that as for the announcing of grace by the
Gospel, either propounded in public, or applied to some particularly, Pastors
do not forgive sins as Judges, and exercise no Judicature, but pardon, in as
much as God announceth and conferreth remission of sins by their means, and
printeth in their hearts the certainty of pardon through their word. But as for
the Ecclesiastical censures, whereby they remit or retain sins, they are truly
Judges, and truly pardon sins, with a pardon which extends but as far as the
punishments do which they can impose. They pardon sins as Judges, as for the
Ecclesiastical pains: For God alone is the Judge of Consciences, and no man can
by judicial absolution exempt a soul from answering at the Bar of Gods
judgment, or by virtue of his judicial absolution, blot out his sins before
God. Which will yet more clearly appear by the following proofs.

CHAP. 3. That the Pastors of the Church cannot blot out sins before God. And
cannot by pardoning sins exempt sinners from Gods judgment. And that unto God
alone, as the only Judge of souls and consciences, it belongs to forgive
sins. And that the absolution of the Priests of the Roman Church is void and of
no virtue.
IN this question we take remission of sins not for the remission of
Ecclesiastical censures and penances, but in the sense that remission of sins
is taken in the Creed, and in the sense that it is commonly taken in the
Gospel, which Isa. 43.25. Jer. 31.34. Mal. 3.17. Mic. 7.18.
promises remission of sins to them that believe in Christ, so that God holds
them for acquitted, there being no condemnation for them that are in Christ
Jesus. In that sense we affirm and maintain, that none but God alone can
forgive our sins with judicial authority. I say not only that he is the only
Sovereign Judge, but absolutely that he is the only Judge, and that to forgive
sins by authority of a Judge, there is no Judge neither with him nor under him,
and that the Pastors of the Church are not inferior Judges subordinated unto
God to pardon sins by a judicial absolution. In a word, that the judgment
concerning remission of sins whereby we are absolved in Gods judicial seat,
does not belong to them in any respect. And we reject the doctrine of the Roman
Church, Bell. l. 3. de poenit. cap. 2. Christus instituit Sacerdotes judices
super terram cum ea potestate ut sine ipsorum sententia nemo post Baptismum
lapsus possit reconciliari.
that God does not forgive sins committed after Baptism, unless the Priest
forgive them, Et eodem capite. Nemo cui coelum ob culpam sit clausum, in illud
ingredi poterit, nisi Sacerdotum ministerio aperiatur.
and that they to whom heaven is shut up by reason of their sin, cannot enter
into it, unless the Priest open heaven unto them: Et paulo post. Negatur
remissio illis, quibus noluerint Sacerdotes remittere.
And that God forgiveth not those whom the Priest will not forgive.

I. The Pharisees not believing that the Lord Jesus was God, were offended
because he forgave sins, Mark 2.7. Luke 7.21. Psalm 51.6.
saying, Why does this man thus speak blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God
only? Whereupon Christ does not find fault with them for believing that it
belonged to God alone to forgive sins, but presently by an excellent miracle he
sets forth his divine virtue before them, that they might acknowledge that by
the same virtue he could also forgive sins.

II. To God alone God commanded us to say, Pardon us our trespasses. To God
David said, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, acknowledging that to God
alone he ought to address himself to obtain pardon. It belongs to the offended
party to pardon, not to him against whom the offense was not done. Of him
speaks Micah, chap. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity,
and passes by transgression? God himself speaks thus by Isaiah, chapter 43.25. I,
even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. He is that heavenly and merciful Father, who exalted
Jesus by his right hand to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.31. Which Son of God has the key of
David, he opens and no man shuts, he shuts and no man opens, Rev.
3.7. that none may take upon himself to open with him, or without him the door
of the kingdom of heaven.

III. Our Adversaries Bellarm. l. 1. de poenit. cap. 11. Non fuit in Testamento
Veteri postetas remittendi peccata.
acknowledge that under the old Testament, and for the space of four thousand
years before Christ's coming, the power of forgiving sins was not in the Church,
yet the godly without that were saved. Whence it follows that this judicial
remission by the Priest was not necessary, and that by the doctrine of the
Roman Church the condition of the Church of the New Testament is grown worse,
since in those days God did immediately forgive, but now the remission of sins
must pass through the hands of the Priests, and they are made Judges between
God and man. Of these Judges the judgments many times are unjust, as our
Adversaries acknowledge. Shall we say that remission of sins is now better,
because it depends no more from God alone?

IV. This practice is so evidently unjust, that even in the Roman Church, where
the people is used to go to the Priests and ask them Absolution, if they that
speak so, spoke in right French or English terms, and said to them, Father
forgive me my sins, that would be odious, and intolerable.

V. Who knows not, that it belongs to the only sovereign Judge, to forgive
crimes? and that the Highest Courts of Justice (though they judge without
appeal) give no letters of grace or abolition to a fellon, because it belongs
only to the Royal power? How comes it to pass then, that the Priests, who are
infinitely more under God then the Highest Courts are under the King, make bold
to attribute to themselves the power of forgiving sins, and give absolution to
traitors against God? and to grant pardons which cannot be given but by the
Judge of souls, which is the Sovereign Judge?

VI. Neither is it for subjects to pardon sins committed against the Sovereign.
It belongs not to a domestic servant to forgive his fellow servant, the
offenses against their common Master.

VII. Much less yet ought a traitor in the Gaol to pardon the offenses of his
fellow-traitor against the King. How can then a sinner, who stands in need of
pardon, yea, who often is a greater sinner then the man to whom he gives
absolution, forgive the sins committed against the eternal God?

VIII. And whereas Gods decrees are eternal, and Gods Counsel-order for the
remitting of such a man's sins, as well as the Decree about his election, is
before the foundation of the world, can a Priest retaining a man's sins and
denying to give him absolution, alter the order of Gods Counsel? Or if he give
him absolution, to what purpose does he give a judicial sentence upon a case
decided before all ages? And how does the Priest know whether his judgment be
conformable unto Gods decree? and whether he absolveth a man whom God has
reprobated? Especially seeing that the Priest himself doubts of his own
salvation? Why does the Priest require of the penitent firmly to believe that
he has pardoned him his sins, whereas himself knows not whether God has
forgiven him?

IX. Above all things it is considerable, that pardoning sins like a Judge,
cannot belong but to him that is Judge of consciences, and knows the secrets
of thoughts, intentions, and private affections, and the nature and
grievousness of the fact. For to give right judgment of a crime, the Judge
ought to know the nature and the greatness of the same. Now the things that
aggravate o^ diminish sin are the thoughts, and intentions, and secret desires.
The principal part of the sin is in the will and thought. Yea, very often the
whole sin is in the thought, and in the evil desire, as when want of strength
and confidence keeps the intention from coming forth into action. Since then
the Priest sees nothing in all these, and knows not the hearts, it is plain
that he is incapable of judging of sins, or to know the grievousness or the
nature of sin. And it is certain, that if God had established some Judge on
earth to forgive sins, he would also have given him the knowledge of the hearts
of those that ask pardon. For God who decrees the end, gives also just and
necessary means to attain it.

X. It is necessary also that he that has authority to forgive sins be Judge
of souls, and have them in his power, and be able to punish souls, which are
spiritual and immottal, with punishments conformable unto their nature, that
is, with spiritual and eternal pains, and to give graces and absolutions
accordingly. That being not in the Priests or the Popes power, it is evident
that they cannot pronounce a sentence either for or against souls, by pardoning
or retaining their sins. Which appears by the nature of the pains which they
impose, as pilgrimages, fasts, whipping, and pecuniary mulcts. By these pains
do they not confess that they have souls in their power? for all these are
corporal pains. Why then in matter of grace and remission do they pretend to
give spiritual graces? Note.
Why does their power of loosing extend further then their power of binding?
seeing that those two things must be equal, and have the same limits, as St.
Ambrose told us before.

XI. As granting letters of grace to a fellon guilty of death, is giving him
his life, likewise pardoning a man his sins, for which he deserves to be
damned, is giving him salvation. If then the Priest give absolution to a man,
and the pardon of all his sins, he gives him life and salvation, especially
when he gives him absolution on his death bed. And Bellarmin makes bold to say,
that Bell. 2. l. de Indulg. c. 11.. Quinta. Pontifex remittit culpam and poenam
aeternam.
the Pope remitteth both the fault and the eternal pain. Now is it not manifest
impiety to think that a Priest can give salvation, and pronounce a judgment
whereby a man may be exempted from going into Hell? And how can one give
salvation to another, being not certain of his own? Why do we not rather give
glory to God, saying, that the Pastor announceth unto the dying sinner the
remission of his sins by Jesus Christ? and that if the repenting sinner
believes that, God will forgive him for Christ's sake? and that there is no
need that the Priest pronounce a judgment, and by a judicial power give a
sentence of absolution, to free the sinner from Gods judgment? It being
certain that God can forgive without the Priest, and that the Priest cannot
forgive without God, who is not bound to follow the Priests sentence, and make
his own sentence void.

XII. I know that Priests giving absolution, pretend to use the authority which
they affirm they have from God. But every man knows how easily one may
incroach upon Gods authority under that color. They that usurp the Kings
rights use to shelter themselves under the Kings authority, and doing things
contrary to the Kings interest, and displeasing to him, say nevertheless that
all they do is for his service. Must we absolutely believe the Priests without
enquiring further, seeing that the pardon of sins, is so lucrative unto them,
and raises their authority so high?

XIII. Wherefore also it shall not be found that any Apostle, or any Pastor of
the Church in the time of the Apostles ever used that power, or that ever they
said to a sinner not suspended or excommunicated, I pardon thee thy sins. It is
a new abuse and a corruption of which no example is found in all Antiquity. For
as for the suspended and excommunicated sinners, the Pastors forgive them in
quality of Judges, only as for the remission of Ecclesiastical pain, as Saint
Paul, and the Corinthians did to the incestuous excommunicated man.

XIV. To this add that the power of Pastors extends only unto their flock, and
by consequent both the graces and pardons which they grant, and the pains which
they impose upon sinners, can last no longer then the said sinners belong unto
their flock. Now the Priest giving absolution to a dying man pretends to give
him a grace, not for this life, but for the future, for it as if he pronounced
a sentence that such a man be happy after his death. And indeed the Pope
pardons sins after death, forgiving the souls that are in Purgatory, yea
reconciling excommunicated persons after their death, as we shall see
hereafter. By this means he exercises the power of the keys over those whom
God has not committed to his keeping, and that are not of his flock. He
loses those whom he cannot bind.

XV. The worst is, that by this doctrine men are set above God. For sin is that
which puts a discord between God and man. In which discord the parties are God
and man. In that suit, Priests bear themselves as Judges, as Cardinal Bellarmin
says, Bellar. l. 3. de poenit. c. 2. Peccata omnia causae sunt, quas cum Deo
ipso habemus. Et ideo cum Deus judicium de peccatis Sacerdotibus permiserit in
Ecclesia sua, non possunt qui in Ecclesia sunt, sine sacerdotum judicio cum Deo
reconciliari.
Sins are suits which we have with God, and therefore since God has permitted
the judgment of sins in the Church unto Priests, they that are in the Church,
if they have such suits, cannot be reconciled unto God without the judgment of
Priests. These men make God their suitor in a manner, since the Priest is a
Judge in Gods cause, and that God and man are parties in a suit, whereof the
Priest is Judge. Truly whosoever will look near hand into that judicial absolution,
shall find it a sentence deciding how God ought to behave himself with the
sinner; As if the Priest said to the sinner, I give order that God forgive
thee. For his absolution cannot otherwise be the sentence of a Judge, nor a
Judicial act, as M. du Perron calls it. I wish that our Adversaries would tell
us whether the Priest giving absolution gives a sentence that God should
pardon, or declares only that God has forgiven? For if he enjoyneth God to
pardon, he is above God, and gives him Laws. But if he only declares that God
has pardoned, his absolution is not an action of a Judge, nor a Judicial
sentence. He that says God forgive thee* by these words gives no pardon, or
absolution. And he that declares to a sinner that God has forgiven him, must
be certain of Gods intention, and of the sinners repentance, and must exactly
know the nature of the sin; Things which the Priest knows not.

XVI. It must not be omitted that God never pardons sin, unless the sinner
have a true repentance and contrition of heart, and a true faith in Christ.
Things which the Priests know not, and by consequent, know not whether their
absolution be valid. And the Priest must speak thus to the sinner, if not in
word, at least in thought; I absolve thee as much as it lies in me, and if
thou be worthy of it, and if thou have a true faith, and a serious repentance.
But because I know not whether these virtues be in thee, I know not whether I
absolve thee, and whether my absolution be valid. So much the Maldon. Tom. 2.
de poen. par. 3. these. 5. Quantum in me est, ego te absolvo.
Jesuit Maldonat freely acknowledges, saying that the Priest must say within
himself, I absolve thee as much as it lies in me, or as Suarez. in Thom. tom.
4. disput. 19. sect. 2. n. 20.
Suarez says, that the Priest pardons, unless he that receives absolution,
put an impediment to it, in which impediment coming out of want of faith and
repentance the Priest knows nothing.

Tolet. l. 3. de instruct. sacerdotum cap. 12. Triplex conditio potest apponi
absolutioni, una est de praeterito, ut si fecisti hoc, ego te absolvo. Altera
est de praesenti, ut si ita est, ego te absolvo. Tertia de futuro, ut ego te
absolvo, si hoc seteris.
Cardinal Tolet says, that three conditions may be added to the absolution. The
one is for the time past, saying, If thou have done this, I absolve thee. The
second is for the present time, If it be so, I absolve thee. The third is for
the time to come, If thou do this, I absolve thee. He adds a fourth if, when
that depends on a third person, I absolve thee, if the Bishop consent to it. If
one of these ifs fail, the sinner must know that there is no absolution for
him. Reason ought to put in another if for God, saying, I absolve thee, if God
will have it, and if he know thee to be worthy of absolution, or if God approve
thy repentance. But these Gentlemen presuppose that God will like whatsoever
they like, and will acquiesce in their judgment. Is not a judgment thereby
made ridiculous, and the judicial power imaginary, if the Judge must not know
whether his judgment be valid, and if he pardon with an if, and with a
condition upon which his judgment is suspended? as if he said, I forgive thee
if thou art not an hypocrite, but if thou art an hypocrite, I forgive thee not:
But whether thou art an hypocrite or no, I cannot discern. This is acknowledged
by Hierom, Hier. in c. 4. Danielis. R^m temerariam faciunt qui audacter
peccatoribus ^ndulgentiam pollicentur.
saying, It is rashly done of them that boldly promise pardon unto sinners. And
by Basil, Basil. regular. breviorum Interrog. 15. (...).
The power of forgiving is not given absolutely. And by Cyprian, Cypr. Ep. ad
Antonianum Sect. 11. Si vero nos aliquis poenitentiae simulatione deluserit,
Deus. qui non deridetur, and qui cor hominis intuetur de his quae nos minus
perspeximus judicet, and servorum sententiam Dominus emendet.
If any deceive us by a false show of repentance, let God who cannot be mocked,
and looks into the heart of man, be pleased to judge of those things which we
did not perceive, and let the Master be pleased to correct the sentence of his
servants. In these places Basil and Cyprian speak of the reconciliation of
sinners with the Church after public penitence. For of a Sacrament of
Penitence, and of a judicial absolution given in secret unto a sinner, there
was no mention made in those days, neither was it known as yet.

Whereupon the words of the Treatise of exhortation to penitence in the first
Tome of Ambrose, are observable. There the Author speaks thus of those that
being in a mortal sickness do repent, and are reconciled, that is, admitted to
the Communion. Tract. de exhort. ad poen. Tom. 1. operum Amb. Qui positus in
ultima necessitate agritudinis suae acceperit poenitentiam, and mox
reconciliatus fuerit, and vadit id est exit de corpore, fateor vobis non illi
negamus quod petit, sed non praesumo dicere quia been hinc exit. Non praesumo,
non polliceor, non vos fallo, non vos decipio, non vobis promitto. Fidelis been
vivens securus hinc exit.
He that being put to an extreme necessity of sickness has received penitence,
and was presently reconciled, and so goes away, that is, goes out of this
body, I confess that we deny him not what he asks, but together I do not
presume to say, that he goes hence well and happily. I presume not so far, I
say it not, I will not deceive you or cosen you. I will promise you no such
thing. The faithful that lives well, is he that goes out of this life with
assurance. The effect of that discourse is, that he doubts very much whether he
that being sick calls his Pastor, protesting of his contrition and confesses
his sins, and upon that is reconciled (his Pastor announcing to him the
remission of his sins) and is received to the Communion of the holy Sacrament,
he doubts (says he) whether such a one is saved, and whether his sins be
pardoned: Whence the Author draws an exhortation to live well betimes, rather
then to trust in such a reconciliation. But the Priests of the Roman Church in
our days, speak quite another language; If in a man's sickness a Priest being
called, hears the sick man's confession, and gives him absolution of all his
sins, giving him the host to eat: It is presumed that such a man's sins are
truly pardoned, and that he is going, not into Hell, but to Purgatory, or to
Paradise.

XVII. If the sinner be truly penitent, God in his word promises to pardon
him. But unless he repent, God will not pardon him. So then, if the sinner
repent and be converted with all his heart, God will forgive him, though the
Priest, yea, though the Pope himself would obstinately deny him pardon. But if
he have no true repentance, God will not forgive him, though he had received a
thousand absolutions. Wherefore I see not what good that judicial absolution
does, since God forgiveth without it, and punishes and damneth with it.

XVIII. It is certain as we have proved it, and as the Council of Trent, and
the Catechism of the same Council heretofore alleged do acknowledge it, that
the man who is truly contrite has already obtained of God the remission of his
sins, before he receive sacramental absolution. So that the Priest giving
absolution, forgiveth sins already pardoned, and gives judgment in a suit
already judged. Hereby Cardinal Bellarmins error Bellar. lib. 3. de poenit.
cap. 2.
is laid open, when he says that the Priest giving absolution, judgeh a suit
between God and the sinner, for if God before that sacramental absolution, has
already pardoned, and received the sinner into grace, there is no more
difference, and no more suit to Judge.

XIX. As then under the Law the leprous being healed and clean, were sent to
the Priest to be declared clean, not to be cleansed: Likewise the sinner
already reconciled unto God by faith in Christ, and by true contrition, comes
not to his Pastor to receive pardon, nor to be reconciled unto God, but that
his reconciliation and repentance may be made known unto the Church, and that
he may be confirmed, in confidence that God has forgiven him. And as Christ
raised Lazarus from the dead before he said, Loose him and let him go, likewise
God regenerateth and quickneth sinners, before they be loosed by the Pastors
from the bonds of Ecclesiastical censures.

XX. In vain it is replied that God forgiveth a contrite sinner before he has
the absolution of the Priest, and that this hinders not but that the contrite
sinner must have a vow in his heart to ask the Priests absolution. For he that
makes that vow should offend God, if he did it with an intention to receive the
pardon of sins which God has already forgiven. A man that seriously repents,
and believes that God has forgiven him, may and must make a vow to obey God,
to hear his word, and to be partaker of his Sacraments, but must not make a vow
to ask of the Priest pardon of those sins which he believes that God has
already forgiven him. If for his sins he was excluded from the communion of the
Church, he must seek his reconciliation with the Church, that he may glorify
God, and edify his neighbors, although he be fully persuaded that God is
reconciled with him. But whosoever believes that God has forgiven him all his
sins, and looks besides for an absolution from the same sins by the judicial
sentence of a man, brings the grace of God in question, and asks for a
sentence in a suit already judged. He expects of the Priest a judgment which
is not in the Priests power, and attributes unto him a power which he has not
received of God.

XXI. But how shall the penitent that receives the Priests absolution, be sure
that by this Sacramental absolution his sins are forgiven, since the Roman
Church believes that the Sacraments are void, and confer no grace, unless the
Priest has an intention to confer them, and to do that which the Church does?
That intention is probably presumed, and by a likely conjecture; so that it is
a presumptive and conjectural absolution. It is an absolution that must be
guest at, an absolution which is believed, because a man will believe it. Truly
here there is great reason of doubting, if I understand the world, and how we
live in an age swarming with Atheists, there being many Priests that believe
nothing of that they do, whether they laugh in their sleeve at all Religion, or
whether they know the truth of Religion and the abuses of Popery, but are kept
in it by fear. Such men when they give absolution have their heart somewhere
else, and detest in their soul their own actions.

XXII. Another scruple troubles the consciences, and makes sinners uncertain
about the absolution which they have received. For all the actions of a Priest
fallen into irregularity are invalid, because by the Laws of the Roman Church
they are forbidden to exercise their charge. In the Roman Church they call
irregularity an inability to receive orders, or to exercise them when they have
received them. By the Laws of the Roman Church a man becomes irregular for
drinking no wine; for loosing one of the fingers which serve for handling the
Host, and making the sign of the Cross: For killing a man, or cutting off a
man's limbs. Many hold Tolet. l. 2. Instruct. Sacerd. c. 63. Non est opus eum
cui virilia abscissa sunt secum in pulverem redacta aut sicca portare, ut
vulgares putant
that a gelded man is not irregular if he carry about him the parts that are
wanting to him, dried or beaten to powder. Also a Priest falls to irregularity
if he marry, not if he keep concubines. He becomes not irregular nor unable for
the Priesthood if he commit Sodomie, as Navar. Tom. 2. In caput ad inferendam.
23. qu. 3. De defensione proximi, Sect. 37. Edit. Col. p. 255. Respondendum
est, sodomiae crimen non comprehendi, Primo quia sicut dictum est supra,
irregularitas nisi ob casus a ^ure expressos non incurritur, ex quorum numero
hic non est, etc. Tertio quia parum refert illud crimen esse gravissimum
spurcissimum and maxim detestabile, cum majus sit haeresis mentalis ^a. 2ae q.
11. Art. 3. Et majus desperatio, etc. quorum tamen nullum irre -- gularitatem
inducit.
Navarrus a famous Doctor teaches at large; The reason is, that be the vice
never so detestable, yet the heresy conceived in the mind, and despair are
more horrible crimes, which nevertheless bring no irregularity; Which he
proves by the authority of Thomas. These things being so, how shall he that
receives absolution know, whether the Priest that gives it has some defect
in his body, or whether he has committed any crime that made him irregular?
for if it be so, the absolution is void and without effect.

XXIII. The Council of Trent in the fourteenth Session, chap. 6. moves another
difficulty. That it may happen that a Priest who by absolution remiteth the
mortal sins of others, is himself in a mortal sin. Yet that Docet quoque etiam
Sacerdotes, qui peccato mortali tenentur, per virtutem Spiritus Sancti in
ordina -- tione collatam tanquam Christi Ministros functionem remittendi
peccata exercere.
Council declares that such a Priest has nevertheless the power of remitting
sins, by the virtue of the Holy Ghost which was conferred upon him in his
ordination. These are two propositions, which to receive without doubting, one
has need to be of a very easy belief. The one that Bishops in the ordination
of Priests confer upon them the Holy Ghost; The other that this virtue of the
Holy Ghost remains still in Priests how vicious soever they be, and that by the
same virtue they have power to forgive sins. Of these two propositions, the
first is full of difficulty; For although Christ said to his Apostles, Receive
ye the Holy Ghost, yet we find not that he gave that power to the Bishops that
came since, to give the Holy Ghost in ordination. Seeing that in the Roman
Church some Bishops are yet in their swaddling clothes, and children of Princes
have fat Bishoprics bestowed upon them in their cradle. Some Bishops have no
learning at all. I have seen some that could not read. Some Bishops are
altogether profane in their conversation. So that one can hardly believe that
God put his Spirit in such men's power to dispose of it. Hardly will any believe
that a Bishop visiting his Diocese in the Rogation weeks to confer Orders, can
when he returns from hunting, or comes from his wanton sports, give the Holy
Ghost by the laying on of his hands, and so spread the Holy Ghost abroad
through the Towns of his Diocese. And since among the Apostles there was one in
the Devils possession, Is it not possible that among the Bishops some are led
by the same Spirit? When that happens, is it like that a man possessed by the
Devil can confer the Holy Ghost? Is there any Priest who having received the
laying on of hands from a Bishop, can say truly that at the same instant he
feels himself filled with the Holy Ghost?

But the chief consideration is, that by the ordination which the Bishops
confer, they pretend to give unto the Priests a power to do things which the
Holy Ghost never commanded or taught. The Bishop constituteth the Priests
sacrificers of the body and blood of Christ, of which Priesthood and sacrifice
there is not one word in the word of God, no more then of the power of
forgiving sins with authority of Judges, and of that judicial absolution which
the Apostles and the ancient Church never practiced, and of that indelible
character of Priesthood, which remains even in hell, printed by the Bishop in
the ordination, by virtue whereof Priests sacrifice and give absolution. Now it
is not to be believed, that by such an inordination, whereby things contrary to
the Holy Ghost are injoined, the Holy Ghost can be conferred.

The second proposition is little more probable; That God approves that an
Atheist, or an incestuous man, or a blasphemer, have the power to forgive Gods
children with an authority of a Judge; for to such men St. Peter's sentence may
be applied, 2 Pet. 2.19. While they promise liberty to others, they themselves
are the servants of corruption.

XXIV. Of the weakness of that power to absolve sins with authority of Judges,
we have an example in the Pope himself, in whom they make the sovereign power
of forgiving sins to subsist, and who has limited unto Priests and Bishops
the cases in which they may forgive sins, reserving to himself an unlimited
power, without exception of any case. Yet we see in the first book of the
sacred Ceremonies, chap. 2. of the fifteenth Section, that Pontifex petat a
Confessore plenariam indulgentiam.
the Pope when he is near his death, calls for his Confessor, and begs of him a
full indulgence; and gives (as Bellarmin Bellar. lib. 1. de Indulg. c. 6.
Sect. Postrema. Papa potest Co fessario suo dare potestatem ut se a peccatis
absolvat.
says) power to his Confessor to forgive him all his sins. As if he said to
him, I command thee to forgive me my sins. He that pardons sins unto all the
Church, Thom. Opusc. de regimine principum lib. 3. cap. 10. number. 20. Oportet
dicere in summo Pontifice esse plenitudinem omnium gratiarum, quia ipse solus
confert plenam indulgentiam omnium peccatorum. Vt competat sibi quod de primo
Principe Domino dicimus, quia de plenitudine ejus nos omnes accepimus.
from whom depend the keys, and the power of absolving, so that Bishops and
Priests have no power of absolving, but by a dependence on the Pope. He that
gives pardons for millions of years, and fetches souls out of Purgatory, yet
asks pardon of him to whom he has given power to pardon. That Confessor who
has his part in the Popes pardons and Indulgences, forgiveth the Pope who has
forgiven him: So they forgive one another, not the offenses of the one to the
other, but the offenses which both have committed against God. By this means
they are tossing remission of sins between them like a tennis ball, and the
world must believe that God approves that, and ratifieth it in his Counsel.
Certainly these men play a pageant among themselves, even till death.

How far the Pope may rely upon that absolution, and that plenary indulgence
which he received from his Confessor in the point of death, it appears by all
the Masses which are sung at Rome for the Popes soul immediately after he has
given up the Ghost. Lib. 1. Cerem. Sacr. Sect. 15. In prima die exequiarum
leguntur ducentae Missae.
On the first day of his obsequies two hundred Masses are sung, and on the
ninth day as many. And all the prayers said in those Obsequies, pray for a soul
that trembles for fear of Hell, and eternal damnation.

Now although all these proofs were as weak as they are strong and evident, and
though God had given indeed power to the Pastors of the Church to forgive sins
as Judges, yet the Roman Church had lost that right long ago, having altered
the doctrine of the Gospel, and perverted or clipped the benefit of Christ's
merit, by the merits and satisfactions of men, by the sacrifice of the Mass,
and by the Invocation of Saints, and overthrown the humane nature of Christ by
the doctrine of transubstantiation. For the keys given to the Pastors depend
upon the Gospel, and cannot be separated from it. To what purpose these keys,
if Satan has altered the locks? To what end that remission of sins, since
thereby another kind of grace is offered unto us, then that which is contained
in the Gospel?

CHAP. 4. Proof of our doctrine by the Ancient Fathers; And even by the Roman
Church.
Upon this point the Fathers of the first age are of one mind, for they say
all, that there is none but God alone that can forgive sins, and that it is for
God only to blot out sins before God, and that it belongs not to Pastors to be
Judges in the remission of sins.

Irenaeus speaking of the miraculous healing of the man to whom Christ forgave
his sins, says that Iren 5. l. cap. 7. Peccata remittens hominem quidem
curavit semetipsum autem manifest ostendit quis esset. Si enim nemo potest
remittere peccata, nisi solus Deus, remittebat haec autem Dominus and curabat
homines, manifestum est, quoniam ipse erat Verbum Dei Filius hominis factus,
etc.
The Lord forgiving sins healed a man indeed, but he manifestly showed what he
was. For if no man can forgive sins but God alone, the Lord together forgave
them, and healed the men, it is then evident that he was the word of God, etc.

Tertullian speaks the same language, Tertul. lib. 4. contra Marcion. Judaei
solummodo hominem ejus intuentes nec dum esse Deum certi -- merito retractarent
non posse hominem delicta remittere sed Deum solum, etc.
The Jews considering Christ as a man only, and not certain yet that he was
God, and not considering him neither as son of God, did with good reason
represent to him, that a man cannot remit sins, but God alone.

Again, Ut ostenderet eum and hominem qui delicta dimitteret illum scilicet
filium hominis apud Danielis prophetiam consecutum judicandi potestatem ac per
eam utique and remittendi peccata.
That only Son of Man of whom it is spoken in Daniels prophecy, who obtained
the power of judging, and by consequent of remitting sins.

And Novatian, Novatianus cap. 13. lib. de Trinitate, Si cum nullius sit nisi
Dei cordis nosse secreta, Christus secreta conspicit cordis: Quod si cum
nullius sit nisi Dei peccata dimittere idem peccata dimittit, etc. merito Deus
est Christus.
Seeing that it belongs to none but God to know the secrets of the hearts; if
Christ sees the secrets of the hearts, and seeing that it belongs to none but
God alone to forgive sins; If Christ forgiveth sins, etc. Christ is with good
reason [called] God.

And Cyprian, Cypri. lib. de Lapsis. Nemo se sallat, nemo decipiat, solus
Dominus misereri potest. Veniam peccatis, quae in ipsum commissa sunt, solus
potest ille largiri, qui peccata nostra portavit, etc. Homo esse Deo non potest
major, nec remittere aut donare indulgentia sua servus potest quod in Dominum
delicto graviore commissum est. Ne adhuc lapso and hoc accedat ad crimen, si
nesciat esse praedictum, maledictus homo qui spem habet in homine.
Let none cozen himself; Let none deceive himself; there is none but God that
can show mercy. He alone can forgive sins committed against him, who has
carried our sins, who has felt sorrows for us, whom God delivered for our
sins. A man cannot be greater then God, and the servant cannot by his
indulgence remit or pardon that which was committed against the Master by a
greater sin, lest that this also be added unto the man fallen, besides his crime,
Cursed be the man that puts his hope in man.

And Hilary Hilar. Can. 8. in Matthew. Nemo potest dimittere peccata, nist solus
Deus, ergo qui dimittit, Deus est, quia nemo remittit nisi Deus. Deus in homine
manens curationem homini praestabat.
speaking of Christ, None can remit sins but God alone: Wherefore he that
remitteh sins is God. God dwelling in man, bestowed healing upon that man.

And Clemens Alexandrinus, Clem. Alex. l. 1. de paedagogo c. 8. (...).
That man alone can forgive sins, who is constituted our instructour by the
Father of all things.

And Ambrose Donaturus peccatum solus remanet Jesus, etc. Solus remanet quia
non potest hoc cuiquam hominum cum Christo esse commune ut peccata condonet,
solius hoc munus est Christi qui tulit peccatum mundi. Ambros. Ep. 76. ad
studium.
None remains but Jesus that forgiveth sins, etc. He remains alone, because
this cannot be common unto Christ with any man. This is the charge of Christ
alone, who has born the sins of the world.

The same in another place, Id. l. 3. de Sp. S. cap. 29. Peccata nemo condonat
nisi unus Deus, quia aeque scriptum est, Quis po^est peccata condonare nisi
unus Deus?
None is without sin but God alone. So none forgiveth sins but God alone: For
it is equally written, Who can forgive sins but God only?

Theodoret speaks thus of the Heretics Audiani, (...). Theodoret. lib. 4. de
fabulis haereticorum in Haeresi Audianorum.
By a rash enterprise they give remission of sins. In the same place, Ibid.
(...).
They give absolution to them that have confessed themselves; prescribing not a
term for penitence, as the Laws of the Church enjoin, but giving pardon with
authority.

Chrysostom (...).
Hom. 6. upon the second Epistle to the Corinthians, None can forgive sins but
God alone. And Hom. 54. upon John, (...).
It belongs to none else to forgive sins. And Hom. 40. upon the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, (...).
It is a thing possible to God alone to forgive sins.

Optatus in the fifth Book against Parmenian, Sordes and maculas mentis lavare
non potest, nisi qui ejusdem fabricator est mentis.
He alone that formed the spirit, can wash the filth and spots of the spirit.

And in the same place, Si Deus hoc promisit, quare vos vultis reddere quod
vobis nec promittere licet, nec reddere, nec habere? Ecce in Esaia promisit
Deus inalbare peccatis affectos, non per hominem.
If God promised that, why will ye do that which is not lawful for you to
promise, or to give, or to have? Behold God promised in Isaiah, to whiten those
that are stained with sin, not to do that by others.

Cyrillus Alexandrinus in the twelfth book upon John, chap. 56. Et certe solius
very Dei est ut possit a peccatis solvere. Cui enim alii praevaricatores Legis
liberare a peccato licet nisi Legis ipsius Authori?
And truly it belongs to none but the true God to have the power to loose men
from their sins. For to whom else is it lawful to deliver the prevaricators of
the Law, but to the author of the Law? And in consequence he shows how the
Apostles forgave sins, namely, that it was the Holy Ghost abiding in them that
forgave sins.

Austin in the twenty third Sermon of the fifty, speaks thus to them that take
upon them to forgive sins to others, Nam quid es homo, nisi aeger sanandus? Vis
mihi esse Medicus? Mecum quaere Medicum.
What art thou O man, but a sick man that must be healed? Will thou be my
Physician? Seek rather a Physician with me.

And as for that we were saying, that Pastors are said to do that which God
does by them, and that they administer the graces of God, not as Judges, but as
Ministers and Proclaimers of Gods grace; this is also the language of Fathers.
Chrysostom in the 86. Hom. upon John, (...).
What say I, the Priests? No, not an Angel, nor an Archangel, can do any thing
in the things that are given us of God, but Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
dispenses all. As for the Priest, he lends his tongue unto God, and gives him
his hand. And in the second Homily upon the second Epistle to Timothy, (...).
All comes from the grace of God. To him (that is to the Minister) it belongs
only to open his mouth. But it is God that does all. This does no more but
fulfill the signs.

And Ambrose in the fifth book upon Luke, upon the fifth Chapter. Quis enim
peccata potest dimittere nisi sotus Deus? qui per eos quoque dimittit, quibus
dimittendi tribuit potestatem.
Who is he that can forgive sins but God alone? Who also forgiveth them, by
those to whom he has given power to forgive. And as for the means whereby he
forgiveth, Hierom makes an enumeration of them in the sixth book upon Isaiah,
chap. 4. Funibus peccatorum suorum unusquisque constringitur. Quos funes and
vincula solvere possint and Apostoli imitantes Magistrum suum, qui eis dixit,
Quaecunque solveritis, etc. Solvunt autem eos Apostoli sermon Domini and
testimoniis scripturarum, and exhortatione virtutum.
Every one is kept bound with the cords of his sins: Which cords and bonds the
Apostles also can loose, imitating their Master who told them, Whatsoever you
shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Now the Apostles loose by the
word of God, and by the testimonies of Scriptures, and by exhorting to virtue.
In all this, neither he nor the other Fathers speak of Sacramental absolution,
nor of the authority of Priests to forgive sins with authority of Judges. And
whenever in their Sermons (by oratory amplifications, which are familiar to
Chrysostom) they exalt the power given to the Pastors of the Church, they speak
either of their power to impose, or to release Ecclesiastical censures, and to
exclude the sinner from the Church, or to reconcile him; or of their power to
exhort the Nations to the grace and remission of sins which is propounded in
the Gospel.

The ancient Church having no other absolution, but that which was done in
public after that the penitence was fulfilled, the custom was, when the
Penitent was reconciled unto the Church, and received to the Communion with the
imposition of hands of the Bishop, that the whole Church joined in prayers and
humiliation to obtain the grace of God, and the remission of sins for the
penitent, as Tertullian Presbyteriis advolvi, caris Dei adgeniculari, omnibus
fratribus legationes deprecationis suae injungere.
teaches in the book of Penitence, in the ninth chapter. And Sozomenus (...).
in the seventh book, chap. 16. where he relates with how many tears and
prayers, the Bishop and the people, with the Penitent, humbled themselves
before God to obtain pardon from his mercy. An evident proof that the Bishop
did not pronounce any judgment about the remission of sins before God, but did
the office of a suitour and suppliant before God, not that of a Judge, but only
as for the measure of Ecclesiastical pains, which were regulated by the
Ecclesiastical Canons. Of which nevertheless, the shortening was in the Bishops
power, and that shortning was called Indulgence. Note the old signification of
the word Indulgence.
A word which in our days is taken by a notorious abuse, for a shortening of
the pains of Purgatory by the Popes grant, employing for that the
superabounding satisfactions of Christ and his Saints, and of the Friars, which
he boasts to have in his keeping in the Churches treasury, whereof he
carries the Keys.

Besides that public custom, we can bring many examples, to show that for
blotting out sins before God, and reconciling the sinner unto God, the Bishops
behaved themselves as suppliants, not as Judges. In Basils life, fathered upon
Amphilochius, Tomo 2. Vitae Sanct. ab Aloisio Lipomanno edit. Venet. an. 1553.
fol. 298. Vita Patrum ab Her. Rosweido Edit. Antwerp. an. 1615. p. 160.
a woman presents her self unto Basil to obtain the remission of her sins. To
which Basil speaks thus, Did thou hear, O woman, that none can forgive sins
but God? To which that woman answers, Father I have learned it so, and
therefore I made my request to you, that you would intercede unto God for me.
And Austin toward the end of the 58. Treatise upon Saint John's Gospel,
speaking of the pardon of offenses which we obtain of men. Nostrum est, donante
ipso, ministerium charitatis and humilitatis adhibere. Illius est, exaudire ac
nos ab omni peccatorum co^taminatione mundare per Christum and in Christo, ut
quod aliis etiam dimittimus, hoc est, in terra solvimus, solvatur and in coelo.
It is our part, by his gift, to employ the Ministry of humility and charity.
And it is his part, to hear our prayers, and to cleanse us by Christ, and in
Christ, from all pollution of sin, that what we release unto others, that is,
what we loose on earth, may also be loosed in heaven.

Ambrose is express upon this, in the nineteenth chapter of the third book of
the Holy Ghost, Isti rogant, Divinitas donat: Humanum est obsequium, sed
munificentia supernae est potentiae.
They (meaning the Pastors) are praying, but the Godhead is giving. Unto man
it belongs to obey, but liberality belongs to the heavenly power.

Leo the I. about the year of the Lord 450. speaking of the Confession which
the Penitent make unto the Priests, says that Leo in fine Epist. 80. ad Episc.
Campaniae. Confessio Deo offertur tum etiam Sacerdoti, qui prodelictis
poenitentium precator accedit.
the Confession is sufficient which is first presented unto God, and then to
the Priest, who presents himself as a Petitioner for the sins of Penitents.

And whosoever shall look with a judicious eye, into all that is still done in the
Roman Church, shall find many traces whereby he may discover, that the custom
of saying, I absolve thee, in form of a sentence, is new, and that it is not
long since Absolution was given in form of a Petition. For in the extreme
Unction (which from a miraculous cure for the health of the body, is turned
into a Sacrament for the health of the soul) the Priest gives not absolution
otherwise then by praying, and speaking thus unto the sick, Absolutionem and
remissionem peccatorum tuorum tribuat tibi omnipotens pius and mise^icors Deus.
The Almighty, gracious, and merciful God, give thee the remission and
absolution of all thy sins. If at any time there is need of an absolution in
strong terms, and of a judicial sentence of pardon, it is especially upon the
point of death: Yet when the Priest contents himself to beseech God that he
would forgive the sinner, as acknowledging that it belongs not to him to
forgive. Thus when it is questioned, to reconcile an Heretic excommunicated,
and to take off the excommunication, The Bishop (after that by exorcism, and by
the sign of the Cross upon the Heretics forehead, he has conjured the Devil
that possessed that poor Heretic) says many prayers, whereby he prays to
God to receive the wandering sheep, and to give absolution to the miserable
strayed sinner, as it is exactly set down in the Roman Pontifical, Pontisicale
Romans Parisiis apud Rollinum Thierri, An. 1615.
in the chapter of the reconciliation of an Apostate Schismatic or Heretic.
And in the same book, in the chapter of the Solemn Office after the Mass of the
dead, there are many prayers whereby the Priest prays that God absolve the
soul of the deceased person, and blot out his sins. Which prayers in the same
place are called Page 39^. Absolutiones istas non semper in omnibus exequiis
fieri.
absolutions; Which is an evident trace of the custom of calling prayers
absolutions, before the Priests had taken upon them the authority of Judges,
pronouncing absolution with a judicial power.

In vain shall one reply, that these examples are taken from the absolutions
that are done out of the celebration of Sacraments: For the extreme Unction is
put by the Roman Church among the Sacraments. And as for the reconciliation
which they make of a sinner after excommunication, since it is made by virtue
of the Keys, the Prelates might speak with the like authority as in the
Sacrament of Penitence. Yea they may and ought to speak with more authority in
excommunications, relaxations, and censures, then in the Sacraments, because in
the Sacraments they are mere administrators. But as for the Ecclesiastical
discipline, they may pretend that God has constituted them Judges and
Dispensers with power of binding and loosing.

The ancient Roman order shows the same: For there the Priest gives absolution
in the form of a Prayer. And we find in the 21. Opuscul. of Thomas, that a
Doctor of the Roman Church in the time of Thomas maintained, that absolution
was not to be given in absolute terms, and in the form of a judicial sentence,
with an Indicative certitude, saying, I absolve thee* But that they ought to
say, God give thee absolution and remission of thy sins; as it is said in the
extreme Unction. He added that the custom of saying, Absolvote, etc. was new,
and but of thirty years standing, and that no example of that practice was
found in all Antiquity. He alleged for himself, Gulielmus Altissiodorensis,
and Gulielmus Parisiensis, and Hugo Cardinalis. Which opinion, Thomas confuteth
so, that he rather confirms it. For he flies always to that sentence,
Whosesoever sins ye forgive, etc. Presupposing without proof, that Christ
speaks there of the Sacramental absolution, and of a judicial absolution, not
of the power of binding and loosing, which is exercised out of the Sacraments
by the Ecclesiastical discipline, and by the preaching of the Gospel:
Perceiving not that the said power is gven to the Apostles, not only over those
that are of the Church, but also over Infidels and not baptized persons, as
many as shall be converted by the Gospel, to whom our Adversaries acknowledge
that this Sacramental absolution cannot be given. And still he takes the pardon
whereby a public Penitent is reconciled unto the Church for the pardon whereby
the sinner is absolved in Gods judgment. He says indeed, that the Priest
absolveth in Christ's person. But if it be so, the Priest ought to produce the
peculiar Commission which ^he has from Christ to forgive such a man. For that
general Commission, Whosesoever sins ye forgive, etc. is not enough, because we
know that God will not pardon hypocrites who have neither faith nor contrition;
which are things that the Priest knows not. Christ did not authorize him to
forgive in the quality of a Judge, without a true information of those things,
without the knowledge whereof a judgment cannot be just. So I believe not,
that the Priests of the Roman Church will grant him that, by saying, I absolve
thee, they speak in the person of Christ. They say indeed, that they forgive in
the authority of Christ, but not that they speak or pardon in the person of
Christ: As if a subject representing the King, spoke in his person, saying to a
Felon, I am your King, and I give you your grace. If it be so understood, the
Priest has no power to absolve, for then these words, I absolve thee, must be
so understood. It is Christ, not I, that absolveth thee. And in the same place
he says, that the power of the Keys absolveth from the sin, not as the
principal efficient cause, but as an instrument; in the same manner (says he)
as the water of Baptism by touching the body washes the heart, as Austin
says. Hereby Thomas does powerfully confirm the truth: For the water of
Baptism washes not the heart, and cleanses not sins: That praise is due to
the blood of Christ, and to the merit of his death, and to the efficacy of the
Spirit of sanctification. And if Austin has in some place spoken in such
Metaphorical terms, (as the connection of the discourse going before and after,
may show it) those Metaphorical terms have no force to establish a new doctrine
in the Church.

That the Doctor against whom Thomas writes, spoke true when he said, that the
power which the Priests challenge of pardoning with authority of Judges, and
really to absolve the sinner with a judicial sentence, was but new, it
appears by that which Lombard, the master of Thomas, and his senior by few
years, writes of that matter in the fourth book of sentences, Did. 4. Litera
D. Filius irae esse desiit, ex quo diligere and poenitere coepit. Exhinc ergo
solutus est ab ira, quae non manet super illum qui credit in Christum, sed
super illum qui non credit. Non ergo postmodum per sacerdotem, cui confitetur,
ab aeterna ira liberatur, a qua jam liberatus est per Dominum, ex quo dixit
Confitebor, etc. Item Ambrosius, Verbum Domini peccata dimittit, Sacerdos est
judex, Sacerdos quidem officium exhibet, sed nullius potestatis jura exercet.
Idem ille solus peccata dimittit, qui solus pro peccatis nostris mortuus est.
These are his words, He left to be a child of wrath, ever since he began to
have love and to repent. From that time then he is free from wrath, which
abides not upon him that believes in Christ, but upon him that believes not.
After that then, he is not delivered from the eternal wrath by the Priest to
whom he confesses, being already delivered from it by the Lord, when he said,
I will confess. For none but God can cleanse man within from the spot of sin.
None delivers him from the debt of eternal death, but he that said by the
Prophet, I alone blot out the iniquities and the sins of the people: And so
Ambrose, The Word of God remitteth sins, the Priest is Judge. The Priest indeed
does his Office, but he does not exercise the right of any power. And the same,
He alone forgiveth sins, who alone is dead for our sins. And Austin, None takes
away sins but the only God, who is the Lamb that takes away the sins of the
world.

Observe that he calls the Priest a Judge, but he adds, that the said Judge
has no right or power to Judge; that is, that in effect he is no Judge.

The same Doctor in the letters E and F, Hoc sane dicere and senti^e possumus,
quod solus De^s dimittit peccata and retinet, and tamen Ecclesiae contulit
potestatem ligandi and solvendi, sed aliter ipse solvit and ligat, aliter
Ecclesia. Ipse enim per se tantum dimittit peccatum, qui and animam mundat ab
interiori macula, and a debito aeternae mortis solvit. Non autem hoc
sacerdotibus concessit, quibus tamen tribuit potestatem solvendi and ligandi,
id est, ostendendi homines ligatos vel solutos. Unde Dominus leprosum sanitati
prius per se restituit, deinde ad sacerdotes misit, quorum judicio ostenderetur
muadatus. Ita etiam Lazarum jam vivificatum obtulit discipulis solvendum. Quia
et si aliquis apud Deum sit solutus, non tamen in facie Ecclesiae solutus
habetur, nisi per judicium sacerdotis.
Truly we can say and believe that God alone forgiveth and retains sins, and
yet he has given power of binding and loosing unto the Church. But he and the
Church do not bind in the same manner. For he alone remitteth sins by himself,
who both cleanses the soul from the inward stain, and freeth it from the debt
of eternal death. Now he gave not that power to the Priests, to whom
nevertheless he gave the power of binding and loosing, that is, to show that
men are bound or loosed. Wherefore the Lord first by himself restored health
unto the Leper, and after that sent him to the Priests, that by their judgment
he might be declared clean. Likewise also, having already quickened Lazarus, he
presented him to his Disciples to be loosed. Because although a man be loosed
before God, yet he is not accounted to be leosed in the face of the Church,
unless he be loosed by the judgment of the Priest. He speaks with good reason,
for after reconciliation with God, the excommunicated sinner must satisfy the
Church, that he may be loosed from the bonds of Ecclesiastical discipline. The
effect of his discourse is, that the contrite sinner is already absolved,
before the Priest absolve him: And that the Priest loses the sinner, that is,
he declares that God has loosed him. And that he proves by Hieroms testimony
upon Matthew. 16. Whatsoever thou bindest on earth, etc. Bishops and Priests
(says Hierom) not understanding this text, take upon them I know not what of
the Pharisees pride, thinking that they can condemn the innocent and loose the
guilty: Whereas with God, the Priests sentence is not requisite, but the life
of the guilty. And in Leviticus a Commandment is made to the Lepers, to show
themselves unto the Priests, which Priests do not make them to be either clean
or Lepers, but only they discern those that are clean and those that are
unclean. Whereby it is made evident, that God follows not always the judgment
of the Church, which often judges by subreption or ignorance. But God judges
always according unto truth. And in matter of pardoning or retaining sins, the
Priests of the Gospel have the same right and office, as the Priests of the Law
had in old time under the Law, as for the cure of Lepers. And by consequent
they forgive sins, in as much as they judge and show that God has forgiven or
retained sins. Lombard adds, that besides this way of loosing (which is
nothing else but declaring that such an one has given such testimonies of his
repentance, that there is reason to believe that God has loosed him, and
forgiven him) there is another way of loosing, namely by reconciling the sinner
unto the Church, and restoring him to the Communion, Hier. in Matthew. 16. prout
citatur a Lombardo. Vide and Hier. in Levit. 14. Et Can. Omnis and Can.
Convenimus Did. 1. de Poenitentia.
after he has satisfied the Church by penitence. But he holds that if he be
truly penitent before that reconciliation to the Church, he was already
reconciled with God.

Alexander Hales, famous among the Schoolmen, was of the same opinion as
Lombard. These are his words, Alex. Hales Sum. Par. 4 qu. 21. memb 1. Paris
potestatis est intus baptizare and a culpa mortali absolvere. Sed Deus non
debuit potestatem baptizandi interius communicare, ne spes poneretur in homine.
Ergo pari ratione nec potestatem absolvendi ab actuali.
They are things of equal power, to baptize inwardly, and to give absolution
from a mortal sin. Now God ought not to communicate [unto man] the power of
baptizing inwardly, least that [men] should put their confidence in man. Then
by the like reason he did not [impart unto man] the power of absolving from
actual sin.

Let us hear what Pope Adrian the VI. says of this. He writ about the year,
1500. being not yet Pope: For Popes spend not their time about making Books.
And I make no doubt, but that when he was made Pope, he altered his opinion.
For a man that brings in question the power of the Keys to forgive sins,
should not have been suffered in the Papal See, and himself should have
overthrown his See. These are then his words in the fifth Quodlibetical
Question, Difficultas magna est inter Doctores, an claves sacerdotii se
extendant ad culpae remissionem, and certe probatissimi Theologi senserunt quod
non. Magister sent. did. 18. in 4. lib. dicit, Sacerdotibus non concessit Deus
potestatem culpam dimittendi seu ligandi, sed ostendendi homines esse ligatos
and solutos, etc.
There is a great difficulty among the Doctors, whether the Keys of Priesthood
reach as far as the remission of the fault. And truly, the most approved
Divines have been for the Negative. The Master of the Sentences in the
eighteenth Distinction of the fourth book, says that God has not granted unto
Priests the power of forgiving the fault, nor that of binding, but to show that
men are bound or loose. Wherefore the Ecclesiastical, Priest, for the point of
remitting or loosing sins, does the same thing as the Priest of the Law did
toward Lepers, and these are originally the words of Hierom, handling this
text, Matthew. 16. Whatsoever thou shall bind, etc.

Item Doctor Irrefragabilis, part 4. qu. 80. Sacerdotis potestas se extendit
ad culpam delendam per modum deprecantis, sed per modum impertientis vel
imperantis nequaquam. Unde dicit, Sacerdos enim nunquam tentaret absolvere eum,
de quo non praesumeret quod esset absolutus a Deo. Concludens potestatem
clavium ad culpam delendam se non extendere, etc.
Also the irrefragable Doctor, in part 4. question 8. The power of the Priest
(says he) extends it self to blot out the sin only by way of petitioning, not
by way of giving or commanding. Wherefore also he says, that the Priest would
never undertake to absolve him, whom he did not presume to be absolved by God:
Concluding, that the power of the Keys extends not to the blotting out of sin.
And as for the text of John 20. Whosesoever sins ye forgive, etc. he says that
it must be understood as for the true remission, or obligation to the pain, or
as for the manifestation or showing of the fault. To which the interlineary
Gloss seems to allude, saying in the same place, That is, those whom you
shall judge worthy of remission, namely by the two Keys of power and
discretion. Bonaventure seems to be of the same opinion in the eighteenth
Distinction of the fourth Book. And truly that seems to be probable: For the
same power was given to the Priests, both to retain and to remit sins. Now it
is manifest that they cannot retain a true penitents fault. How then could they
pardon the sins of a true Penitent? And how then could they pardon a man's sins
that does not repent worthily enough? Yet because other Doctors probably
maintain the contrary, saying that a Sacramental penitence, like a second plank
after Shipwreck, confers sometimes the first grace, opere operato, I leave that
undecided as a probable question.

I will shut up this Chapter by a place of Austin, in the 23. of the fifty
Sermons, where that holy man speaks of that woman of ill life, Luke 7. who came
to Christ when he was at the Table in a Pharisees house, and began to water the
Lords feet with her tears, and wipe them with her hair, that she might obtain
the pardon of her sins. Whereupon Austin speaks thus;

Tenete, quia homo non potest peccata dimittere. Illa quae sibi a Christo
peccata dimitti credidit, Christum non hominem tantum sed and Deum credidit.
Take this for a maxim, that man cannot forgive sins. This woman that believed
that Christ did forgive her sins, believed that Christ was not only man, but
God also. And a little after, Futuri erant homines, qui dicerent, ego peccata
dimitto, ego justifico.
Some men were to come that should say, I forgive sins, I justify, I
sanctify, I heal all whom I Baptize, etc. Sed in eo Pharisaeus melior, quia
cumputaret hominem Christum, non putabat ab homine posse dimitti peccata.
Melior ergo Judaeis quam haereticis apparuit intellectus. Judaei dixerunt, Quis
est hic qui etiam peccata dimittit? Audet sibi homo hoc usurpare? Quid contra
haereticus? Ego dimitto, ego mundo.
But in that the Pharisee was better then they, because that thinking him to be
a man, he believed not that a man could remit sins. The Jews then seem to have
had more understanding [in this point] then the Heretics. The Jews said, Who
is this that forgiveth sins? Dare a man usurp that [authority?] But what says
the Heretic against that? I forgive sins, I cleanse, I sanctify, etc.
Respondent and dicunt, Si non dimittunt homines peccata, falsum est quod ait
Christus, Quae solveritis in terra, soluta erunt in coelo. Nescis quare hoc
dictum sit? Quomodo dictum sit? Daturus erat Dominus hominibus Spiritum
Sanctum, etc.
The Heretics answer and say, If men do not forgive sins, that which Christ
said is false, All that you loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. To that
Austin answers, Do thou not know why that is said, and how it was said? The
Lord would give the Holy Ghost unto men, and would have it understood that it
is by the Holy Ghost that sins are forgiven unto the faithful, not by the merit
of men. For who art thou O man, but a sick man that must be healed? Will thou
be my Physician? Seek a Physician with me, etc. It is the Spirit, not you, that
forgiveth. Now the Spirit is God: God then pardons, not you.

Behold then the substance of our belief, and the language of our Pastors to
the confessing sinner, that shows signs of true repentance. We say not to
him, I absolve thee from all thy sins; nor, I forgive thee. But since thou have
a true repentance of thy sins, I declare unto thee that God forgiveth thee thy
sins by Jesus Christ. Believe in Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; I
announce unto thee the remission of thy sins for Christ's sake. It belongs not
unto me to absolve thee in Gods judgment: For Pastors are only Messengers of
the Grace of God, and Ministers of reconciliation. Yea I say unto thee, that
before thou came to me, to declare unto me the contrition of thy heart, God
had already forgiven thee. For, he forgiveth all them that turn to him with a
true heart. Yet because thou have given scandal to the Church, thou must be
reconciled with the Church, and give her satisfaction by public repentance,
and so be received to the Churches Communion. For God has given to the Pastors
of his Church the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, that is, the government of
his Church, and the power of binding sinners by Ecclesiastical censures, and of
loosing them, by taking off the said censures, and reconciling the sinner, cut
off from the Communion: Which judgments God promises to ratify in heaven; so
that he that is bound on earth by the judgment of Pastors, is judged in Gods
counsel to be tied and bound to that Ecclesiastical punishment.

For this we receive no money, and take nothing for confessions, and neither
before nor after the reconciliation, do we impose any, either corporal or
pecuniary pain: Very glad that God has made use of us to bring the sinner to
the right way again.

The purity and holiness of that proceeding, grounded upon the holy Scripture,
and conformable unto the practice of the ancient Church (but only in the
length, and the diverse degrees of public penitence) will be much more evident,
when we have laid open the strange abuses wherewith the absolution and
remission of sins is defiled in the Roman Church.

CHAP. 5. Of the Abuse of the Keys, and of Absolution, both that which is
called Sacramental, and that which is given without the Sacrament.
IN the building of Popery, there is scarce any place where Satan has more
powerfully labored, and more disfigured the Doctrine of the Gospel, then in
the use of the Keys, and in the remission of sins, and in the absolutions
which the Priests and the Pope confer.

It is already a great abuse, as we have proved, and a bold undertaking, that
sinful men take upon them to pardon sins with authority of Judges, bearing
themselves as Judges in Gods cause, and usurping a power which the Apostles
never practiced, and of which no example is found in the Word of God. But how
many more abuses are joined with that?

I. Let us set in the front the unlimited and Sovereign power usurped by the
Pope to forgive sins: Upon which, all the power that Bishops and Priests have
to forgive sins, is made to depend. That power is thus described by Thomas the
Angelick Doctor whom the Pope has Sainted. Thom. 21. Opusc. cap. 10. Cum enim
summus Pontifex sit caput in corpore mystico omnium fidelium Christi, and a
capite sit omnis motus and sensus in corpore vero, sic etiam in proposito.
Propter quod oportet dicere in summo Pontifice esse plenitudinem omnium
gratiarum, quia ipse solus consert plenam indulgentiam omnium peccatorum: Ut
competat sibi quod de primo Principe Domino dicimus, quia de plenitudine ejus
nos omnes accepimus.
Seeing that the High Priest is the Head in the mystical body of all the
faithful [members] of Christ, and seeing that in a true body, all the motion
and sense proceeds from the head, so it is in the thing now in hand. Wherefore
we must say, that in the High Priest there is fullness of all graces, because he
alone conferreth a full indulgence of all sins. So that to him is convenient,
that which we say of the first Prince who is the Lord, that of his fullness we
have all received, John 1.16. Which Papal power he stretches even over the
temporal of Kingdoms. And hereupon he accuses Christ of importunity, saying,
that Unde Dominus utitur in Johanne quadam importuna interrogatione, ter
quaerens a successore suo beato Petro, quod si ipsum diligit, gregem pascat.
in the Gospel according to Saint John, the Lord makes a troublesome
interrogation, asking of his successor Saint Peter, that if he love him he
would feed his sheep. If we must believe this Doctor, Christ ought to have
abstained from that importunity, and given more respect to his successor. The
Pope then having (according to Thomas) fullness of grace and power to give full
pardon of all sins, so that of his fullness we all receive; no wonder that in
the distribution of that fullness of graces he keeps some for himself. So far,
that he is judge in his own cause, and dispensing himself from the vows which
he made unto God, as the Jesuit Eman. Sa, Aphor. Confess. in verbo Papa. Papa
potest esse judex in causa propria, and absolvere ab obligatione, qua quis
homini tenetur, and secum ut volet dispensare.
Emanuel Sa teaches, in his Aphorisms. Yea, as Bellarmine says against
Barcklay, He can in good sense make sin to be no sin, and no sin to be sin.
Having (as the last Council of Laterane says) Ult. Conc. Later. Sess. 10.
all power both in heaven and earth.

II. Having then reserved unto himself the power of remitting sins without any
reservation or exception, he has limited the power of Bishops and Priests to
certain cases, which they cannot overpass, but upon the point of the penitents
death. Murder, perjury, sacrilege, blasphemy, witchcraft, invocation of
Devils, and eating flesh on the week before Easter, are cases reserved to the
Bishop or his Penitentiary, and are above the power of Priests. Yet the Pope
has granted so many privileges to some Confessors, to the Jesuits
especially, that the Bishops have almost nothing reserved to themselves. And
the Doctors are not agreed about these cases. It is not yet decided, Whether
playing at Dice over ones own fathers grave, or cutting a Priests purse while
he is lifting up the Host, or pissing in the Holy Water, or cutting the staff
of Saint Francis into a game of nine-pins, be cases reserved to the Bishop.

III. But besides the sins of which Priests and Bishops can absolve, there are
crimes of an higher nature reserved unto the Pope alone, and passing the power
of the Bishops. These cases are numbered in the Bull de Coena Domini, where we
find the form of Excommunication, that the Pope thundereth out every year upon
the Thursday before Easter, which he ratifieth by casting down a burning
candle. There all, that are guilty of the cases reserved unto the Pope, are
excommunicated. Among others, they that appeal from the Pope to the future
Council. The Pirates that rob the Seacoasts of the Popes territories from
mount Argentario to Terracina. The forgers of Apostolical Letters. They that
carry arms to Heretics. They that stop the Victualers bringing provision to
the Popes Court. They that kill a Prelate. They that raise tenths upon the
Clergy, or usurp the rights of the Church, as Kings and their Chancellors, and
their Courts of Parliament, for they are specified by these names in the Bull.
They that oppose the reception of the Council of Trent. They that stay or
molest the Romipets, that is, the Pilgrims, going to Rome to get pardons. These
are the horrible crimes, the absolution whereof is reserved unto his Holiness.
For of the less crimes, as Murder, Sodomy, Incest, Witchcraft, Bishops give
Absolution. Priests will commonly give the absolution of fornication and theft,
but not of eating flesh in the holy Week, which yet is the Week in which Christ
ate a Lamb with his Disciples.

IV. Here words are wanting to describe the grievousness of the disease.
Suppose that the Pope is Peter's successor, in the quality of Apostle, and Head
of the Church, as if we presupposed that a circle has angles: Yet it is not
found that Peter reserved certain cases unto himself, of which the other
Apostles could not absolve: Nor that he reserved to the Apostles certain cases,
of which ordinary Pastors could not give absolution. For Peter knew that Christ
had spoken to all the Apostles alike, when he said, Whatsoever you shall bind
on earth, shall be bound in heaven, Matthew. 18.18. And whose soever sins you
forgive, they shall be forgiven, Joh. 20.23. And if the power of the Apostles
had no limitation in this point, why should their successors have a limited
power: Why must the charge which Christ gave them without exception, be
restrained in their respect. Why shall the Bishop of Rome be successor of
Peter's illimited power, and the successors of other Apostles, shall not be
successors of the power which the Apostles had without limitation, and without
cases reserved unto Saint Peter?

V. Hence also it is made evident, that the power given unto the Apostles to
forgive sins, depended not on that of Saint Peter; and that Saint James and
Saint Paul did not forgive sins by Saint Peter's concession, or by dependence on
his authority, since Christ gave to them all immediately the like authority to
forgive: as Paul calls himself an Apostle not of men, neither by man, but by
Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.1.

VI. It is true that the Fathers of the Council of Trent in the fourteenth
Session, chap. 7. ground that reservation of certain cases upon a text of Romans
13. where they make the Apostle say, Quae a Deo sunt, ordinata sunt: The things
that are of God, are ordered or set in order; Whence they infer, that the
higher powers must reserve to themselves something above the inferior powers.
But that text is falsely alleged, and corrupted both in words and sense. In
the words, for there is according to the Greek, (...).
The powers that are in being, are established or ordained by God. And so the
French Bible of the Doctors of Lovain translates it. In the sense, for in this
place Paul speaks of Princes, and of the civil or secular power which bears
the sword; and speaks not of order or rank among Princes or highers powers, but
says only, that God has established and ordained them. And though the text
said that among higher powers there must be order or dependence the one on the
other, it would not thence follow that the power of forgiving sins in the
Sacrament of penitence must be greater in some then in others; For the
Sacraments change not nature according to the quality of persons, no more then
the preaching of the Gospel, as it is seen in Baptism.

VII. The Pope was not contented with that. For of the satisfactions which
Priests impose before or after absolution, he may release what he pleases, and
dispense from them by Indulgence. The Priest will impose to a penitent for a
satisfactory pain, to say so many prayers, to fast so many days, to go to such
a place on pilgrimage, to give so much alms to Monks. If these penances are
ill, the Priest ought not to have enjoined them; if they be good, the Pope
ought not to dispense with them. It belongs not to him to exempt the sinner
from doing penance, since our Adversaries ground the necessity of those
penances upon Gods command. Bellar. l. 4. de poen. cap. 13. Indulgentiae
faciunt, ut pro poenis quae nobis per indulgentiam condonantur, non teneamur
praecepto illo de faciendis dignis poenitentiae fructibus.
Bellarmin fears not to say, that, Indulgences make, that as for the pains
which are remitted to us by the Indulgences, we are not obliged to obey that
commandment of God, ^o do fruits worthy of repentance. By the same indulgence
the sinner cease to be obliged to fulfill the rule that says, Verily I say
unto thee, thou shall not come out thence, until thou have paid the utmost
farthing. For our Adversaries understand that text of the satisfactory pain in
Purgatory.

VIII. The terms used by the Priests in absolution, are considerable. The
Jesuit Emanuel Sa in the word Absolutio sets down all the solemn words, and the
whole form, saying that the wise speak thus when they give absolution. Our Lord
Jesus Christ absolve thee, and I in his authority absolve thee, first from the
sentence of excommunication, as far as I can, and thou need. Next I absolve
thee from thy sins, in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, Amen. Passio Domini nostri Jesu Christi, and merita B. Mariae and omnium
sanctorum, and quicquid boni feceris, and mali patienter sustinueris, sint tibi
in remissionem peccatorum, and in augmentum gratiae and praemium vitae aeternae.
The passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the merits of the Blessed Mary, and
of all the Saints, and all the good that thou shall do, and all the evil which
thou shall patiently suffer, be unto thee for remission of sins, and
augmentation of grace, and for the reward of eternal life, Amen. The same words
are related by Cardinal Tolet in the third book of the Instruction of Priests
chap. 11. This way of absolution is but new, and the Gospel says nothing of
it. The Gospel speaks of the remission of our sins by Jesus Christ; saying
that, Whosoever believes on him shall receive remission of sins through his
name; And that God has quickened us together with Christ, having freely
forgiven given us all our offenses. But that our sins are forgiven us by the
merit of the Saints, the Word of God says not. Neither does that Holy Word
speak of attaining to the reward of eternal life by the merits of Saints, or by
our own. That absolution cannot be done in faith, since it is not grounded on
the word of God. If the passion of Christ be sufficient to purchase for me the
remission of my sins; What need I to add unto it the merit of men, who stood in
need that their sins should be forgiven them by Jesus Christ?

IX. To make the abuse more gross, the Priest giving the absolution, imposes
penances or satisfactory pains which the Council of Trent calls Sess. 14. cap.
8. Ad praeteritorum peccatorum vindictam.
revenges. So the Priest does wholly forgive the sin, and yet at the same
instant he imposes punishments of the same sin. He takes revenge of sins
forgiven: As if he said, I forgive thee, but thou shall be punished, for I have
forgiven thee thy sin, but not the pain of sin. By this means Priests loose the
sinner by the absolution, and send him back bound by the obligation to a
satisfactory pain; which pain if the penitent bears not, and subjects not
himself to it, he eludeth (as much as in him lies) the sentence of the Priest,
and being more crafty then his Confessor, makes use of the absolution, and
rejects the conditions under which he received it. All that without authority
of Gods word, who gives not that power to Pastors to lay corporal or pecuniary
pains upon the sinner. And against the Lords example, who sending back the
woman taken in adultery, said to her only, Go and sin no more. John 8.11.
without imposing any penance upon her. And against the example of the Apostle
St. Paul who receiving the incestuous man to the peace of the Church of
Corinth, 2 Cor. 2.7. and 10. lays no corporal or pecuniary penance upon him:
And against the example of all the ancient Church, which had no other
absolution but the public, and made with good reason the fulfilling of the
satisfaction to the Church to march before the absolution and reconciliation
with the Church, But in our days the Confessors give the absolution before the
sinner has fulfilled the enjoined penances, because they are paid presently
after the absolution; for if the sinner were to fulfill the penances before the
absolution, that would keep back the payment. If this were in fashion, I make
no doubt but that Confessors would impose short satisfactions, that they might
be quickly paid.

X. Here is worse yet; For sometimes Priests will give absolution before they
know whether the penitent will accept of the satisfactory pain that shall be
imposed upon him. As Cardinal Tolet says in the third book of the instruction
of Priests chap. 12. Observe that the absolution must not be given but after
the penance imposed and accepted. Cum tamen probabile scit Confessarius
poenitentem accepturum, non est inconveniens praecedere absolutionem.
Yet when the Confessor probably knows that the penitent shall accept the
satisfaction, there is no inconvenience to make the absolution go before.

Here it were good to know whether the absolution be valid, when the penitent
having received absolution, and coming afterward to consider the nature of the
satisfaction imposed on him, declares to the Priest, that he cannot accept of
it, and will not fulfill those penances, nor subject himself to them in any
wise.

XI. Sometimes also Priests give absolution without enjoining any satsfaction,
as Bellar. l. ^. Indulg. c. 7. Paludanus testatur a Bonifaci^ VIII. suisse
prohibitum poenitentiarium, ne consitentibus peccata anno illo Jubilei
satisfactiones injungeret. Acts 10. John 3.
Bellarmin says. Which is another abuse, For so the Sacrament of Penitence is
administered without penitence, and a reconciliation is made without
satisfaction, which satisfaction according to natural order, and the ancient
custom, ought to go before absolution. For even among men satisfaction must be
made to the offended party before he can obtain pardon. But these Gentlemen
will persuade themselves that God will approve of a pardon without penitence,
and without satisfaction. Or that he shall like, that sins be pardoned to a
sinner before he has satisfied.

XII. There is no less abuse in that doctrine of theirs, that the absolution
which the penitent has received from the Priest is void, if the Priest that
conferred it had no intention to confer it. A doctrine which makes of
absolution an illusion, and fills the penitents mind with uncertainty, since it
depends on a conjectural condition, upon which the repenting soul can fix no
assurance.

But that doctrine is directly opposite to the doctrine of the Gospel. For it
makes the benefit of Christ's merit and the remission of sins purchased by his
death to depend upon a Priests intention. For this maxim of the Gospel is true
of any man that has true repentance and seeks salvation in Christ, that
believing in Christ he has remission of sins and eternal life. Shall the want
of intention in a Priest make the grace of Christ to the sinner of none effect?
Or shall the hypocrisy of a confessor who believes not what he does, and has
a profane intention to deride Religion, make the promise of the Gospel void?
Christ knew the hypocrisy of Judas, yet he sent him to announce remission of
sins by the Gospel; Which Christ would not have done, had he known that the
hypocrisy of Judas would have made the Sacraments which he administered of no
use. Truly the Word of God, and the promise of absolution of sins are
effectual, not according to the intention of the man that propounds it, but
according to the disposition of the person that receives it. The Word of God
says, that the man that believes is saved, not he that is absolved by one
that believes, or by one that has an intention to effect what he says. Yea I
dare say, that if Satan being changed into an Angel of light, should preach the
truth of the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments, the condition of a man that
should believe in Christ by his word, should be better then of him that out of
unbelief should reject the word of an Apostle.

XIII. To make the abuse worse, they separate the power of giving Absolution
from the preaching of the Gospel. For the true Office of Priests is to preach
the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments. But in the Roman Church, a Priest
cannot absolve, unless he have an especial privilege, and some Priests give
absolution that preach not: Bishops that preach not, and the Pope among others,
give absolution. For they hold that the power of absolving, is a point of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which depends not on the order of Priesthood,
Note.
nor on the nature of Episcopacy, but on the Popes power, who imparteth to such
as he pleases, such part of that power as he thinks good. Hence it is, that
even a Layman, yea a woman can bolt out excommunications by the Popes
Commission.

XIV. Likewise there is a great abuse in this assertion of their Doctors, that
by virtue of the Keys, attrition becomes contrition. They call attrition a
sorrow for sin, proceeding only from the fear of punishment, but contrition, a
sorrow for sin, proceeding from the love of God. The one is a servile grief,
the other is a filial sorrow. Is it credible, that the Keys have the virtue to
make vices to become virtues? For the grief for sinning, moved only by the
apprehension of the punishment that attends it, is evil, and proceeds not from
the Spirit of adoption. A man must repent for such a repentance. It is a
forced, not a willing obedience. God is merciful to such a Penitent, if he
forgive his penitence, and punish him not for his obedience.

XV. The abuse also is evident, in that absolutions are given by others, and by
subdelegate persons, as if sins could be forgiven by Attorney. As the Jesuit
Emanuel Sa Eman. Sa, Apho. 4. Confess. in Verbo Absolutio, Art. 4. Absolvere
potest Episcopus per se vel per alium. Idem in verbo Episcopus. Oportet
Episcopum esse Doctorem, id est, populum suum docere. Quod si non praedicat,
ipse dabit suis sumptibus praedicatorem.
says, the Bishop can absolve, either by himself, or by others, them that are
subject unto him by right, etc.

Bishops do for the Sacrament of Penitence, what they do for preaching the
Gospel. For every Bishop is obliged to preach, either by himself or by another.
Some Bishops being incapable to preach, because they are yet children, or
because they are without learning, they preach by others. It is well for them
if in the day of Judgment they may be admitted to give account by others, and
to appear by Attorney. How should they like it, if they were condemned to dine
by others, and to fast in their own person? But why could not a Priest giving
absolution by the Bishops Commission, give it of himself, and in his name,
without borrowing another man's name?

XVI. What shall we say of the dishonest gain, which the Clergy sets up under
color of confessions and absolutions? It is one of the prime revenues of
ordinary Parsons. As if they said, Pay me, for I have forgiven thee thy sins.
Is it not a reasonable demand? But all that the Priests do, is nothing compared
to that the Pope does, and to the gain which he reapeth from the remission of
sins. As his hands are longer, he sweeps far more, and his rapines are
answerable to his greatness. Would one insist upon that matter, he might make a
great book of it. The Book of the Apostolic Chancery shows so much. That
book made by a Dotary, Receiver of the casual revenues of the Pope, has made a
great discovery of the mystery of iniquity. Among other Articles, there is the
Chapter of Absolutions, Taxa Cancel. Apostolicae excusa Parisiis in vico sancti
Jacobi ad crucem ligneam prope Sacellum Divi Juonis apud Tossanum Denis 1520.
cum privilegio. Absolutio pro eo qui in Ecclesia cognovit mulierem, and alia
mala commisit, gros. 6. Absolutio pro eo qui matrem, sororem, etc. carnaliter
cognovit, gros. 5. Absolutio pro eo qui defloravit virginem, gros. 6. Absolutio
pro perjurio, gros. 6. Absolutio pro eo qui revelavit confessionem alterius,
gros. 7. Absolutio pro eo qui falsificavit literas Apostolicas, gros. 17. vel.
18. Absolutio and dispensatio super homicidia, etc. gros. 18. Absolutio pro eo
qui interfecit patrem, matrem, etc. gros. 5.
where these words are found, The Absolution for him that has known a woman in
the Church, and committed other evils, costs six groats. The absolution for him
that has carnally known his mother, his sister, or another kinswoman of his,
five groats. The absolution for him that has defloured a Virgin, six groats.
The absolution for a perjury, six groats. The absolution for him that has
revealed the Confession of another, seven groats. The absolution for him that
has falsified Apostolical letters, seventeen or eighteen groats. The
absolution for a man and a woman who during the time of the Interdict, have
carried away some dead bodies to bury them, nine groats. And in the 38. leaf,
The absolution for him that has killed his father or his mother, etc. costs
five or seven groats. Those groats are worth four pence, like our English
groats. But in the end of the Book the taxes are raised, and groats are turned
into Ducates. In the 32. leaf mention is made of a kind of letters called
Confessional, whereby the Pope grants leave to a man to choose in the hour of
death a Confessor, that gives full pardon of all sins. But the Author says
that this is granted but to Princes, and with great difficulty. Every one
knows that in Spain, none can have absolution at Easter without buying the
Papal Bull, which costs two Realls for every man. Many example, I could bring
to the same purpose. But the example of Pope Boniface the IX. whose life is
written by his Secretary Theodoricus a Niem will serve for all. In the first
Book of schism, chap. 68. he says Ad diversa regna misit quaestuarios vendendo
dictam Indulgentiam offerentibus tantum quantum essent expensuri in via, si
propterea irssent ad urbem, etc. Omnia peccata etiam sine poenitentia ipsis
confitentibus relaxarunt; Super quibusdam irregularitatibus dispensarunt
interventu pecuniae, dicentes se omnem potestatem habere super hoc, quam
Christus Petro ligandi and solvendi contulisset in terris.
that the said Boniface sent Collectors to several Kingdoms, who fold the
Indulgences, taking from the buyers as much money, as they should have spent to
fetch them at Rome. And he says that the same Collectors remitted all sins to
all that confessed themselves without penitence; and dispensed with some
irregularities for money, saying, that for that they had the same power of
binding and loosing on earth, as Christ had given to Peter. This Pope is the
Inventor of Annates; The same Pope (as the same Theodorick his Secretary
relates) being at the point of death, Lib. 2. Schism. c. 11. Cuidam
interroganti ab eo in ultimo constituto qualiter se haberet aut sentiret?
respondens ait si pecunias haberem, been starem.
and being demanded how he did, answered, I should be well if I had money.

Antonine Archbishop of Florence, whom the Pope has Sainted, in the third part
of his Chronicles 22. Title, upon the year 1388. speaks thus of that Pope,
Tempore hujus Bonifacii infamis curia habebatur de labe Simoniae, ut beneficia
non tam meritis conferrentur quam plures pecunias offerentibus. Et replevit
orbem terrarum Indulgentiis plenariis ita ut parvae Ecclesiae in suis
festivitatibus parvo pretio eas obtinerent.
In his time the Roman Court was very infamous for Simony. Benefices were
conferred, not so much according to merits, as according to the greater sums
of money that were offered. He filled the world with plenary Indulgences. So
that small Churches in their feasts obtained them for little money. That Pope
dyed in the year 1404.

About four and fifty years after him, Aeneas Sylvius of Siena was chosen Pope,
and was called Pius the II. That Pope in the 66. Epistle to John Peregal speaks
thus, Nihil est quod absque argento Romana curia dedat, ipsa manuum impositio
and Spiritus Sancti dona venduntur, nec peccatorum venia nisi nummatis
impenditur.
The Roman Court gives nothing without money, even the laying on of hands and
the gifts of the Holy Ghost are sold, and the remission of sins is not imparted
but to them that have money. If this witness may not be believed, I know not
who may. And truly to make of a Bishop who at the first had no revenue at all,
a Prince that has above thirty thousand Ducates a day to spend, there was need
of ravening lustily, of making great prizes with Saint Peter's net, and using
the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven to open many chests. For this the Cardinal
and Jesuit Tollet gives a gallant excuse. In the fifth Book of the Instruction
of Priests, in chap. 89. he speaks thus of the gain which the Pope gathers from
absolutions and dispensations, Dico non esse murmurandum contra Papam, quod
exigit pro his pecunias, non per modum pretii, nam ista ad sustentationem
dantur, qua multum indiget tanta in Ecclesia dignitas.
I say, that we must not murmr against the Pope, who exacteth money for these
things, not in form of price of salary; for these things are given for his
entertainment: Of which such a great dignity in the Church has great need.
Indeed, he that raises armies, who has guards of Switzers, and of Troops of
horse, is obliged to make a great expense, which among other profits, is
maintained by the remission of sins. See Navarrus, in the title of Penitence
and Remission, in the 18. Council, where he maintains that the Pope has well
done to grant the remission of all sins, even of reserved cases, for one
Giulio, which is the tenth part of a Ducate. His reason is, Papa non puri
hominis sed very Dei vicem gerit i^ terris ut est in Can. Quan^o, adeo quod
Glossa ejus a^, non potest dici ei, c^r ita facis?
because the Pope holds the place on earth, not of a man simply, but of the
true God, and that none can say to him, Why do thou that? He should have
said, What will become of the poor that is not worth a Giulio? Shall he have
that punishment of his poverty (as if it were a crime) to be deprived of that
Spiritual grace?

XVII. That power of absolving extends even to the dead: Whereof we have an
instance in the letters of homage and subjection of John King of England, which
we shall hereafter produce: whereby, to obtain of Innocent the III. the
remission of sins both for himself and his deceased friends, he subjecteth his
Kingdom unto him, and promises to pay a thousand marks of silver to his
Holiness. The Book of the Apostolic Chancery shows the same. The title of
the Chapter is, De absolutionibus mortuorum. Of the absolutions of the dead. In
the forty one leaf these words are found, Pro mortuo excommunicato, pro quo
supplicant consanguinei, litera absolutionis venit, Duc. 1. Carol. 9.
For a dead man excommunicated, for whom his friends are petitioning, the
letter of absolution is sold for one Ducate nine pence. Pro muliere quae se
suspendit, sive pro viro, ut possit Ecclesiasticae tradi sepulturae, Duc. 1.
Carol. 9.
For a woman that has hanged her self, or for a man, that they may be
committed to Church burial, one Ducate nine pence. Tolet de Instruct. Sacerd.
l. 1. c. 7. Potest ab excommunicatione contracta in vita absolvi post mortem.
And Cardinal Tolet affirms, that a man may be absolved after his death of an
excommunication which he incurred in his life time. And how many Indulgences
are given after death? How many privileged Altars, upon which whosoever says
a Mass, draws a soul out of Purgatory at his own choice? By the Book of Roman
Indulgences, it appears that there are few Churches at Rome without such
privileges. Navarrus in the Commentary about the Jubilee and Indulgences in
the 22. Observation, has these words, Dico convenire debere inter omnes mea
sententia, quod inferior Papa non potest indulgentiam extendere ad mortuos
Purgatorii. Tum quod nunquam id videtur hactenus factum; Tum quod etiam non
parum dubitatum extitit, an Papa id efficere possit juxta latissime congesta
per Felicem.
I say that all with one consent ought, in my opinion, hold this truth, that no
man inferior to the Pope, can extend Indulgences unto the dead of Purgatory,
both because we see not that ever it was done hitherto, and because no small
doubt was made, whether the Pope can do it.

XVIII. It is true that some Doctors begin of late to doubt, whether the Pope
gives pardons to the dead with authority of a Judge, or whether he give them
only by way of suffrage or intercession; for, say they, the dead are none of
his flock. He has no charge to feed them. It was said unto Peter, Whatsoever
thou shall bind on earth, not under the earth. And since the Pope has no more
the power to bind the dead, why does he keep the power to absolve them? But
these men speak without warrant, and the Pope gave them no charge to speak so.
And truly they speak against reason and against experience; for this expression
of pardoning, or giving pardons by way of intercession, has no sense. Praying
for one, is not forgiving him. Now when the Pope gives letters of absolution
for the dead, he speaks as a Judge. If he prayed for them only, that power
ought not to be reserved to him alone, for every one can make the same prayer.
This appears evidently, in that the Pope gives Indulgences by Letters Patents
in Parchment sealed with Lead, as Bellarmine acknowledges in the second Book
of Indulgences, chap. 5. For such pardons are given in the form of a sentence:
The world never heard of prayers and intercessions to God, sealed and signed in
an authentical form, nor or supplications to God in the form of Ordinances.
Wherefore also Bellarmine in the same place Bell. lib. 2. Indulg. cap. 5.
Literae Pontificis suis legitimis sigillis munitae signa sunt, ita plumbum and
membrana signa sunt remissionis quam Pontifex pro potestate a Deo accepta
concedit, etc.
says, that the Pope by these Letters thus sealed, declares his will, and the
power which he received of God. And to assign to an Altar eighteen thousand
years of pardon, and so many forties of days, and the deliverance of a soul
out of Purgatory, is not praying, but decreeing and speaking, as having exactly
calculated with God. But which way soever the Pope give Indulgences to the
dead, he will have us to believe that these souls come out of Purgatory by that
pardon. So that it is the same power under another title. And we should have
the declaration of some Pope of the last ages, whereby he should declare, that
he pretends no jurisdiction over the dead, and that the power of his Keys
extends not to them.

XIX. Of that power of giving Indulgences and Absolutions to the dead, there is
not one word neither in Scripture nor in all Antiquity. We have produced before
the testimony of Cardinal Cajetan, and that of Gabriel Biel, who say, that in
all the writings of the Fathers, there is no mention of Indulgences, nor of the
treasure of the Church made up of the overplus of the satisfactions of Christ,
and of the Saints, of which the Pope takes upon himself the distribution. And
Bellarmine in the second book of Indulgences, chap. 10. acknowledges that
Durandus, Roffensis, Antoninus, and Sylvester, say that Scripture makes no
express mention of Indulgences. To which I will add the testimony of Navarrus
the most famous Doctor of the Canonists of the Roman Church; as also the title
of his works gives him that commendation, and one that was the Popes
Penitentiary. These are his words, What the cause is, that among the Ancients
so little mention is made of Indulgences, but among the late Authors the
mention of them is so frequent: That most holy man Johannes Roffensis.
John of Rochester, reverend by his dignity of Bishop and Cardinal, has taught
it: Of whose discourse about that point, this is the summary. That it is not
certain by whom Indulgences were first given, and that some use of them, as
they say, is very ancient among the Romans. Navarr. Tom. 3. Com. de Jubil. and
Indulg. septimo Notabili Art. 5. and 6. Quod multa de Evangeliis and aliis
Scripturis sunt nunc excusa Inculentius and intellectu perspicacius quam
fuerunt olim. Quod nemo jam dubitat Orthodoxus, an Purgatorium si^, de quo
tamen apud priscos illos nullo vel quam rarissima fiebat mentio. Quod non fuit
tam necessaria sive Purgatorii sive Indulgentiarum fides e^plicita in primitiva
Ecclesia atque nunc est, etc. Quod dum nulla erat de Purgatorio cura, nemo
quaesivit indulgentias, quia ex eo pendet omne indulgentiarum pretium.
That many things of the Gospels and Scriptures are now more eminently printed,
and more clearly understood, then they were in old time. That now no Orthodox
man doubts whether there be a Purgatory, of which among the Ancients no mention
was made, or very infrequent. That the explicit belief, both of Purgatory and
Indulgences, was not so necessary in the Primitive Church, as it is now. And
soon after: While men cared not for Purgatory, men cared not for Indulgences,
because all the price of Indulgences depends on that. Sure the strength of
truth must needs be very great, since it fetches such confessions from the
strongest of our Adversaries. And I wonder how that language could be suffered
in such a famous man, one of the Roman Penitentiaries under Cardinal Borromeo,
Great Penitentiary. And in the same Treatise he speaks thus of the Concession
of Indulgences. Quaestores non quaerunt commodum animarum sed pecuniarum, etc.
Per eam multum enervatur satisfactio poenitentialis quae tantopere est nobis
utilis, etc. Adjuncto item illo quarto, quo^ concedens indulgentiam de alieno
solvit alterius debita, and indecorum esse id fusius efficere significat illud
barbarum proverbium, D^corio alterius corrigiae longae.
The Questors (so he calls the Collectors of the money that is got by pardons)
seek not to gain souls, but to gain money. He adds that by that concession of
Indulgences, the Penitential satisfaction, which is so useful to us is much
weakened, etc. That he that grants Indulgences, pays one man's debts with the
estate of another, and that to practice that too largely is unbecoming. It is
(as the barbarous proverb says) cutting large thongs out of another man's
leather. He says, that because the Pope employeth the superabounding
satisfactions of Saints which he has in his treasure for the payment of
others, it is credible that the Pope takes some also for himself, as the
Jesuit Emanuel Sa says, Eman. Sa, Aphor. in verbo Indulgentia.
Indulgentia utitur etiam qui eam concessit. He that granted the Indulgence,
makes use of it for himself also: So that he forgiveth his own self. He should
have added, that they that have no money to pay the two Reals or the Giulio, to
which the Indulgence or the Bull of Absolution is taxed, have not the remission
of sins. And that he that wants money, or good legs, or a horse to go to Rome
to the Jubilee, or to the places where the Pope has transported the Jubilee,
has no share in that spiritual grace.

XX. Out of the same abuse of the Keys, and the power of absolving, came that
intolerable Tyranny, and depravation of Christ's words, Whatsoever you shall
bind on earth, etc. whereby the Pope makes himself judge of all things, and
Lord either direct or indirect, of all the estates of the world. If we ask by
what power the Pope loses the obligation of Oaths made unto God, and the
bond of allegiance of subjects to their Prince, and upon what ground he takes
the authority of loosing and dissolving marriages lawfully contracted, and
dispensing children from their obedience to their parents, as likewise of
exempting those that have made vows, from the obligation of keeping them, and
of giving and taking away Kingdoms; and by what power he puts an Interdict upon
Cities and upon whole Countries, exposing them for a prey to the next
Conqueror, and delivers souls from the power of Purgatory: They give us this
answer, that Christ said unto Peter, Whatsoever thou loosest on earth, etc. Let
us suppose that the Pope is successor of Peter's Apostleship: Let us suppose
that this was said to Peter alone, although Matthew. 18.18. this was said to all
the Apostles. What profanation is this of the Word of God, that the power of
loosing the bonds of sin by Church Discipline, and by the preaching of the
Gospel, be transported to the loosing of vows, of marriages, of the fidelity of
subjects, of the obedience of children to their parents, yea of souls after
death? Where is one word of that, I say not in the Gospel (which they allege
to abuse it) but in all Antiquity? A prodigious thing, that in the light of the
Gospel, after so many ruins and bloody wars, which that doctrine has brought,
these things are said, yea and believed! And that in places where the
Inquisition reigns, to make but a show of doubting of these things, is a
crime punishable with fire, and a case of Inquisition!

XXI. Would one search all the abuses of these absolutions, both the
Penitential, and those that are without the pretended Sacrament of Penitence,
one might make a great volume of them. I will put here, some out of the rules
of Emanuel Sa, and Cardinal Tolet, both Jesuits.

Eman. Sa, Aphor. in verbo Absolutio. Absolvere potest Sacerdos quivis a
peccatis venialibus and a mortalibus etiam, a quibus poenitens est alias
absolutus.
Every Priest can absolve from venial sins, and from mortal sins also, of which
the Penitent was absolved already before. This rule gives power to a Priest to
do that which is already done, and to loose a man that is not bound. By this
means a man pays twice for the absolution of the same sin. Besides, when the
Priest gives absolution of mortal sins, he shows thereby that they are
venial, that is, pardonable.

Ibid. Absolvi posse morientem qui nihil potest confiteri, sed tantum ostendit
signa contritionis, alii aiunt, alii negant, cum quibus ego sensi. Sed jam
placet ut absolvatur sub condition etiam amens, etc.
A dying man that speaks not, but gives signs of contrition, and a man out of
his wits, who has before given signs of contrition, may be absolved.

Ibid. Absolvi potest qui ex rationabili and justa causa non vult omittere
peccandi occasionem: Modo proponat firmiter non peccare, etiamsi aliquoiles sit
relapsus.
That man may be absolved, who for a reasonable and just cause, will not lose
the occasion of sinning, so that he have a steadfast purpose not to sin any
more, although he be often relapsed. I cannot conceive what occasion of sinning
can be so just, but that one must lose it.

Ibid. Absolvi potest qui non confitetur, aut negat peccatum quod Confessor ex
alterius confessione intellexit illum commisisse.
A man may be absolved, that will not confess, or that denies a sin, which the
Confessor has learned by the Confession of another, that he has committed.

Idem Cap. Absolutio ab excommunicatione. Qui habet ordinariam facultatem
absolvendi in soro interiori, potest absolvere etiam extra confessionem.
He that has the ordinary power of absolving in the inward bar, can absolve
without confession.

Ibid. Potest absolvi quis non solum sine dolor fed etiam invitus, and ab una
excommunicatione, relicta altera.
Absolution may be given to a man, not only without sorrow [for his sin] but
also against his will, and may be absolved of one excommunication, another
remaining. Of which we have a notable example in the sixth book of the Epistles
of Cardinal d'Ossat, Epist. 221. to the King, page 485. This is a strange way
of absolution, to say to a man, Thou will not be absolved from thy sins, but
thou shall be, in spite of thy heart. And thou art excommunicated with two
excommunications; I absolve thee from one of them, and receive thee into the
Church, but thou art excommunicated with another excommunication, and so thou
remainest out of the Church. By these rules an impenitent man may be absolved
with a valid absolution, and one that is truly penitent and contrite, with an
invalid absolution, namely, when the Confessor has no intention to absolve.

Ibid. Absolutus simpliciter sed praestita cautione de satisfaciendo, si non
satisfaciat non reincidit.
He that is plainly absolved, but upon security that he will satisfy, if after
that he do not satisfy, he falls not again into excommunication. Note, that
here it is questioned of satisfying God for the punishment of sins. When there
is reason to instruct one who has promised to satisfy, he is required to give
security. God (belike) will have sufficient security, and if the Priest accept
of the security, God will accept of it also. And if God cannot get satisfaction
from the party, he will sue the security. Is not all that contrived with
singular prudence, and with mature consideration? And how meek is that dealing,
that a man who after he has received absolution, scorns to make satisfaction,
should nevertheless, be suffered to enjoy the benefit of his absolution? Why?
the man has outwitted God, and has given him the slip, and now if God will be
paid, he must strain upon the security.

An absolution made for an unjust cause yet is valid: So say, Bellar. l. 1. de
Indulg. c. 12. Cum summus Pont^sex dispensat in jure Ecclesiastico, dispensatio
est rata, etiamsi non adsit causa justa. Satis est enim, si constet eum
voluisse dispensare, cum id totum ab ejus arbitrio dependeat.
Bellarmine, Eman. Sa, loco superiori. Absolutio ex causa falsa valet, etsi id
quidam negant.
Emanuel Sa, and Tolet. lib. 1. de Instruct. Sacerd. cap. 14. Absolutio injusta
valet, ut habetur cap. de Venerabilibus. Ubi de sent. excom. in 6.
Tolet.

Nec foemina, nec Laicus, nec simplex Sacerdos absolvere possant, nisi ex
privilegio aliquo. Tolet de Instr. Sacerd. l. 1. c. 16.
Neither a woman, nor a Layman, nor a common Priest can absolve, but by some
privilege. For absolving is a point of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Here
observe, that even a woman can excommunicate, and absolve by the Popes
permission.

Cardinal Tolet in the first book of the Instruction of Priests, in the
fourteenth Chapter, gives many very considerable rules. He says, that Quilibet
habens jus excommunicandi potest absolvere, etiamsi nec presbyter nec diaconus
nec subdiaconus sit.
one who has no orders in the Church, can give absolution in the outward bar.
So that a Cobbler having the Popes Commission, may both excommunicate and
absolve.

Again, Ad illam priorem non est necessaria voluntas excommunicati. Nam etiam
invitus potest absolvi, sicut potuit invitus excommunicari, etc. Potest absolvi
ignarus and inscius absolutionis, etc. Potest etiam illa prior dari per
literas, etc. Potest etiam illa fieri per procuratorem, etc. Cui de jure
competit, potest alteri deligare vel demandare absolutionem.
To be absolved at the outward bar, it is not necessary that the excommunicate
person have a will to be absolved. As he was excommunicated against his will,
he may also be absolved against his will. Also one may be absolved without his
knowledge. Tolet says in the same place, that absolution may be done by
Letters, by Attorney, by Commissaries, and by Subdelegacy.

Facultates quae per Romanum Pontificem dantur, per Jubilaeum aut Bullas
Confessariis absolvendi a quibusvis censuris non concernunt forum exterius, sed
tantum ea quae ad poenitentiae forum and conscientiae purgationem. Ut notat
Paris. Consil. 67. number. 20. lib. 4. Et Covarr. ^bi supra ver. quinto
attestantes hunc esse stylum Romanae Curiae ut revera est.
The faculties which the Pope gives by the Jubilee, or by Bulls unto
Confessors to absolve all censures whatsoever they be, concern not the outward
Bar, but only that which regards the Bar of Penitence, and the purgation of
the conscience. That is, they absolve sinners before God only, not before men;
and reconcile sinners unto God, not unto the Church, nor to the Pope. So that
the Pope having reconciled a sinner unto God, has not therefore reconciled
that sinner unto the Pope himself. That poor sinner is acquitted toward God,
by the pardon which the Pope gave him, but is not therefore acquitted toward
the Pope, who by the Jubilee, intended to remit Gods interests, not his own.
There is need of another absolution again. And the said Cardinal, after he has
alleged many Doctors, says that it is the style of the Court of Rome.
Absolvetur cum Psalmo, and oratione Dominica, verberibus, and aliis consuetis.
Ut dicit Sylv. absolutio 3. number. 4.
In the same place he says that the absolution of excommunicated persons must
be done with a Psalm, and the Lords Prayer, and whipping, and other customary
things. No wonder if those that have usurped the power of whipping penitents,
make bold with their purse. Through that whipping many Kings have passed; of
which we will bring examples in the next Controversy.

Absolutio injusta valet, ut habetur cap. de Venerabilibus. Ubi de Sent. Excom.
in 6. Si Episcopus absolvat non praemissa satisfactione, tenet absolutio
Episcopus tamen malesacit and debet corrigi.
And in the same Chapter, An unjust absolution is valid. Again, If the Bishop
absolveth without imposing any saisfaction before, the absolution holds, and
yet the Bishop does evil, and must be corrected.

That I may not stir that sink of abuse further, Whosoever will seriously consider
the whole structure of Popery, will easily perceive that the whole bulk of the
doctrine tends to give authority to the Clergy, and to persuade the people that
God does not impart unto men either remission of sins, or salvation, or any
spiritual grace, but by the Sacraments which Clergymen administer, and by the
intervention of their Ministry: As if God had tied his own hands, to show no
grace to his people, unless they pass through their hands before.

Hence is sprung the opinion of the efficacy of Sacraments, by the only and
bare action which they call in their canting, ex opere operato. That is, the
Sacraments which they administer, confer grace, although they were administered
to one that sleeps, or has his mind somewhere else: And that the attention is
not requisite, it being sufficient that he that receives them, resist not
purposely the grace, and set not his mind to hinder it. Hence came the
doctrine, that the Sacraments are void and without effect, if the Priest that
administered them had no intention, so that we must believe that the grace of
God conferred by the Sacraments, depends on the Priests intention, though he be
never so wicked. Hence also came that doctrine, that God does not forgive sins,
but upon condition of receiving the Priests absolution in case of possibility;
That God forgiveth not those sins, which the Priest would not forgive; That
Priests are Judges, and pronounce judicial sentences which absolve in Gods
judgment. Hence also the power which the Bishops challenge to give the Holy
Ghost by the laying on of their hands, and by ordination, to print in the soul
a Character which remains even in Hell. Hence the privilege of Clarks and
Kings to be partakers of the cup in the Communion, thereby to make Clarks to
become fellows to Kings. Hence that terrible power of Priests, which goes
beyond all Angelical power, to create the Creator, and to make God with words,
and holding him locked up, to be able to boast that they have Christ in their
power, yea though the Priest were a Sodomist: For we have seen before, that for
that crime a Priest falls not into irregularity, no more then for keeping
Concubines. Wherefore these Gentlemen boast in their Books, that they have a
power equal unto Gods. These are the words of Besse a Doctor, and Preacher of
the Prince of Conde, in the first book of the Royal Priesthood, chap. 3. Joshua
did only make the Sun to stay where he was before, but Priests stay Christ
being in heaven, to bring him to an Altar, where he had no abode before. The
creature obeyed him, but the Creator obeys these. The Sun obeyed him, God
obeyes these, whenever they pronounce the sacred words. The remission of sins
is of a divine jurisdiction. It is the work of a Sovereign, an effect for the
Almighty, a strain beyond humane merits and capacities. Yet it is a power
imparted unto Priests, Quorum remiseritis, etc. A sign that the Godhead and the
Priesthood have I know not what common among them, and that they have almost
the same greatness, since they have the same power. How high does this man
raise Priests! There wanted no more but to call them Gods. And that he does in
the same strain. For having applied unto Priests, that which God says of
Princes, he adds, That which God is in heaven, the Priest is upon earth; And
a little after, Priesthood marches even with the Godhead, and all Priests are
Gods. A goodly doctrine; according to which, when you see a whoring and a
drunken Priest, one that can hardly read his Mass (and of such the world is
full) you must say, Here is a God; This man marches even with the Godhead, and
has the same power. Yea God obeys him, as this Doctor says, and he has God
in his power, when he has him locked up in his box. And if that Priest dies
impenitent, (which our Adversaries deny not to be possible) here is a God
carried away by the Devil. This evil flows from a higher spring, from the
Head of the Papal Hierarchy, who could not raise his Empire, without raising
together the props and pillars upon which his Monarchy stands. It is he who the
first of Bishops suffered himself to be Conc. Lat. ult. Sess. 3. and 10.
Vniversis populis adorandus and Deo simillimus, and adorabunt eum omnes Reges
Terrae
adored and to be called God, Glossa Extravag. Cum inter. Credere Dominum Deum
nostrum Papam, etc. Did. 96. Can. satis. Po^tificem constat a pio Principe
Constantino Deum esse appellatum.
and the Divine Conc. Later. ult. Sess. 9. Divinae Majestatis tuae conspectus.
Liber. 2. Sacr. Cerem. sect. 7. c. 6. Seeds Dei, id est, Seeds Apostolica.
Bell. in Barcklayum. cap. 16. Potestas Papae est similis potestati Dei, cujus
Pontifex vicem gerit in terris.
Majesty, and the Extrav. de Immunit. Eccles. Tit. 22. sup. Qu^^i^n in 6.
Bellar. l. 1. de Pontific. c. 9. sect. Ac ne forte.
Bridegroom of the Universul Church, and his Holiness exclusively to all
others. It is he alone, who has challenged to himself alone, and of late ages,
the Apostles sentence, Extrav. Unam Sanctam de Minoritate and Obedientia.
The spiritual man judges all things, but himself is judged of no man; as if
all men of the world were carnal in comparison of him. It is he who of late
ages and without president, has attributed unto himself infallibility in the
faith, De Constitutionibus Tit. 2. in cap. 6. Licet ubi Bonifacius VIII. sic
loquitur. Licet Romans Pontifex qui jura omnia in scrinio pectoris sui censetur
habere, etc.
and to have all the right [or Law] within the closet of his breast, and to be
able to add to the Symbol, and to change that which God has commanded in
Scripture, and to make new Articles of Faith, and to be a Sovereign Judge above
Scripture: Likewise, to dispense from vows and oaths made to God, to promise a
degree of glory in Paradise above the ordinary sort, to unthrone Kings, to put
down Emperors, to give his feet to kiss to great Monarchs, to dispense
subjects from allegiance to their Sovereign, to put such as he will in the
number of Saints, commanding that they be prayed to, to give pardons for many
thousands of years, to give Indulgences to the dead, and to deliver souls out
of Purgatory. It is he, who reserving full power to himself to forgive sins,
has limited the power of Priests and Bishops ^o certain cases, granting them
such a portion of the Keys as he would. That the world may think, since the
authority of Priests goes so far, as to pardon sins with authority of Judges,
and to absolve them before Gods, judicial seat, what may the power be of him
that has an unlimited authority, and in whom God put fullness of graces, that
of his fullness we may all receive, as we heard Thomas saying before; That great
man to whom he gave the title of Saint, and of Angelical Doctor.

Eighth Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. OF Penitential Satisfaction. Where
also it is spoken of Satisfactions in general.
CHAP. 1. The Doctrine of the Roman Church, about Penitential Satisfaction.
AFter that the Penitent has confessed his sins, the Priest lays penances
upon him, that is, satisfactory pains, enjoining him, either to fast so many
days, or to undertake such a pilgrimage, or to visit barefoot the relics of
such a Saint, and there to do his devotions for nine days, or to get himself
whipped, Eman. Sa, Aphor. in verbo Satisfactio. Potest quis per alium satisfacere
de licentia Confessoris. Tolet, de Instruct. Sacerd. l. 3. c. 11. Vnus
satisfacere potest pro altero, etc. Potest Confessarius imponere poenitentiam
vel per se, vel per alium explendam.
or to find another that will whip himself for him; or to give so much money to
such Friars, and that is called alms, though the Friars be rich, and the
Penitent poor. Or to say for so many days, the seven Penitential Psalms in
Latin. To say so many Ave's, interlaced with Pater's. Sometimes Confessors
will delight to enjoin extravagant penances. Nicol. Gyles, Secretary to King
Lewis the XII. in the year 768. of his Annals, speaks of a Penance imposed to
Robert the Normand, surnamed the Devil, by reason of many excesses by him
committed. That for seven years he should abstain from speaking. And the
Penitent lay at a stairs foot, and ate nothing but the remnant of bones gnawed
by a Greyhound. The Decree of Burchard Bishop of Worms, in the nineteenth book,
prescribes many the like penances. He condemns one who has killed his father
or his mother, never to ride in a coach, never to marry, and never to eat
flesh. Occidisti seniorem tuum, etc. Vinum and medonem and mellitam cervisiam
nunquam bibas, nisi in illis praedictis tribus dicbus. Uxorem ne ducas.
Concubinam non habeas, etc. Nunquam te laves in ^aluco. Equum non ascendas.
Causam tuam and alterius in conventu fidelium non agas. In conviviis laetantium
nunquam sedeas. In Ecclesia segregatus ab aliis Christianis post ostium
humiliter stes.
To him that has killed his Lord, he gives for penance, never to drink Wine,
or Mead, or Beer with honey in it, but three days in the year: Never to marry:
To keep no Concubine: Never to bathe himself: Never to ride on horseback:
Never to plead his cause, or that of another: Never to be at a feast; and in
the Church, to stand behind the door.

To him that has killed a thief, he enjoins for a penance, not to enter into
the Church for forty days: All those days to be clad with wool: To wear no
sword: To ride no horse: Not to lie with his wife, (which is punishing two for
one): Upon Tuesdayes, Thursdayes, and Saturdayes, to eat nothing but pulse,
herbs, apples, and small fishes, as Sprats, Smelts, small Trouts, but no Poor
John. And on the same days to drink nothing but small stale Beer. Most part of
all that is taken from the Roman Penitential, and from Theodorets Penitential.

It is an usual penance from the time of Petrus Damianus Cardinal, and which is
yet practiced; to whip ones self, and together to sing Psalms. Baronius in the
1055. year, relates these words of the said Cardinal, Vt tria scoparum millia
unum poenitentiae anaum ex^leant cum modulatione Psalmorum. December Psalmorum
modulatio mill scopas admittit. Cumq^e Psalterium constet ex 150. Psalmis, in
quoque Psalterto quinque annorum poenitentia expletur.
With three thousand lashes, singing Psalms melodiously, they fulfilled a year
of penitence. Now one must give a thousand lashes, singing ten Psalms. And
whereas the Psalter has one hundred and fifty Psalms, with every Psalter five
years of penance are fulfilled: I think he put five for fifteen. Cardinal Tolet
in the first Book of the Instruction of Priests, chap. 14. speaks thus, Let him
be absolved with a Psalm, and the Lords Prayer, and whipping. Matthew. Paris in
Henrico II. An. 1174. Caru^^n suam disciplinae virgarum supponeus, a singulis
viris religiosis, quorum multitudo magna convenerat, ictus ternos vel quinos
accepit.
King Henry the II. of England, was so whipped at Canterbury by a multitude of
Friars, some of which gave him five lashes, and others gave three. I could
bring many examples of Princes whipped by way of penance in our days. At Rome in
the holy week, there is a public whipping. But they that march thus through
the Town whipping themselves, have their faces masked and their back bare, and
for a lenitive of their wounds, some cause Vinegar to be squirted into them.

But because these are hard penances, and a fast of many years is grievous and
troublesome, these Doctors have bethought themselves to use clemency, permitting
the sinner to redeem these penances with money, and to exchange corporal into
pecuniary pains. In the nineteenth Book of Burchards Decree, the nineteenth
Chapter is this, Si quis forte non potuerit jejunare, and habuerit unde possit
redimere, si dives fuerit, pro septem hebdomadibus det solidos viginti. Si non
habuerit unde tantum dare possit, det solidos december. Si autem multum pauper
fuerit, det solidos tres, etc.
If perhaps a man cannot fast, and has wherewith to redeem [his fast]: If he
be rich, for seven weeks [of fast] let him pay twenty sous. If he cannot give
so much, let him give ten sous. If he be very poor, let him pay three. He adds,
that the said money must be employed for the ransom of prisoners, or given at
the Altar, and to Gods servants (so he calls Priests and Monks) or else given
in alms, for also that which is given to the Church is called alms. Laicus
blasphemans, si nobilis fuerit, poena 25. ducatorum multetur, and pro secunda
vice 50. fabricae basilicae principis Apostolorum de urbe applicandis.
The last Council of Laterane, Section IX. enjoyneth a Gentleman who has
blasphemed, to pay five and twenty Ducates for the first time, and fifty for
the second time, which are employed for the building of Saint Peter's Church at
Rome.

The Roman Church was very much enriched that way, and is grown fat with the
sins of the people. So much Baronius acknowledges in the year, 1055. where he
alleges Petrus Damianus Cardinal, Baron. an. 1055. sect. 9. Non ignoras,
quia cum a poenitentibus terras, possessiones agrorum videlicet, accipimus,
juxta mensuram muneris eis de quantitate poenitentiae relaxamus. Quibus plane
ostendit Damianus bona Ecclesiastica ejusmodi fieri, solita redemptione aucta
crevisse.
Thou art not ignorant, that when we receive from Penitents, Lands, that is
possessions of fields, we release of the quantity of the penance, according to
the measure of the gift. To which Baronius adds. By these words Damianus
evidently shows, that the goods of the Church are increased by that
redemption which uses to be done. Thus sins are redeemed with money, and the
rich have here a great advantage. Can one blame these Gentlemen, that take so
much pains to dispose of remission of sins, and by consequent of salvation, if
they think it not reasonable to pardon sins for nothing?

But if there be any man that cannot fast, and that will not or cannot give
money, they have devised to make him burst with singing, enterlarding lashes
with the singing of a multitude of Psalms. The Roman Penitential enjoins, that
such a man Burchard. l. 19. c. 23. ex Poenitentiali Romano. Duodecim triduanae
singulae cum Psalteriis tribus impletis and cum palmatis trecentis per singula
Psalteria excusant unius anni poenitentiam.
sing three times the whole Psalter, in twelve times three days, with three
hundred blows for every Psalter, and that thereby he be discharged of a year of
penance.

To the Penitents whom they will use kindly, they impose no penance or
satisfaction, as we learn of the Jesuit Emanuel Sa, Etsi accipienti
indulgentiam plenariam potest dari absolutio sine poenitentia, expedit tamen
aliquam semper imponere.
To him that receives plenary Indulgence, absolution may be given without
penance, yet it is expedient always to impose some. Or they enjoin the
Penitents to do some work by way of penance, which the sinner was obliged to
do, though the Priest had not enjoined it, as the same Jesuit says, Eman. Sa,
ibid. Potest in poenitentiam imponi epus alias debitum. Tolet De Valentia,
Navarrus, Cajetan, Soto, Palud. Capreol. Sylvest.
One may impose for a penance, a work which otherwise was due, and he
alleges many Doctors that say the same. Cardinal Tolet is of the same mind,
Tolet lib. 3. de Instr. Sacerd. c. 3. Possit Confessarius pro poenitentia
imponere opera alias debita, ut quod jejunet tres dies quadragesimae, quos
tamen tenebatur alias jejunare poenitens.
The Confessor may impose for a penance, works that were due without that, as
to fast three days in Lent, which the Penitent was bound to fast howsoever. By
the same reason, the Confessor may enjoin as a penance to the sinner to believe
in God. And if the Confessor enjoins for a penance to do some good work, to
which every Christian is obliged, it must be presupposed, that when the
Penitent does that work, he does two things: For by that work, he does what he
ought to do for the present, and yet by the same work he satisfies and
recompenceth God for the time past. And the same work is meritorious for the
future, and satisfactory for the sins done before.

It is also a gentle kind of satisfaction, when the Confessor imposes to the
Penitent for satisfaction, Ibid. Alia via juvatur poenitentia and satisfactio
scilicet imponendo illi omnia quae facturus est bona and quae passurus est mala
loco poenitentiae. Est enim sciendum, quod opera alias debita Deo, si
imponantur a Confessario, valent ultra obligationem, etc. Vnde optimo consilio
in forma absolvendi adjungitur illud. Quicquid boni feceris, and mali
sustinueris, sit tibi in remissionem peccatorum.
all the good works which he shall do afterward, and all the evils which he
shall suffer. That is, he declares unto the sinner that all the prayers and
alms which he shall do (yet without specifying to him any kind of good works)
and the sicknesses that he shall suffer, and all the lawsuits that he shall
have, must serve him hereafter as payments and satisfactions to God. This is
expressly set down in the ordinary form of absolution, to which Tolet says,
that it was very prudently added, All the good that thou shall do, and all the
evil that thou shall suffer, may serve thee for remission of sins, and increase
of grace, and reward of everlasting life. For, (says this Cardinal) good works
which otherwise are due, when the Priest imposes them by way of penitence,
become of a value above the obligation; so that the Priest can alter the nature
of the work.

The gentlest satisfaction of all, is when the Priest imposes for a penance to
a man, to find one that will be whipped for him, or that will fast for him. As
the same Cardinal says, Ibid. Unus satisfacere potest pro altero, etc. Potest
Confessarius imponere poenitentiam, vel per se, vel per alium implendam.
One may satisfy for another. And, The Confessor can lay a penance, which the
Penitent shall be obliged to fulfill, either by himself or by another. And the
Jesuit Emanuel Sa, Eman. Sa, Aphor. in verbo Satisfactio. Potest quis per
alium satisfacere de licentia Confessoris.
One may satisfy by another, by the Confessors leave.

The worst penance or satisfaction of all, is when remission of sins is given
to a sinner upon condition of committing some murder, or treason, or disloyal
act. De Paschali and Leodiensibus vide Bochelli decretum, lib. 5. cap. 6.
As when Paschal the II. in the year 1107. commanded Robert Earl of Flanders to
destroy and slay the Clergy of Cambray and Liege, because they adhered to the
Emperor Henry the V. and he was to do that for the remission of all his sins.
Matthew. Paris, and Westmonasteriensis in Johan.
And when Innocent the III. gave to Philip August of France the remission of
all his sins, upon condition of invading and wasting all England, where he had
no right. And when in our time the French Priests gave absolution, and the Pope
set forth Indulgences, upon condition of taking part with the League and
rebelling against the King. For it is as if one said, Will thou have me to
forgive thee thy sins? Be a Traitor and a Murderer, for it is the true way to
make thy peace with God: Or, Because thou art a wicked thief, thou shall have
eternal life.

By fulfilling of these penances imposed by the Priest, our Adversaries hold
that the Penitent satisfies unto the justice of God, and that they serve for
expiation of sins as for the temporal pain, which whosoever shall not fulfill
in this life, he must fulfill what is wanting of the whole satisfaction in
Purgatory, a fire far hotter then our ordinary fire, Bellar. lib. 1. de Indulg.
c. 9. Peccatis mortiferis singulis debetur secundum Canones poenientiae trium
vel septem annorum.
where souls must suffer seven years for every mortal sin, or three years at
least: unless the Pope graciously fetch them out of it by his Indulgences, or
unless the friends of the deceased found Masses and Dirges for them. But none
comes out without money: For these men industrious in the most superlative
manner, have found the way to dig money out of the graves, and death is
tributary to them. If a man has deserved to be twenty thousand years in
Purgatory, Gerson. lib. de absolutione Sacramentali. Fatuae sunt and
superstitiosae quaedam intitulationes de Indulgentiis viginti mill annorum, ei
qui dixerit quinque Pater noster ante talem imaginem, etc. Et esset per
Praelatos providendum, quia cedit hoc in contemptum and irrisionem
indulgentiarum.
let him obtain ten thousand years of pardon, he is discharged of the half of
the satisfaction, and the pain which he deserves in Purgatory is shortened by
one half. But if he has deserved to be but two thousand years in Purgatory,
and has obtained twenty thousand years of pardon, what becomes of the eighteen
thousand years of pardon more then he needed? The Doctors dispute about it.

This is then constant among our Adversaries, that when the Priest has imposed
satisfactory pains upon the Penitent, which are called penitences or penances,
Bellar. l. 4. de poenit. c. 13. Indulgentiae faciunt ut pro iis quae per
indulgentias condonant^r, non teneamur praecepto illo de faciendis dignis
poenitentia fructibus.
the Pope can dispense from them, and exempt the sinner from obeying God, who
says, Act. 2.3. Do penitence; or, Repent.

But because the Gospel teaches us that Christ is the propitiation for our
sins, and that he gave himself a ransom for us, 1 Timothy 2.6. Which ransom being
most perfect and of an infinite price, it seems that looking for other
satisfactions or expiatory pains is more then needs, and going about to
satisfy for a debt which is fully paid already, or derogating from the
perfection of the ransom and satisfaction which Christ had paid, and calling
the virtue thereof in question, and accusing God of envy, because he will not
receive the satisfaction and ransom paid by his Son, for so much as it is
worth. To daube that, and to get a shelter against the doctrine of the Gospel,
they sow up a piece to the Gospel, and a new Article of faith, which is one of
the main buttresses of Popery, and a fundamental maxim of his tyranny, and a
great gate open unto traffic. Bell. l. 2. de Indulg. c. 6. In secunda
reconciliatione, quae fit per Sacramentum poenitentiae, Evangelium dicit
Christum offerri poenitenti cum affluentia bonorum quidem coelestium, sed non
tanta ut remittatur omnis reatus culpae, sed ut post remissam omnem culpam and
poenam sempiternam remaneat poenitentia and satisfactio peragenda, pro
temporaria poena expianda.
They say that in the absolution or reconciliation which is done by the
Sacrament of Penitence, Christ is not offered with such affluence of good, that
thereby the whole pain of our sins be altogether forgiven. Id. l. 1. de Purg.
c. 14. Dicimus in Sacramento absolutionis Deum contrahere nonnihil manum; and
applicare Christi meritum ad tollendam culpam and poenam aeternam, tamen adhuc
requirere opera poenitentiae quibus redimamus temporales poenas.
But that God withdraws his hand a little, and makes himself somewhat sparing
to pardon. For, (say they) the fault of sins since Baptism, and the eternal
pain, is so remitted unto us, that there remains an obligation to the temporal
pain, both in this life and in Purgatory. Which pain is called satisfactory,
because by bearing it, we satisfy the justice of God, and bear the expiation
of our sins. Which satisfactory pain the Council of Trent declares to be not
only Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. Satisfactio, quam imponunt non, sit tantum ad novae
vitae custodiam, and infirmitatis medicamentum, sed etiam ad praeteritorum
peccatorum vindictam and castigationem.
an instruction to learn to live with a new life, and a remedy to our
infirmities; but also a revenge for sins done, as if God would have a revenge
for sins pardoned, or took a delight to avenge himself of his children whom he
has pardoned, and for whom Christ is dead.

Sess. 14. Can. 12. Si quis dixerit totam poenam simul cum culpa remitti semper
a Deo satisfactionemque poenitentium non esse aliam quam fidem, qua
apprehendunt Christum pro eis satisfecisse, Anathema sit.
The same Council thundreth out an Anathema against those that say, that God
never remits the fault, without remitting the pain also, and that there is no
other satisfaction to God for us, but Christ's satisfaction apprehended by
faith. Dum satisfaciendo patimur pro peccatis, Christo Jesu qui pro peccatis
nostris satisfecit, ex quo omnis nostra sufficientia est, conformes efficimur.
The same Council adds, that by our satisfying for our sins, by the pains
which we suffer, we are made conformable unto Christ who satisfied for us: For
these Fathers will, that as Christ by his sufferings has paid and satisfied
for us unto God, so we by our sufferings pay and satisfy for our selves, that
we may be made conformable unto Christ.

They say also, that our satisfactions are valid and receivable before God by
virtue of Christ's satisfaction. For such is their Doctrine, that the payment
which Christ has made of our debts, serves to make us pay the same debts; and
that the ransom which he paid for us, serves to make us pay a ransom for our
selves: And that the satisfaction whereby Christ fully satisfied unto the
justice of God for us, gives us this virtue, that by the torment which we bear
in a burning fire, we satisfy the justice of God for the obligation to the
temporal pain. Yea they make no difficulty to say, that to speak properly there
is no other satisfaction but our own. Tertius modus mihi videtur multo
probabilior, quod una tantum sit actualis satisfactio, and ea sit nostra.
Bellarmine says so much in chap. 14. of the first book of Purgatory, That
there is but one actual satisfaction (that is, one satisfaction in effect)
which is our own. For, as for Christ's satisfaction, they will have it to serve
to make ours good, as Christ having not paid to exempt us from the torments and
pains of Purgatory, but serving only for to give value to our torments, and to
make them satisfactory.

Yea, they go so far as to say, that in respect of that temporal pain, whereby
we are to satisfy God, the merit of Christ is useful indeed, but not
necessary, and that all men stand not in need of it. Merita Christi partim sunt
omnibus necessaria, partim non necessaria, sed utilia. Atque hoc posteriore
modo ad fundamentum Indulgentiarum pertinent.
Let the attentive reader weigh these words of Bellarmine, in the first Chapter
of the second book of Indulgences, The merits of Christ are partly necessary to
all, partly not necessary but useful, and in this last manner they belong to
the ground of Indulgences. He declares that the merits of Christ are the
ground of Indulgences, in that they are not necessary, but only useful. So that
if the merits of Christ were always considered as necessary; Indulgences
should have no ground. To explain his meaning further he adds, Si quis post
gratiam reconciliationis adeptam adhuc sit reus luendae poenae temporalis, is
non necessario eget meritis Christi, ut per ea reatus illi simpliciter
condonetur. Non quod sine meritis Christi possit reatus illi simpliciter
condonari, sed quia ipse poterit non requirere tantam liberalitatem, contentus
ipse suis laboribus and poenis vel in hac vita vel in purgatorio satisfacere
Deo, co-operante semper Christi merito.
If any after he has got the grace of reconciliation, is yet guilty of the
temporal pain, he does not of necessity need the merits of Christ to get an
absolute pardon of that guilt. Not that without the merits of Christ, the guilt
or obligation to the pain can be absolutely forgiven him, but because he may
forbear requiring of God such a great liberality, being content to give
satisfaction to God, by his labors and pains, either in this life, or in
Purgatory, the merit of Christ always cooperating. According to the doctrine
of that Cardinal Jesuit, a soul in Purgatory may speak thus to God, O God, I
know that the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ are so great, that I may be
exempted from this torment by his merits: But I beg not such a great liberality
at thy hands, and am content to be burnt in this fire, and to satisfy thy
justice by temporal pain. Being thus resolved, the merits of thy Son are not
necessary to me, and I stand in no need of them. Only they are useful to me, to
make the pain whereby I satisfy thy justice to be acceptable. Thus a
courageous soul may send back unto God his present, and will not be so much
obliged unto him. And see what that generosity is grounded upon. Non quod
Christi merita non sufficiant, sed quia id nobis utilius, and Christo
gloriosius est, quemadmodum etiam idem Deus instituit, ut secundae causae non
sint otiosae, sed cum ipsa prima causa adres producendas conveniant.
It is not (says the same Doctor) because Christ's merits are not sufficient,
but because it is more profitable for us, and more honorable for Christ (as
God also has instituted it) that the second causes be not idle, but that they
concur with the first cause to bring forth effects.

Is not that a very pregnant consideration, and sufficient to make a soul
willing to be burnt some thousands of years? For, belike, there is both profit
and honor in contributing to the payment, and presenting to God ones own pains
and satisfactions, to attain to the Kingdom of God when the term of the torment
is expired, rather then to be presently transported into Paradise, like an idle
man and of small courage, contributing nothing of his own. These are gallant
and courageous spirits indeed, whom God will torment and burn to gratify them.
Yet to my thinking, since some action must be attributed to second causes, if
these souls had been presently put in possession of the heavenly glory, their
actions would have been more noble and excellent, then those which they do in
that underground fire, far from the sight of God, and from the company of his
Saints, and they had glorified God in a far better way.

And that one may not think that these satisfactions are such small things, the
Roman Church holds, that the Bell. id prolixe probat lib. Indulg. c. 2. Sancti
plus passi sunt, quam eorum peccata requirunt.
Saints, Monks, and Martyrs, do more then needs for the expiation of their
sins, so that there is an overplus which the Pope reserveth in his treasure.
How he gathers it, and lays it up, and by what text of Scripture he is
constituted the Keeper and Distributor of the same, it is not said, but is left
to be piously presumed. As the same Bellarmine says, Idem l. 2. de Indulg. c.
8. Fidere sanctorum meritis est Filio Dei perbonorisicum and gloriosum.
That trusting in the merits of the Saints, is honorable and glorious unto
Christ. For it is an Article of Faith, drawn from the unwritten word. O
excellent Apostle, who was wrapped up to the third heaven, and there did learn
unutterable things; if all that doctrine be true, how ignorant were thou in the
doctrine of the Gospel! For in all thine Epistles where thou magnifiest so
excellently, and expoundest so clearly the benefit of our Savior Jesus, we
find not one word of all this doctrine. Here let us give glory to God, on the
one side acknowledging the depths of Satan, and on the other side the just
wrath of God, who has smitten these last ages with the spirit of stumbling.
Indeed, when after the reading of Evangelists and Apostles, I come to revolve
in my mind this horrible sink of prodigious abuse, I find my self as it were
transported into a new world, as if from the reading of the holy Oracles, I
past to the reading of Alcoran.

CHAP. 2. Of the word Satisfaction. State of the Question.
BEsides the general significaion of the word Satisfy, which signifies, to
give content, there are two kinds of satisfaction in the civil society, which
belong to the present question. For either satisfaction is made for injuries
and offenses, or for debts. For injuries, satisfaction is made Terent. Adelph.
Nolim sactum, jusjurandum dabitur te esse indignam injuria hac.
when a man protests that he is sorry for it, excuses himself with humility,
and craveth pardon. The Roman Civil Law had forms of satisfactions for
offenses. But as for debts, satisfaction is made by paying, either personally,
or by another.

Our Adversaries and we are agreed upon this, That since we have offended God,
we ought to humble our selves before him, repent, amend, and crave his pardon.
If that be called satisfying, we willingly acknowledge and approve that
satisfaction. But because our sins in the Lords Prayer are called debts, whose
payment is nothing else but the punishment due to Gods justice, the question
is, Whether the faithful children of God are able to pay that debt? and,
Whether God exacts of them satisfactory pains to satisfy his justice? and,
Whether they be obliged to bear penances or pains, which serve for expiation or
satisfaction to God?

It is the doctrine of the Roman Church, that by absolution, which the Priest
gives in the Sacrament of Penitence, the whole fault of the sins committed
since Baptism, is remitted and put out, but not the whole pain: And that by the
virtue of the Keys, eternal pain is changed into temporal, by which we must
satisfy and bear it, both in this life and in Purgatory. Which is the reason
why the Priest imposes satisfactory pains upon the sinner, which he must bear
and fulfill to satisfy the justice of God. And if the Penitent does not wholly
satisfy in this life, and dies before he has fulfilled the satisfaction, he
must bear those pains which remain yet to bear, in Purgatory, to fulfill the
satisfaction.

According to that doctrine, our Adversaries take the word Satisfaction for a
compensation paid to God for the offense. As Cardinal Tolet says, Tolet.
Instruct. Sacerd. l. 3. cap. 11. Est autem satisfactio, ut in praesenti
sumitur, offensae poenae quoad poenam recompensatio.
Saisfaction is a recompense of the offense past, as for the pain. And the
Catechism of the Council of Trent, in the Chapter of the Sacrament of
Penitence, Satisfactio est rei debitae integra solutio. Est compensatio, cum
homo pro peccatis commissis aliquid solvit.
Satisfaction is an entire payment of the thing due, and a compensation which a
man pays unto God for his sins. According to that doctrine, when a man has
born the pains enjoined by a Priest, we must say that God is wholly paid and
well recompensed, and believe that God will be contented with that payment: And
that the Priest knows exactly how much God must have, that he may be wholly
paid, and call for no more. Bellarmine in the first Book of Indulgences,
Chapter 2. makes no difficulty to say, that the remission of the pain is due to
the satisfactory work by commutative justice. That commutative justice, is a
justice that pays so much for so much, so that God being thus paid by the
Penitent, ought in reason to be contented, and according to that Cardinals
rule, God must pardon, and should be unjust, if he accepted not for payment
those satisfactory pains, which the Penitent fulfilleth by the Priests
injunction. Bellar. lib. 1. Indulg. cap. 9. Justificatus potest ex condigno
satisfacere Deo pro debito poenae temporalis.
The same Doctor says, that the justified man can satisfy God for the debt of
the temporal pain, Ex condigno, that is, by an equipollent satisfaction. And
Cardinal Tolet, As near as can be, one must impose a just and equal
satisfaction; that is, according to the grievousness of the sin.

By all that was said, it appears that the satisfactions of the Roman Church,
are not only humiliations and requests for pardon, but are pretended to be
payments and recompenses to satisfy Gods justice. As indeed the chief of all
these satisfactions is the pain of Purgatory, which is a punishment inflicted
by a Judge, who draws satisfaction from the sinner, and a revenge, as the
Council of Trent told us before. For in Purgatory, the amendment, and the
correction, or warning for the future has no more place. The same appears,
because the Pope dispenses and discharges such as he pleases from those
satisfactions; Tolet. de Instruct. Sacerdotali, l. 3. c, 11. Quantum fieri
potest, satisfactio justa and aequalis imponi debet.
for he would not discharge a sinner from being contrite, and from craving
pardon of God. Also because the Roman Church in the Sacrament of Penitence,
puts Contrition and Confession, as things different from satisfaction, so that
satisfying is another thing then being contrite, and asking pardon of God, by
confessing sin unto him. So then satisfying in the style and sense of the Roman
Church, is paying God, it is giving compensation to God, it is contenting his
justice by suffering the punishment.

Our language is far from that, for we speak after the Word of God. Among the
sufferings and the disgraces which we bear for the doctrine of the Gospel, we
have that honor, that we maintain the perfection of the merit of our Savior
Jesus, and that we are Advocates among men of the honor of him, who is our
Advocate with God. For knowing the misery of our nature, and how guilty we are
before God, we humble our selves before him, and to him make Confession of our
sins, believing that the best, yea the only Penitence which God requires at
our hands, is to be sorry that we have offended God, and that keeping our
selves from evil, we apply our selves unto good works, and advance in the fear
of God. For as the book of Ecclesiastical maxims attributed unto Saint Austin,
says, De dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis, cap. 34. Poenitentia vera est poenitenda
non admittere, and admissa deflere. Satisfactio poenitentiae est causas
peccatorum excindere nec earum suggestionibus aditum praebere.
True penitence is not to do things which we should repent for afterward, and
to weep for sins committed, satisfaction of penitence is to cut off the
occasions of sin, and to give no access to their suggestion. But as for
satisfying God by saisfactory pains, we acknowledge no other satisfaction but
the sufferings of our Savior Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for us, and who
is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. This satisfaction
being most sufficient, we look for no other, and renouncing our own
satisfactions, we repose our consciences upon the only satisfaction which
Christ offered unto God.

We borrow not the satisfactions of Saints or Monks, knowing that the best of
them was saved by Christ's satisfaction, not by the merit of their sufferings.
We are not so rash as to enjoin a sinner to pay God, or give him some
compensation, knowing that God will not be paid with such light coin, as men's
works or sufferings; we advise consciences not to build their faith upon such a
weak foundation. We are not so injurious to Gods goodness and mercy, as to
believe that he gives us but half a pardon, or that he receives not Christ's
satisfaction for as much as it is worth, seeing that it is sufficient to acquit
us both from temporal and eternal pain. We will not wrong his justice so much,
as to believe that he punishes with satisfactory pains, those that have no
more sin, and that by consequent are no more guilty; or that he will take two
payments for one debt, and two satisfactions for one sin, seeing that one,
which is that of Christ, is most perfect and sufficient. We are confirmed in
this belief, because we see that those very men that impose these
satisfactions, dispense from them afterward, as acknowledging them not
necessary, and sometimes they give absolution without any satisfaction. Also
because we see that these humane satisfactions are very gainful to them that
maintain them, and that the benefit of Christ's merit was pared purposely, to
make room for gain. For if no other satisfaction but that of Christ were
acknowledged, Priests should have no authority to impose corporal or pecuniary
penances, and none should have recourse to the Pope to be delivered from those
pains by Indulgences, which are so beneficial unto him: He has invented
torments for souls, that he might release them for their money. He has built a
burning prison for souls, that he might be the Jailer, and that the living
should pay for the deliverance of the dead. But this accusation must be
justified with proofs, and requires a Chapter apart.

But before we bring our proofs, the Reader is desired to remember, that to
have a clear understanding of this difference, Gellius, lib. 6. c. 14.
Puniendis peccatis tres esse debere causas existimatum est. Una est, quae (...)
vel (...). Altera, quae (...). Tertia, quae (...), a Graecis nominatur.
the ends for which God afflicts sinners, ought to be carefully
distinguished. 1. Some pains are called Castigatory, which serve to amend and
correct the sinner, turn him away from vice, and teach him to fear God. So does
a father chastise his children, and a good Master his Disciples. 2. There are
Satisfactory pains, which serve not to amend the sinner, nor to turn him away
from vices, but to satisfy justice, and pay unto God a compensation for the
pain due to our sins. Such is (if we believe our Adversaries) the torment of
Purgatory fire, where amendment has no more place. 3. There are also some
pains which are called Exemplary, and are inflicted to be an example and a
warning to others. Such are the pains of malefactors, which are publicly
punished or executed, that others may be refrained by their examples.

These ends, though different, may sometimes meet in one punishment. As when a
thief is whipped in public, he satisfies justice, he gives example to others,
and by his punishment he is taught to amend.

CHAP. 3. That the Holy Scripture makes Christ and the merit of his death, to
be the ground of remission of sins, as his death being the only ransom and
propitiation for our sins. And that the Roman Church feigning to acknowledge
the sufficiency and perfection of that satisfaction, debaseth and weakeneth it
with all her power.
HOly Scripture attributes the remission of our sins to Jesus Christ. 1 John
2.1, 2. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole world. 1 John 1.1. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin. Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins. Col. 1.19, 20. It
pleased the Father -- having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him
to reconcile all things unto himself. Isa. 53.5, 6. He was wounded for our
transgressions -- and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. John
1.29. He is the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. 1 Timothy
2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. Col. 2.13. God has quickened us,
together with Christ, having (...). See Acts 5.31. Luke 24.47. Heb. 1.3.
forgiven us all our offenses. In a word, it is the substance of the Gospel; it
is that we profess to believe in the Symbol. It is that we ask in our prayers,
the remission of our sins by Jesus Christ.

Now as in our prayers we intend to ask of God an entire remission of our sins,
so we must believe that the ransom which he paid for us, is not an imperfect
ransom. As in the Symbol, when we say, I believe the resurrection of the flesh,
and everlasting life, we mean not that we believe half a resurrection, or an
imperfect eternal life, but we profess that we believe a full and whole
remission of our sins by Jesus Christ. As the Lord said unto his servant,
Matthew. 18.32. I forgave thee all that debt. And the texts alleged before say,
that all our sins are forgiven, and that freely. And the Apostle to the Hebrews
7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost, them that come unto God by him. It
would be an impious opinion, tending to the abolishing of the Gospel, to think
that when the Apostle said, that Christ gave himself a ransom for us, he spoke
of an imperfect ransom, after which we are still obliged to pay our ransom or
redemption, and to satisfy Gods justice by satisfactory pains, such as those
of Purgatory. Of which it cannot be said that they are inflicted for example,
for no body sees them: Or that they are for correction or amendment, for they
hold that the souls in Purgatory are altogether just, and are no more subject
to sin.

The same is made evident by the death of those whom Scripture affirms to be
entered into rest, and into the glory of the Saints, as the thief carried into
Paradise the very day of his death, and that Lazarus mentioned, Luke 16.22, 23,
25. whose soul departed from his body, is carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom, where he is comforted. And Simeon received into peace, as God had
promised him, Luke 2.19. And the merciful and righteous, of whom we read, Isa.
57.1, 2. that they are taken away from the evil to come, and enter into peace:
And those of whom it is proclaimed in heaven, that being dead in the Lord they
rest from their labors, and they are blessed. For upon such it is evident,
that after their mortal race done, God laid no satisfactory pain. Upon this
Cardinal Bellarmine is sore gravelled, and not knowing in what rank to put the
souls lying in Purgatory, he says that Bellar. lib. 1. de Purgat. c. 12..
Respondeo. Qui decedunt cum peccatis venialibus aut cum debito poenae alicujus
temporalis, ii simpliciter non moriuntur in Domino, sed partim in Domino, etc.
partim non in Domine.
they partly die in the Lord, partly not in the Lord. This doctrine is so
evidently set down in Scripture, that the Doctors of the Roman Church seem to
embrace it, whenever they go about to amplify the price, and efficacy of
Christ's sufferings with excessive terms and Hyperbolical words, so far as to
say that one drop of Christ's blood was sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds,
so that by their reckoning his death was not necessary to save us. Which is
accusing God upon the by, and taxing him of cruelty, for laying such horrible
torments upon his beloved Son without necessity, when one drop of his blood
could have served to his end. But these high expressions are used purposely to
amuse the simple, and to insinuate with more plausibility, those Articles
whereby they pare the merit of Christ's death, and derogate from the perfection
of the same. For Cardinal Bellarmine in the fourteenth Chapter of the first
Book of Purgatory,. Tertius.
makes no difficulty to say that he Tertius modus videtur probabilior, quod una
tantum sit actualis satisfactio, and ea sit nostra.
thinks it more probable that there is but one actual satisfaction which is our
own. He holds not Christ's satisfaction to be an actual satisfaction. Only he
will have it to serve to make our satisfactions of a sufficient value for our
redemption. Wherefore also he teaches Bellar. lib. de Indulgentiis, cap. 4..
sexta.
that the Saints who suffered more then needed to satisfy for their own sins,
are in some sort our Redeemers, because their sufferings become payments for
our redemption. Whence it follows that every one of us, when he satisfies for
himself, is the Redeemer of himself.

This is also the Doctrine of the Jesuit Vasquez, Cap. 9. page 597.
in the 132. dispute upon the first part of the second of Thomas, in the 82.
question, where he stiffly maintains that the next cause that gets us a right
to the Kingdom of heaven, is not the righteousness of Christ, but the
righteousness which by the merit of Christ is derived into us. So he calls the
inherent justice, and the habitual virtues which are within us, the chief
whereof is Charity.

To the same purpose our Adversaries bring texts of Scripture depraved after
their manner, which command us to redeem our souls our own selves. They say
that we satisfy ex condigno, and by equipollency, so that God is wholly paid:
That to satisfy God for temporal pain, such as that of Purgatory, the merit of
Christ is not necessary: And that we may very well forbear asking of God such a
great liberality, contenting our selves with our own satisfaction: As we shall
hereafter more exactly show.

The same appears in that belief of the Roman Church, that the torments and
labors which the Saints have suffered, serve to others for payments and
satisfactions to the justice of God. For example, Saint Antonine Archbishop of
Florence, who was Sainted by the will, statute and mandate, (for these are the
terms of the Bull of canonization) of Clement the VII. relates of Saint
Dominick, Antonin. de sancto Dominico Tit. 23. c. 1. sect. 2. Trinam
disciplinam quasi quotidie de manu propria, non chordula sed catena serrea
usque ad sanguinis effusionem capiebat: Pro suis culpis unam, quae minimae
erant, pro in Purgatorio existentibus aliam, tertiam pro iis qui versantur in
mundo.
That he gave to himself three disciplines, that is, he whipped himself three
times almost every day, not with a whip-cord, but with an iron chain, even to
effusion of blood; one for his sins, which were very small, another for them
that are in Purgatory, and the third for those that dwell in the world. Thus
that venerable Saint paid and satisfied for others. The Pope has received the
two last disciplines of that Saint into his treasure, and converts them into
cempensation, payment and satisfaction for others. Not but that Christ's
satisfaction is sufficient to exempt from Purgatory, but because it is not Gods
pleasure to make it serve so far, or because it was not Christ's intention when
he dyed for us, to satisfy for the pain of Purgatory. For (says Bellar. lib.
1. de Purg. c. 20. Si Christus satisfecit pro omni culpa and poena, cur post
remissam culpam adhuc tam multa mala patimur?
Bellarmine) if Christ satisfied for all our fault and for all our pain, why
after the fault is forgiven do we suffer so many sorrows? This is declaring
plainly enough, that Christ did not satisfy for the whole pain, although the
whole fault be forgiven us.

This is the fundamental maxim upon which all that abuse is grounded, that by
Baptism all the fault is forgiven, and together all the pain of sins committed
before Baptism. But as for sins committed after Baptism, the fault is wholly
forgiven and remitted by the Sacrament of Penitence, but not the whole pain,
but we are to satisfy for that pain, both in this life by penances enjoined by
the Priest, and by those that are voluntarily undertaken, and after this life
in the fire of Purgatory, out of which nevertheless the Pope may deliver souls
by his Indulgences.

That maxim being a new Gospel, taken from the unwritten word, deserves a
Chapter by it self.

CHAP. 4. Where this Maxim of the Roman Church is examined, that God having
forgiven the whole fault, does not always forgive the whole pain.
OUR Adversaries lay this as a ground, that in sin there are two things, the
fault and the pain, that is, the offense and the punishment, and that God
forgiving the whole fault, does not always forgive the whole satisfactory pain
due to the fault.

In this doctrine I find four notable absurdities, which before all things must
be laid open.

I. The first is, that in sin there are two things, the fault and the
punishment: A great absurdity. For how can they say that fault is in sin,
seeing that fault and sin are all one? When the Priest says, Mea culpa, he
confesses his sin. See Genes. 31.36. Numb. 15.26. Quoniam culpa est omnis
populi.
Numb. 15.26. He that says that the sickness is in the body, presupposes with
good reason that the sickness and the body are two things. But these men say
without reason, that the fault is in the sin, as if they were different things.

II. The absurdity is much alike, in their saying, that these two things are in
sin, the fault and the pain, whereby they say by consequent, that the pain is
in the sin. Which is not true. For the pain is not in the sin, and is neither
part, nor accident, nor circumstance of sin. Sin is truly sin, though it remain
unpunished. There are sins without pains, and pains without sin. How should the
pain be in the sin, since the pain is of a nature contrary to the sin? The sin
is unjust, but the pain is just. The sin comes from man, but the pain comes
from God. The pain is made to correct the sin, and is by consequent contrary to
the sin.

III. The third absurdity is in their saying, that God forgiving the sin, does
not always forgive the pain. They presuppose that God sometimes forgives the
pain, which is false. For the pain is never forgiven, there is nothing that can
be pardoned but the sin, or the fault, which is all one. Themselves would laugh
at him that should say, that the Prince has pardoned whipping or the gallows
to a malefactor. It is the fault that is pardoned, because it is unjust. But
pains are just, therefore they need no pardon.

IV. This discovers a fourth absurdity, the grossest of all. For by speaking
thus, they make two pardons where there is but one. If a Malefactor receives
grace from the King, no body has lost common sense so much as to say, that the
King has forgiven him, not his crime only, but also the punishment. The felon
will be contented at all times that his crime be wholly pardoned; Which pardon
when he has once obtained, after that he will never be such an idiot as to
petition, that the punishment be forgiven him: For he knows that by the
absolute pardon of his crime, the prison-gates are open unto him, and that he
is free from all the punishment which he might have feared from the Kings
Justice. Hence it appears how ridiculous and imaginary the Popes pardons are.
For nothing can be forgiven but the fault. Now by these pardons, the Roman
Church holds that nothing is pardoned but the pain, because it is already
wholly remitted by Jesus Christ. According to the imagination of these
Gentlemen, when a father has wholly pardoned his sons fault, his son needs to
get another pardon, that he may not be whipped. No other way did they find to set
up their error, but by overthrowing reason. Having forsaken the Word of God,
they have by his just judgment lost common sense.

V. Absurdities might be slighted, if impiety did not go along with them. But
by this doctrine a high wrong is offered unto God. It is casting injustice upon
God, to teach that God forgiveth the fault, and yet burns a poor soul for
faults wholly pardoned. He that wholly pardons, looks for no more vengeance
or or satisfaction to justice. Let them tell us whether these souls that are
burning in Purgatory be guilty or not guilty. If they be guilty still, they
affirm untruly that all their fault is remitted and pardoned, for it is the
fault that makes a man guilty. If they be not guilty, it is unjust to burn and
torment souls that are not guilty. Where there is no fault, there is no sin,
and by consequent no satisfactory pain for sin. And would God behave himself so
toward the souls of his children, for whom Christ dyed? Is there any father so
unnatural, as to burn his children for offenses absolutely pardoned? Yea to
punish them with pains, which serve not to mend them, but to content himself,
and to satisfy his justice?

The cause being taken away, which only can make the satisfactory pain just
before God, the pain also is taken away. Now the only cause that can justify
the torment of souls burning in a fire, is the fault. Otherwise the sinner
frying in that fire, might justly complain of God, and say to him, Why do
thou punish me with satisfactory pains, after thou have absolutely forgiven me
my sin? Why do thou use me as guilty, when I have no more fault? And whereas
thy son Jesus has paid both for the fault and the pain, and has sufficiently
satisfied to exempt me from this torment of Purgatory? Why do thou not
receive the ransom which he paid for me, for so much as it is worth? Why do
thou abate of the price and virtue of my ransom? If it be for thy glory, thy
goodness shall be much more exalted by pardoning me. If it be to satisfy thy
justice, Christ has entirely satisfied for it. Our Adversaries have not yet
bethought themselves to frame answers for God unto this expostulation: For they
will be burnt for many ages, although God has given a full pardon to the
repenting and believing sinner.

VII. Sins being debts, the payment whereof is the satisfactory pain, he that
says that God wholly forgiveth the sin, and yet exacteth satisfactory pains
after full pardon, makes God to say, I forgive thee the whole debt, but yet
thou shall pay: I do wholly forgive thee, but thou shall be burnt and punished
for the sin which I have forgiven thee. As if one hanged a man with his Kings
Letters of pardon hanging at his neck, in contempt of the Kings authority. So
these men frame us a God that abuses men, and his own Graces, fetching
satisfaction for debts fully acquitted, punishing sins pardoned with
satisfactory pains.

VIII. But how did Christ bear all our sins? Was it not by bearing all the
satisfactory pains due to our sins? And if Christ bare all our pain, it was to
acquit us from it. Si tulit abstulit. No man loads himself with another man's
debt, but to discharge him of it. So speaks Saint Austin, that August. Sermon.
141. de Tempore. Communicando nobiscum sine culpa poenam, and culpam solvit and
poenam. Idem lib. 1. de peccatorum meritis and remissione cap. 32. Vt esset in
similitudine carnis peccati poena sine culpa, unde in carne peccati and culpa
solveretur and poena.
Christ by taking part with us of the pain, has abolished both the fault and
the pain. Here the question is not of the means of applying that grace, whereby
Christ has born all our pain, of which we shall speak hereafter, but only to
know whether Christ has born all our pain, and whether he did not bear it to
discharge us from it. The grace of God is not applied unto us, by means
contrary to that grace, and such are our torments. Our Adversaries themselves
make these means superfluous by the Popes Indulgences, who exempteth such as he
will from Purgatory. For thereby they declare that it is not a thing repugnant
unto the justice of God, or to the Gospel, that God remit unto men the whole
pain, as well as the fault, and exact no satisfactory pain from them.

IX. Let them tell us why they will have God, at certain times, and to certain
persons, to remit wholly both the pain and the fault; but at other times, and
to other persons, though less stained with sin, to use rigor, and punish and
torment them many ages in a vehement fire? For example, all the faithful that
shall be alive in the world when Christ comes to judge the quick and the dead,
though they have run never so far on the score, as for the debt of
satisfactions, they shall have all that score discharged, and shall not enter
into Purgatory. And the Carmelite Friars have that privilege, to be no longer
in Purgatory then till the next Saturday after their death; so that if they die
upon Friday night, they are but lightly singed, and enter into Purgatory only
to come out, and to tell news of it. Whereas there are many persons, dead many
ages ago, held to have been very devout in their lives, for whom nevertheless
Masses are said still, upon a presupposition that they are in Purgatory still.
Is it not because they have paid and made large gifts unto the Church? For a
man that has given nothing, so many services should not be said. It is lucre
that brought in these satisfactions. By a new Pyrotechny that imaginary fire
was kindled, that souls might be drawn from it with profit to the Pope and his
Clergy.

X. That Commandment of God so often iterated, that we forgive those that
offend us, as God forgiveth those that offend him, and that prayer which Christ
has indicted to us, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us, gives us here a great light. Saint Paul, Ephesians. 4.32. gives us the
same charge, Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. We ought to know then, how God
would have us to forgive those that have offended us. Does he mean that a
private man offended by another private man (for of such the Apostle speaks)
ought to forgive the whole offense so, that he reserve to himself a resolution
to make him bear the whole pain of it? Does he mean that we avenge our selves
after we have forgiven? Would not that be a base and treacherous part? Would
not the world call it a fraudulent and hypocritical pardon? Since then God will
have our forgiving of our neighbors, to be framed after the example of Gods
pardon to us, and since when we forgive the whole offense, we forgive also the
whole pain, it follows that God forgives us in the same manner, and that by
forgiving the whole offense, he forgives also the whole satisfactory pain. Yea
it is far more reasonable and likely that God should do so then man, because
God is infinitely more merciful then man.

XI. God says, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. If the wicked will turn from all his sins --
All his transgressions that he has committed, shall not be mentioned unto him.
Then he lays no satisfactory pain upon him, such as the fire of Purgatory:
For punishing a converted sinner in that manner, would be mentioning his sins
unto him.

XII. According to the doctrine of the Roman Church, he that after a total
pardon of an offense, will punish him whom he has forgiven, cannot be justly
reprehended. For he will say, Does not God do the same? Does he not punish
those in a fire, to whom he has given a full pardon? Will ye have me to be
more merciful then God? Certainly man is of himself but too prone to evil, and
given to fraud and revenge, and needs not to be seduced to it by Gods example,
whom these men make Author of vices, and a Teacher of Revenge and Disloyalty.

For these causes Tertullian Tertul. lib. de Bapt. cap. 5. Exempto reatu
remittitur and poena.
speaking of Baptism, says that the guiltiness being taken away, the pain also
is remitted. He gives a reason why in Baptism the pain is remitted unto us,
even because the fault is pardoned. Aug. Sermon. 141. de Tempore.
As Austin told us before, that Christ taking part with us of the pain without
the fault, has abolished both the fault and the pain.

CHAP. 5. Proofs of our Adversaries, whereby they pretend to prove that God,
after all the fault is forgiven, inflicteth the satisfactory pain.
AGainst that truth so evident, our Adversaries bring some small reasons; and
whereas they pretend to make a great building, they bring straws to it instead
of timber and stone.

I. They say that God having forgiven David's sin, yet punished it, and sent
affliction on his family, 2 Samuel 12.13.

I answer, that the question being of satisfactory pains, they bring us
examples of castigatory and exemplary pains, which served only to correct and
amend David, and make him an example; not to satisfy Gods justice, or to pay
any recompense to him. Of that David himself is a good example, thus speaking
of himself, Psalm 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I
might learn thy statutes. And the Apostle, Heb. 12.10. God chasteneth us for
our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness. The chastening of a
Father, and the punishment of a Judge are different things. There is great
difference between bearing the corrections of our God, and satisfying his
justice. Medicines are not satisfactions or payments. They that strike a man in
a fit of falling sickness, do it not to be avenged of him, or to draw
satisfactions from him, but for the ease of the patient. David never intended
by the afflictions which he suffered to satisfy Gods Justice; that would have
been an intolerable burden, but he comforted himself in that confidence, that
God chastened him as a father his son. Chrysostom in the Homily of Penitence
and Confession, says that God imposes pains upon us, not to punish us for
sins past, but to mend us for the time to come. And Austin in the second Book
of the merit of sins, and of remission, chap. 34. Pains before the remission of
the fault are punishments of sin, but after the remission they are combats and
exercises of the righteous. And so Ambrose in the first Book of Penitence,
chap. 4. speaking of the chastenings wherewith God visits his children, His
indignation is not an execution of revenge, but rather an effect of pardon. And
as for David's case, Austin in the fore-alleadged place says, that he was
punished after the pardon, Vt pietas hominis in illa humilitate exerceretur and
probaretur; that the piety of that man might be exercised and tried in that
humiliation. It was not then out of revenge, or to draw satisfaction from him
to the justice of God. The castigatory pains of Gods children, which serve to
mend them, are very unreasonably alleged to establish the torment of
Purgatory, where souls are burning without mending, and where they hold that
God tormenteth the souls of his children to content himself, and satisfy his
justice, not to mend them: As if, because a father makes his son to take
Physic to heal him, one would infer that he will hang him to content himself.

II. To this Bellarmine opposes the words of God himself, 2 Samuel 12.14.
Because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die. Whence he
gathers, that God sent him that punishment for his sins past. But this Cardinal
labors in vain to prove that which we grant. We know that David was punished
for his sins past, and that his murder, and adultery, were the meritorious
causes of that punishment; but the question between us is about the final
cause, and the end which God purposed when he chastened him; whether God
punished David's sins to satisfy his justice, and to draw from him recompense
and satisfaction, as our Adversaries will have it; or, whether he chastised him
to amend him, and make him wiser for the future, as we affirm, and as David
himself does acknowledge. For since God had fully pardoned him, the pains that
followed must be compatible with that first pardon: Now they are things
compatible and very well agreeing together, that a father forgive his son, and
yet keep him to a Physical diet or abstinence. He may forgive him an excess
committed by drunkenness, and yet forbid him the use of wine for a time. But
the Doctors of the Roman Church teach, that God tormenteth souls after he has
fully forgiven them.

IV. Hereby also their example is confuted of the damned, whose father God is,
as he is their Creator, and yet he makes them satisfy his justice in Hell.
For God does not punish the damned, after he has fully pardoned them. But here
the question is of the pain which God inflicteth upon his children after
remission, not of that which he makes his enemies to suffer whom he never
pardoned.

V. The tears, the fast, and the humiliation of David, were not to satisfy
Gods justice, nor to pay him any recompense, as Bellarmine imagines, but they
were effects of his sorrow, signs and helps of his repentance, and a lesson to
others to teach them how much they ought to hate sin. It would have been an
aggravation of sin in David, if he had been senseless at Gods rods, and had not
bowed under his mighty hand, or had given himself to mirth, when Gods
judgments or threatenings invited him to repentance.

VI. Bellarmine says, that God, after he had pardoned David's fault about the
numbering of the people; did nevertheless punish him. 2 Samuel 24.
But of that pardon after the punishment, the sacred history says nothing. And
the punishment that followed, was not laid upon David especially, but upon the
people, who for other reasons had deserved that punishment: But God took
occasion of David's fault in numbering the people, to punish the people which he
was numbering. Yet nothing happened to David, that may not be taken rather for a
chastisement then a satisfaction. Now the wholesome chastisements whereby God
exercises and instructs his children, agree very well with their pardon.

VII. They allege to us also the example of David, forgiving Shimei who had
cursed and reviled him to his face, and yet Shimei was since put to death for
the same crime that was forgiven him. In which passage they find, to their
thinking, that David forgave him the fault, but not the pain. So that, by their
reckoning, when Shimei was put to death, it was not because of the fault which
he had committed since it was forgiven him. They should have told us then for
what fault he was put to death. These men put out their own eyes, and study to
speak absurd things. Read the history, and you shall find that David had not
forgiven Shimei; but that when Abishai required that he should be put to death,
David answered, Shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? 2 Samuel
19.22.
for do I not know that I am this day King over Israel? David seeing himself
that day restored to the Kingdom, would not trouble the public joy, by
spilling the blood of any man, wherefore he said to Shimei, Thou shall not die;
but he did not tell him whether that promise was for ever, or for that time
only, reserving to himself the intelligence of that which might be diversely
understood. Besides it is evident by the second Chapter of the first Book of
the Kings, that Shimei was put to death, not for his curses, but because he was
gone out of Jerusalem against the express prohibition of Solomon. The
remembrance of the first fault, 1 King. 2.16. and the following verses.
made him to be punished for the second. Truly, if a King having fully pardoned
a man's crime, should afterward put him to death for the same crime, he should
cast a great blur upon his reputation, and hardly would any man trust his word
after that, although he should use the distinction of the Roman Church, that he
has pardoned the fault, not the pain.

VIII. Bellarmine brings the example of those that were slain by Gods
commandment for worshipping the golden calf, and says that God had forgiven
them: But he says that without proof. For Scripture says not that God had
forgiven them. And though he had, the punishment which happened since the
pardon, ought to be considered, not as inflicted to give satisfaction to
justice after the remission of the fault, but to give example unto others.

IX. The same I say of Moses and Aaron, who were punished for not glorifying
God in the waters of Meriba. For it was an example to all the people to trust
in the Word of God. And the same of the Corinthians punished with death and
sickness, for the profanation of the holy Communion. In all these God took no
satisfaction after the fault remitted, but did chastise sins by an exemplary
punishment.

X. To the same purpose they object, Numb. 14.20. where God says that he has
pardoned the people, yet two verses after, God denounces to the most part of
that people, that they should never see the Country which God had promised
them.

I answer, First that it is a great licentiousness to bring examples of the
pardon granted to a great people, when the question is about the pardon of
sins, which God grants to every particular person. For among a great
multitude, there being some good some evil, it is not possible that the pardon
granted to a Nation, be understood to be alike effectual to all the
particulars. Neither ought we to believe that in a Nation, the impenitent have
the same benefit of a pardon as the penitent, that become new men.

Secondly, They are mistaken, if they believe that God pardoned the sin of that
Nation, with the pardon whereby salvation is obtained. For of that very people
the Apostle to the Hebrews says, Heb. 3.11. Heb. 4.5, 6, 7.
that God swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest; by which
rest, the same Apostle declares a little after, that the heavenly rest must be
understood. The sense of that text, Numb. 14.20. is clear. In the twelfth verse
God had spoken as if he would have extermined that people in an instant, and
made Moses to grow to a great Nation, but at the request of Moses he executes
not that threatening. Yet the fault of that people was not blotted out, as for
the eternal salvation, as the Apostle teaches us.

XI. They think they have some reason to allege unto us the example of Adam,
whom God pardoned, and yet punished. I answer, that if Adam was saved, as we
presume, the pains which he suffered in his life were not satisfactory, nor
laid on him to satisfy Gods justice, but were chastenings and profitable
exercises for his salvation and amendment.

XII. They say also, that the godly whose fault God has fully pardoned, die
nevertheless: And that little children, to whom God has forgiven original sin,
yet bear the pain of that original sin, which is death, and that death is not a
castigatory pain that may serve to amend a sinner, or to instruct and warn him
for the time to come: And by consequent (say they) it is a satisfactory pain to
content the Justice of God.

This argument is very injurious against the death of Gods children, putting it
among the Judgments of God, and the satisfactory pains to satisfy his
justice. Our Adversaries call with good reason, the death of Martyrs a triumph
and a crown, because for them death, which by nature is evil, changes nature,
becomes honorable, and is put among Gods blessings, as having a conformity
with the Cross of Christ. Why shall we not say the same of the death of the
godly, that yield their souls unto God with joy, and by that death are exempted
from sin, and put in possession of life? And that because Christ by his death
has taken away the curse of ours, and made death which by nature is the gate
of hell, to become the gate of heaven, bringing to us under the hideous face of
death, the gift of everlasting life. Is it material, whether we yield our soul
unto God by the mouth, or by the wound? By a burning fire, or by a burning
Fever? by a commotion of humors, or by a popular commotion, since both the
ways we go to God alike? and that many without Martyrdom die, having the zeal
and the virtue of Martyrs? Was it to satisfy Gods justice by torments, that
Lazarus dying, yielded his soul unto God, which was carried into Abraham's
bosom? Was it to satisfy by punishment, Genesis 49.18.
that Jacob departing in peace was saying, I have waited for thy salvation O
Lord? Certainly they that put death among satisfactory pains, make the death of
the Saints very bitter. It is a cold comfort to a godly person dying, to tell
him, that he must take his death as a punishment from God: that he must bear it
to content his justice; and that God having forgiven the fault, yet will be
paid and satisfied for the pain.

The same I say of the death of little children, whose sin is blotted out by
the blood of Christ, being sealed with the seal of Gods Covenant by Baptism. To
these God grants a great privilege to hasten their rest, and to bring them
betimes out of the combat, to exempt them from temptations, and give them the
reward of workmen, before the heat of the day. If they feel pain in death, it
is because the passage is troublesome, but a strait and troublesome passage is
not a payment nor a satisfaction. Do our Adversaries believe that the Virgin
Mary dyed without pain? And yet they would not say that her death was a
satisfaction or a punishment of her sin.

Besides, it is without reason that the evils that are general unto all
mankind, are here alleged, seeing here the question is of those evils only,
which are proper unto Gods children, to whom the fault is altogether remitted.
Sicknesses and death happen to Gods children, not as they are Gods children,
but as they are men; but God makes those evils to change their nature; he makes
evils to become remedies, sicknesses medicines, and death an entry into life.

XIII. Our Adversaries finding no help in Scripture, try the help of Reason, to
no better purpose: They say that we acknowledge as well as they, that the
regeneration of the godly is done by degrees, not in an instant: Whence they
infer, that we ought not to find it strange, if by the same reason the
remission of sins is not done all at once, but by degrees and progresses, God
forgiving first the sault, and then the pain. This reasoning will help to clear
the Truth; For regeneration and the amendment of the godly is done by degrees,
and by little and little. We advance in it by labor, by the exercise of good
works, and by continuing instant in prayers: And that because it is an habit
which is contracted, and a quality which is formed in us. But the remission of
sins is a decree of Gods Counsel, which changes not, and advances not by
increase or addition. Thus the King gives pardon to a felon in an instant, not
by degrees. Besides in the progress of regeneration and amendment of life, the
last degrees are not repugnant unto the first. But here they will have God to
forgive the whole fault, without forgiving the whole pain, which are things
repugnant. For he that remits not the whole pain, shows thereby that he has
not forgiven the whole fault, else it would be a pain without fault, and a
punishment for a sin fully pardoned.

XIV. They allege, that after the King has granted to a guilty man his life,
yet he lays heavy Fines upon him. I said in another place, that in that case
the pardon which the King granted was not a full pardon, but a diminution of
pain: but that God does not give half pardons. He does wholly forgive his
children for whom Christ is dead, for he is infinitely merciful, and Christ
has fully satisfied for them. The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

XV. Others say, that This Rule belongs to the Civil Law, and to the municipal
Laws of France.
after that the King has given to a felon his grace, he must satisfy his
Adversary; whence they infer, that after that the King has pardoned the whole
fault, he must yet satisfy, and bear the pain. This is a reason without
reason. For the King cannot justly exempt a man from paying his debts, nor give
leave to a Robber to withold his neighbors goods. But God may without
injustice remit the whole pain, as well as the fault, as our Adversaries
acknowledge. Here it is especially to be noted, that a felon after he has
obtained the Kings grace, yet is obliged to satisfy the offended party,
because the King and the adverse party are two, and that the right of the
offended party is not in the Kings power: But here God who is the King, is also
the offended party; who when he has remitted all his interest, there remains
no more party to be satisfied. So these Doctors, by that example of the King
condemn themselves. For should not that felon be mad, who having obtained the
Kings grace, would come and ask his Majesty, Sir, You have forgiven me the
fault only, do you mean to forgive me the pain also? These men study to paint
Gods Temple with Chimera's, and those conceits which in all other things would
be ridiculous, they find reasonable in matter of Religion.

XVI. No more reason have they to say, that in all Gods actions mercy and
justice must shine together. Now Gods mercy (say they) shines by pardoning us
the whole fault, and his justice by making us bear the satisfactory pain. By
thus reasoning they condemn the Popes plenary indulgences, whereby the sinner
after the remission of the fault, is exempted also from all the pain, whereby
they think to satisfy Gods justice. Thereby also they condemn the absolutions
which are given without expecting any satisfaction. And their maxim is false,
for toward Devils, God uses Sovereign justice without mercy. The Apostle
James Jam. 2.13.
tells us, That he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no
mercy. So we must not find it strange, if God uses mercy to some without
execution of his justice, according to that sentence, Romans 8.1.
that there is no condemnation for them that are in Christ Jesus. Yet toward
the sins of the godly, God has used his whole justice by punishing them in
Christ wholly and fully; and receiving from his son a perfect satisfaction to
his own justice: But together, he has set forth his mercy, imputing unto them
that satisfaction. As for the means of applying that satisfaction, we shall
speak of them afterward. If any being moved with compassion toward the Devil
and the damned souls, will affirm that God uses some mercy toward them, he
speaks without any authority of Gods Word, and tells us news of that Country,
as having intelligences there, or as newly returned from thence.

We have showed why the remission of the fault excludes not castigatory pains,
but excludes satisfactory punishments. If remission of sins exempted us from
chastening, it would serve to corrupt us, and so remission of sins would be a
kind of punishment. In this life there is no worse pain then impunity, for
thereby a man becomes insolent and abandoned to all evil. It would be an ill
privilege of a father to one of his children, to exempt him from taking
Physic when he is sick. The like cannot be said of satisfactory pains, as they
make the pain of Purgatory, which serves not to amend the sinner, for there
they hold that souls sin no more. Our Adversaries will not deny, that to be
exempted from that torment, would be a great benefit.

CHAP. 6. That the Satisfactions of the Roman Church, derogate from Christ's
satisfafaction, and are injurious against Gods Justice.
CArdinal Bellarmine Bellar. lib. 1. de Purgat. c. 14.. Respondeo si. Homo sui
ipsius redemptor and salvator appellatur, etc. Respondeo tres esse modos
dicendi, Primus quorundam est, qui asserunt unam tantum and illam Christi esse,
ac nos proprie non satisfacere, etc. quae sententia erronea mihi videtur, nam
Scriptura and Patres passim vocant nostra opera satisfactiones and redemptiones.
disputing of the ways to satisfy Gods justice for our sins, says that upon
that point there are three diverse opinions. The first is of those that say,
that there is but one satisfaction to Gods justice for our sins, which is that
of Christ. Which opinion he says to be erroneous, affirming that the good
works that we do, are satisfactions and redemptions for our sins, and makes no
difficulty to say, that in Scripture the faithful man is called the Savior and
Redeemer of himself.

The second opinion is of those that say, that there are two satisfactions, the
one that of Christ, the other our own, yet so, that ours depends on that of
Christ, which opinion he says to be probable, and yet he rejects it, and
follows the third.

He says then, Tertius tamen modus videtur probabilior, quod una tantum sit
actualis satisfactio and ea sit nostra.
The third way seems to me more probable, that there is but one actual [or
real] satisfaction, and that the same is our own. He acknowledges no
satisfaction indeed, but our works or sufferings: and acknowledging that Christ
has satisfied, he holds not his satisfaction to be actual, but that it serves
only to give a value to our satisfactions, and that by it we come to have the
grace to satisfy. As if he said, that Christ's death is not actually and indeed
the ransom for our sins, but that it gives us virtue to pay our ransom: Or that
it is not a payment, but that it is like the Philosophical stone, which by her
touch makes our payment, that we our selves furnish, to become good money, and
that by virtue of the same, the pains of Purgatory are accepted for redemption,
from the pain due for the sins committed after Baptism. For this cause he
maintains that, homo sui ipsius Redemptor and salvator appellatur; man is
called the Redeemer and Savior of himself. This is not mincing, it is roundly
and openly blaspheming against the Son of God.

If this doctrine be true, we must say that the Apostle spoke but
inconsiderately, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6.
when he said, that the Lord Jesus is the only Mediator, who gave himself a
ransom for us; for to speak the language of these Gentlemen, he should have
said, that Christ gave not himself actually a ransom for us, but that he gives
us the grace to pay our ransom our selves, and that there is no other actual
satisfaction to Gods justice, but that which we do our selves. And the Apostle
to the Hebrews, chap. 1. v. 3. ought not to have said that Christ had by
himself purged our sins, that is, in his own person. For to speak as the Roman
Church does, he should have said, that he gives us the grace to purge our sins
our own selves by the torment that we bear in Purgatory.

The question is then of the nature and efficacy of Christ's satisfaction, who
his own self bore our sins in his own body upon the tree, and by whose stripes
we are healed. 1 Pet. 2.24. Isa. 53.5.
And as Isaiah says, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him; where the word
chastisement signifies satisfaction. He is the propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only, 1 John 2.2.
but also for the sins of the whole world, says Saint John. Col. 1.19, 20.
For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. And having
made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things unto
himself, says Saint Paul. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there
is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, says
Saint Peter. Acts 4.12.


I. Here then I ask these Doctors that would be Saviors and Redeemers of
themselves, whether Christ by his death and sufferings has paid and satisfied
Gods justice for all the pain, both eternal and temporal due to our sins? And
to speak more plainly, I ask, Whether Christ paid and satisfied for the pain
of Purgatory? If he did not satisfy for the pain of Purgatory, he did not
satisfy for the whole satisfactory pain which is due to us, and there will be
need of some addition to the ransom and satisfaction which Christ paid for us.
And it will be hard enough for them to find in any man that which is deficient
in Christ, and to find where or how to supply what they find wanting in the
death of Christ. But if Christ has satisfied for all the satisfactory pain of
sins, both eternal and temporal, and both for Hell and for Purgatory, it is
certain that his end in satisfying for the pain due in Purgatory, was to exempt
us from it. If he paid the debt, it was to acquit us. Why should God demand two
satisfactions for the same sins? Why should he take two payments for the same
debt, when the first payment is sufficient? Why should he not receive Christ's
satisfaction for so much as it is worth? Or why should he abate of the value
and efficacy of the same? As if in a payment one would take angels only for
crowns; or having received the whole Covenanted sum for a Prisoners ransom,
would take it for half the ransom only. May not here poor souls frying and
tormented in Purgatory now many ages, justly ask of God why he punishes them,
when they are without fault? Why does he make his children to bear the
punishment of a sin fully pardoned, yea of a sin for which Christ has fully
satisfied? Truly, should that be done to a stranger, yea to an enemy, it would
be unjust dealing. How much more when a father does that usage to his children?
Where is that Sovereign bounty of the heavenly Father? Where are those tender
compassions? that infinite mercy whereby he delivered his Son unto death to
save his enemies, and make them heirs of his Kingdom?

II. And since they acknowledge that there is a residue of the merit of Christ
above that we need for our salvation, yea so much above, that one only drop of
his blood (if our Adversaries may be believed) was sufficient to redeem many
worlds, and both from Hell and Purgatory; why, since the payment is greater
then needs, is it not employed by God for so great a need?

III. Do they not contradict themselves, when they say that Christ has
redeemed us from the eternal pain, not from the temporal? For it is as if they
said, Christ has redeemed us for ever, but not for two or three hundred years.
That he has satisfied for all, but not for this or for that. For the pain of
Purgatory (if there be any) is comprehended within eternity.

IV. Ask them proofs of their assertion by the Word of God, they will answer as
if you made them another question. They will bring Texts of Scripture that
exhort to good works, and to penitence, and to sufferings for Christ's sake, and
they accuse us of a dastard mind, because we refuse to satisfy in our own
person. But they could not yet bring one Text of Gods Word to prove that by
Baptism the pain indeed, and the fault of the precedent sins is blotted out,
but that for the sins committed since our Baptism, it lies upon us to satisfy
for the pain thereof, both in this life and in Purgatory. And that in that
respect the godly are Redeemers of themselves, and satisfy Gods justice. That
doctrine is a new Gospel unknown to the Apostles, and a fundamental Article of
the Roman faith taken from the unwritten word.

V. Holy Scripture sets forth Christ unto us, as sent into the world to remedy
the evil which the sin of Adam has brought into the world. To that the most
part of the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans is employed. Now it is
an inconvenient doctrine, that Adam should have more strength to make us
debtors to Gods justice, then Christ to acquit us of that debt, and give
satisfaction to Gods justice. But Adam by his sin has made all his posterity
subject to satisfy Gods justice, both by temporal and by eternal pains. Christ
therefore was sent into the world to satisfy for us, so that by his
satisfaction we are discharged from the obligation of satisfying Gods justice,
either by temporal or eternal pains.

VI. Against that doctrine of the Roman Church, Cardinal Bellarmine moves an
objection in these words, Bellar. lib. 1. de Purgat. c. 14. Sect. Quarta.
If Christ's satisfaction be applied unto us by our [satisfactory] works, either
they are two satisfactions joined together, the one of Christ, the other our
own; or it is but one satisfaction. If they are two, then the same fault is
twice punished, and two punishments answer one fault. Or if there is but one
satisfaction, either it is that of Christ, and so it is not we that satisfy;
or it is our own, and so Christ shall be excluded. Or else we shall share that
honor with Christ, he paying for the fault, we for the pain.

To that objection the Cardinal answers nothing, but only propounds three
several opinions, of which he chooses the worst, saying, that in effect there
is but one satisfaction, which is ours, and that our works are the redemption
of our sins.

VII. One reason seems to me very strong against these satisfactions and penal
works, whereby they pretend to satisfy Gods justice by the punishment, after
the full pardon of the sin. That whosoever will pay or satisfy, he must do it
with his own, not with another man's estate. Much less can a debt be paid, by
giving to the Creditor that which belongs to him already: For then the Creditor
will say, you pay me with mine own goods: You take money out of my purse to pay
me, and thereby pretend to be quit. Our Adversaries do the very same: They pay
and satisfy God with his own; for we cannot offer any work which may be
acceptable unto him, unless it proceed from his grace; And after all, they say
that God is satisfied according to the Laws of commutative justice, which
pays so much for so much, and they say themselves to be Redeemers of
themselves.

VIII. Of this argument the strength grows, when we come to consider what God
is, and what we are. For the distance being infinite, and the inequality
between God and man without measure, all that we do to satisfy his justice
cannot have any, I say not equality (although our Adversaries speak that
language) but not so much as any proportion. It is of this, as of the Suns
beams beating upon a looking glass, whose reflection does not reach to the Sun
again, who is extreme far from the sphere of activity of the glass. Thus David
speaking of all the good that he could do, said to God, My goodness extends
not to thee, Psalm 16.2. That holy servant of God, did not aim to pay unto God
a satisfaction ex condigno, by equality of recompense. If a company of Pismires
did present a rich man with the fourth part of a corn of Wheat, stolen out of
the same man's barn, what satisfaction could that present give him? Yet between
Ants and the greatest Kings there is some proportion, for both are finite
things. But between the infinite God, and man who is finite, yea and wicked,
poor, weak, and infinitely in Gods debt, there is no proportion.

IX. This will be more evident yet, when we consider that a servant that must
serve his Master every day, cannot by yielding to day the service that he
owes, satisfy thereby for his disobedience of the days before. He that owes
a crowns rent every Month, cannot by paying the crown this Month satisfy for
the arrears of the Month before, nor for other debts of many years that are
behind. Now there is never a day but is wholly due unto God, and all our labor
is his due. How can a sinner then by fasting, praying, and giving alms,
satisfy Gods justice for sins past, as the Roman Church will have it, seeing
that the service which he does to day, is due for this very day? What more? for
that very service which we owe him at this present time, we shall never render
unto God all that we ought to pay, whatsoever we do: So far are we from
satisfying by our present works for our sins past. For we owe unto God all that
we can, yea we owe our own selves. And among our best works there is always
some imperfection, and matter for craving pardon.

X. To show here the wrestling of truth against untruth in a prejudicate mind,
and obstinately set upon error, I will bring here Cardinal Bellarmine's words,
Bellar. lib. 4. de Poenitentia, cap. 8. Illud antea praemittendum putamus, nos
hoc loco de satisfactione illa verba facere, quae (ut nostri loquuntur) ex
condigno quidem poenam temporalem explets non tamen ex rigore justitiae.
Satisfactio enim ex rigore justitiae duo requirit, ut satisfiat ex propriis,
and ad aequalitatem, nulla videlicet praeveniente aut intercedente gratia ejus,
cui debetur satisfactio. Nos autem neque aliquid habemus, quod Dei non sit,
neque possumus ullo genere honoris adaequare injuriam quam Deo fecimus, cum
injuriae mensura aestimetur ex dignitate Dei quae infinita est, mensura honoris
quem illi impendimus, aestimetur ex infirmitate nostra quae est finita and
perexigua.
We must (says he) give this warning beforehand, that we speak in this place
of that satisfaction, which (as our Doctors speak) expiates the temporal pain
by a condign (that is equipollent) satisfaction, yet not according to the
rigor of Justice. For satisfaction in the rigor of justice requires two
things, that we satisfy with our own proper goods and with equality, no grace
of him to whom the satisfaction is due prevening or intervening. But we have
nothing that belongs not unto God, and we cannot by any kind of honor equal
the injury which we have done to God, seeing that the measure of the injury is
esteemed by the dignity of God which is infinite, and the measure of the honor
which we yield unto him, is esteemed according to our dignity, which is finite
and very small.

This is evidently the language of a man set upon the rack, who having said
before, things that directly oppose the Word of God, and where untruth is
evident, namely, that we can expiate the temporal pain by condign or
equipollent satisfaction, endeavors to return to the good way, and to give
glory to God, but soon after the spirit of error gives him a stop, and makes
him turn about again: For he adds, Nihilominus tamen accedente Dei gratia eaque
multiplici, vere possumus, aliquo modo, ex propriis, and ad aequalitatem, ac
per hoc just and ex condigno satisfacere.
Nevertheless the grace of God intervening, and that grace being of many sorts,
we can truly, in some sort, give satisfaction of our own, and with equality,
and by consequent justly satisfy, and with condignity, that is, with
equipoellncy. Truly he had clearly proved, that we cannot satisfy God with any
thing of our own, nor present any satisfaction unto God, but that there will be
an infinite distance between that satisfaction, and that which is due by the
rigor of justice. But now overthrowing all that he had said, he coyneth a
grace of God, which makes us to give unto God a satisfaction of our own, and
with equality and condignity. Truly, if it be the grace of God that we
satisfy, the satisfaction is not of our own. And if it be infinitely under the
rigor of justice, it is not with equality and equipollency. Besides, that
doctrine puts our satisfactions and torments among the graces of God. And so we
must believe that to be burnt in a vehement fire for many ages, is a grace of
God, and one of his blessings. But I should rather think, that to be free from
that torment is a grace of God. And if to be delivered from that torment by
Indulgences is a grace of God, here is one grace of God that destroys
another, and a blessing of God, that keeps God from doing us so much grace as
to torment us.

XI. The force of truth gives another stretch to our Adversaries, and extorts
this confession from them, That it follows from their doctrine, that God
takes a greater payment then needs, according to the rigor of justice, and a
greater satisfaction then justice requires, because Christ having sufficiently
paid both for all the pain and for all the fault, yet he requires from us
another satisfaction for the same pain, for which Christ has fully satisfied.
These are the words of Gregorius de Valentia, Gregor. de Valent. lib. de Satis.
c. 3. sect. Hoc tamen. Hoc tamen ex hac re consequi negandum non est nempe,
compensationem pro offensa per aliquid amplius Deo fieri, quam alioqui secundum
rigorem justitiae oportuisset. Siquidem absque nostra satisfactione potuisset
sola Christi satisfactio abundantissime sufficere.
We must not deny that hence it follows, that the compensation for the
offense is done to God by some thing more then otherwise it needed, according
to the rigor of Justice; for the satisfaction of Christ alone might have been
most abundantly sufficient, without our satisfaction. And a little after, Neque
vero injustum est, quod plus in offensae compensationem Deus ex pacto exigit,
quam alioqui satis esse potuisset, etc.
God by paction exacteth more for the compensation of the offense, then might
have been sufficient, etc. which he maintains to be just. Quo fit, ut
secundum justitiae normam satisfiat Patri aeterno in proposito, etiamsi aliquid
amplius, quam alioqui ad aequalitatem oportuisset, ipsi offeratur.
Whence (says he) it happens that satisfaction is made to the eternal Father,
according to the rule of justice, and as he had purposed it, although something
more be presented to him, then needed to satisfy with equality. Could one
disgrace more the justice of God, or offer a greater wrong to his Mercy? For
not only Fathers, but equitable Judges use to remit somewhat of the rigor of
Justice toward Delinquents by the virtue of (...).
equity, which for considerable causes abates something of (...).
the rigor of the Law, giving a favorable interpretation to the Law,
according to that rule that summum jus very often is summa injuria. But these
men will have God to exact more satisfaction then is due to him by the rigor
of justice, and to take a greater payment then he should; Yea that he exceeds
the rigor of Justice in punishing his own children.

XII. Also it ought to be considered in what state that doctrine puts
consciences. For holy Scripture teaches us to glory in our afflictions, and to
be well pleased with the chastisements wherewith God visits us, taking them for
wholesome remedies and testimonies of his love. But these men study to aggravate
afflictions, and dip them in gall; teaching Gods children to believe that God
afflicts them to content his justice, not chastising them as a father does his
children, but punishing them as a Judge does felons to get satisfaction from
them. It is but a poor glory for one to pay his debts by torments. It is a cold
comfort to yield to necessity, saying, God justly torments me, for he executes
his judgments against me, and his Justice takes satisfaction from me. But
alas! when shall I have satisfied enough? When shall his justice be fully
satisfied? What do I know how much I owe? or what God will allow me for every
lash, and every fast? Truly it is hard to know that, seeing that Bellarmine in
his Book De gemitu columbae, says that Pope Innocent the III. is condemned to
be in Purgatory till the day of judgment, although he be reckoned among the
most excellent Popes, who made more Decrees then any, and deprest the Crowns of
Kings under the Papal See, more then any other Pope. Masses are still said at
Saint Denis for the soul of King Dagobert, dead above a thousand years ago,
although he was a very devout King, and he that made the greatest gathering of
relics. What may then the condition be of a Gentleman or a Merchant, who in
his lifetime contented himself to believe in Christ, and never troubled
himself to buy the satisfactions of other men; and obeying Gods Commandments to
his power, never pretended to works of supererrogation? For the relief of such
a man's soul, perhaps his surviving friends may think it their best course to go
to some privileged Altar, to which the Pope has granted, that who so gets a
Mass to be sung upon it, fetches a soul out of Purgatory, such as he will call
for; and where the Pope has given seven or eight hundred thousand years of
true pardon, that there may be enough to spare, and more then one needs. For to
hope that Christ sitting at the right hand of God, and there interceding for
us, will without help deliver a soul out of Purgatory, these Gentlemen hold it
an ill-grounded hope, and a self-flattery. There is (belike) in his Holinesses
power a more certain relief, which may be had with a little money.

XIII. I add, that as sins were voluntary, the satisfactions for sins must also
be voluntary. Now the satisfaction that souls are said to make in Hell, is not
voluntary, for there is none but would exempt himself from Purgatory if it were
in his power, and choose rather to be in Paradise. Thus these souls pay unto God
a satisfaction, which though they endure with patience, yet they are not come
to it with their good will. God receives no such payments, or compensations,
or satisfactions to his justice. The propitiatory offerings under the Law were
to be voluntary, Deuteronomy. 16.10. Christ laid down his life willingly for us, John
10.17, 18. Gods people is a willing people, Psalm 110.3. A forced punishment,
though born with patience, is not a satisfaction to Gods justice. For willing
faults, God will have willing satisfactions, and none shall be found such, but
that of the Son of God.

XIV. Gods most perfect justice receives none but a most perfect satisfaction.
Now in our sufferings there is always some infirmity of faith, and some
impatience. Wherefore we repose our consciences altogether upon that
satisfaction which Christ has paid for us, because it is that only that has
no imperfection, and in which God finds matter enough to satisfy his justice.
We then relying altogether upon Christ's satisfaction, who satisfied for all our
sins, and for all the pain, both eternal and temporal, bear the afflictions
which God sends us, not as satisfactions to his justice (for we should sink
under that burden, God being infinitely great, and infinitely just, and we
small, weak, guilty, and defective in our best works) but as Fatherly
chastenings, trials of our faith, and bridles to our worldly desires.

XV. Truly the pardons which the Pope gives, whereby a man is exempted from
satisfying, show sufficiently that in the Roman Church satisfactions are not
held necessary, but that they hold rather, that without satisfying Gods justice
with torments, a man may be saved.

XVI. And the profit that the Clergy gets thereby, by particular Masses, which
are sung to deliver those souls from Purgatory, that have given to the Church
(for they are never sung for one that has given nothing) and the traffic of
Indulgences, so lucrative to his Holiness, make us sufficiently know the end of
their so eager fighting for humane satisfactions. God having received from his
beloved Son Jesus Christ a full payment for our sins, these Gentlemen will give
him a second payment, that themselves may have the third payment.

XVII. Here the injury offered unto God is notorious, for they are not
contented to add unto the satisfaction of the eternal Son of God other
satisfactions, of which the Word of God says nothing, but they present unto
God satisfactions, of which some are vain, as self-whipping, wearing a rope for
a girdle, going barefoot to visit relics, mumbling up seven Psalms in Latin,
not knowing the language; some are wicked and unjust.

XVIII. I call that an unjust satisfaction, when a sinner gets another to whip
himself for him, or to fast in his room. For it is charging God with blindness,
and making him an unreasonable Judge, that will relase a felon because his
neighbor whipped himself for him. A goodly excuse for a sinner, endited before
Gods judgment of several crimes, to say, Lord all that is true, but I have
made satisfaction for it, for such a friend of mine has whipped himself for me,
and has fasted so many days for me, which I pretend to be allowed for me,
though all that while I was feasting. And Saint Dominick whom I have chosen for
my Patron, suffered much more then he needed for his own sins, and whipped
himself three times a day, almost every day, with an iron chain, till the blood
came, to expiate the sins of others. But the language of Gods Spirit agrees
not with that. For the Apostle says, Gal. 6.5. that every man shall bear his
own burden; and 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. And David, Psalm 49.7. None can
by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him. That Royal
Prophet had not learned this doctrine, that the Saints are in some sort our
Redeemers, as Bellar. lib. 1. Indulg. cap. 4.
Bellarmine says, since by the Law it was forbidden Deuteronomy. 24.16.
to put the fathers to death for the children, or the children for the fathers,
should God do a thing which himself declares to be unjust? Should the great
and just Judge accept in his judgment my pain for the sin of another? If one
says, Such a man indeed has whipped himself for me, and fasted for me, but I
have paid him for it, and he has taken my money in the nature of Alms to
satisfy for me; he abuses God two ways, 1. The one by supposing, that for
the pain which Charles should pay in Purgatory, God be contented that Philip
whip himself. 2. The other, by thinking that God will accept money instead of
whipping. No Judge in the world is such an idiot, as to behave himself so. And
after all, we must return to the Word of God, and see what declaration God has
made of his will upon that subject, and what assurance we have that he will
accept of the sufferings and fasts of another man, for satisfaction for our
sins.

XIX. I call also those satisfactions unjust, whereby a sinner is enjoined to
do those things which he is bound to do without that injunction, and to which
he is obliged, though there were no satisfaction for him to make. A man that
has committed murder or adultery, will come to a Priest and confess himself,
and receive absolution; But upon condition that he shall say so many prayers,
and give so much in alms, and that is called satisfaction or recompense for the
pain due to that sin. It is well done, to enjoin good works to the sinner, but
the sinner must do those good works, though he had committed neither murder
nor adultery. It is an ordinary duty which we owe unto God, and we shall never
do so much as we owe. Wherefore these good works cannot be instead of
satisfactory pains for sins past; both because we owe them without that, and
because good works are not punishments or satisfactory pains. Yea, I would hold
it a great punishment, if I were hindered to do them. Gregor. de Valentia, lib.
de satisfact. cap. 4.. Porro. Ex part operum, per quae satisfieri debet Deo,
asserendum est duo debere inesse illis; Alterum ut placeant and sint gratae
Deo; Alterum ut habeant quandam difficultatem seu molestiam.
A work must be troublesome and full of pain, that it may be satisfactory, says
Gregorius de Valentia. So that by his reckoning, it is a trouble to serve God.
It is a foul art of Satan to put good works among pains, and satisfactory
fines, to make them odious, and that men may do them against their heart. As if
one said to a sinner, To punish thee for thy sin, I condemn thee to be a good
man. When such a man shall give alms, he will say in his heart, This is a
penance which I must bear for the pain of my sin. As when the Court of
Parliament (that is, the high Court of Justice) besides other punishments of a
felon, An usual course in the Court of Parliament of Paris.
fines him in so much alms to the poor, such an alms must not be put among good
works, it is a punishment. Likewise prayers cease to be good works, when one is
punished with praying. As indeed those to whom that punishment is imposed, to
read the seven Penitential Psalms many times over, make as much haste as they
can, biting their nails as they read, and when they begin, they wish they had
done. In the same manner as they that are whipped while the Psalm is read, wish
that the Psalm were shorter, and the favorable Reader makes haste to come
quickly to vitulos.

XX. Hence arises another absurdity, in which God is manifestly derided. For
if one fast for another, the Doctors hold that in respect of him that fasteth,
that work is meritorious of salvation, but in respect of him for whom he
fasteth, the work is satisfactory. Truly, if he that fasteth purchases eternal
life by the merit of his fast, I must think that his fast is sufficiently
recompensed, and yet they will have the same work to serve to pay for another,
and to satisfy before God for his neighbor, and that the work be meritorious
in one regard, and satisfactory in another. As if one would have a thousand
pounds which he bestows upon the buying of an house, to serve also to acquit
another of the debt of a thousand pounds; so dividing the money, that cross
should purchase the house, and pyle should pay the debt. A Judge that should
pronounce such a sentence would be accounted mad: And yet these Doctors will
have God to judge so. But if this being done by men, be unreasonable, and
unjust, why shall the same be thought just and equitable for God to do, in that
high matter of doing justice unto men? And if the same work can be meritorious
for one that does it, and satisfactory for another that does it not, much more
shall it be satisfactory for him that does it: And so the same fast may serve
unto the same man, to satisfy for Purgatory, and to deserve eternal life. For
these men have prescribed that Law unto God, without knowing his will.

XXI. The like may be said of the exchange of corporal into pecuniary Laws: For
besides the foulness of the traffic, it is selling Gods right, and imposing a
Law upon God himself; as if they told him, We have condemned such a man to
satisfy thee with fasting and beating of himself, but now our mind is that
thou content thy self with a little money, which shall not be for thee, but for
the Church, that is, for our selves.

The VI. Roman Council held under Pope Symmachus in the year, 504. shows,
that even then the Roman Church did already exercise that foul traffic, and
got money from the people for the remission of sins. For there we find these
words. Quoniam nonnulli memores sui pro remissione peccatorum suorum and pro
aeternae vitae mercatione de facultatibus suis tam rerum mobilium quam
immobilium quaedam per Scripturas Ecclesus tradiderunt, and Deo Creatori
perpetualiter habenda dederunt.
Some being mindful of themselves, have left unto the Churches by their
writings [or deeds] some of their goods, both moveable and unmovable for the
remission of their sins, and to buy eternal life, and have given them unto God
their Creator to have and to hold for ever. These men speak, as if those that
have given money for the remission of their sins, and to buy eternal life, had
enriched God. But these false Priests have enriched themselves with that which
was given to God. For upon further consideration they have found that God had
no need of it.

XXII. Those penances are little better, whereby a Penitent is condemned to say
the same Prayer many times over by a precise number, in a tongue which he
understands not. The Lord Jesus condemns the Pharisees for using vain
repetitions in their Prayers, Matthew. 6.7. And yet they understood what they
said, and did not tie the virtue of the prayer unto the number. The Spaniards
while they are speaking of other things, will say their beads. In France the
good wives say them as they go to Market. The Italians as they go to the
baudy-house: These are the satisfactions. They satisfy God while they offend
him. If God demanded of us satisfactions, they should use other satisfactions
to expiate such a satisfaction.

XXIII. But the most unjust satisfactions are those that oblige a sinner to be
wicked, pretending to satisfy for a sin, by a greater sin, and to expiate
theft by murder or treason. As when the Pope commands a Prince to invade his
neighbors Country to obtain the remission of his sins. And when he sets forth
indulgences, whereby absolution is given to all that will rebel against their
King. Of which we have brought several examples, and will bring more in this
work. Thus salvation and remission of sins are propounded as rewards of cruelty
and disloyalty. And after all, as if they had purposed to disgrace the
doctrine of the Gospel, they say, that the blood of Christ gives virtue to
these satisfactions, that is, that by wicked actions the merit of the Son of
God is applied to a man's conscience.

XXIV. Of all these satisfactions, so much in general. If they be evil, they
must not be enjoined: If they be good, the Pope ought not to dispense from
them, nor to exempt men from the obedience to this Commandment, Do penitence,
since our Adversaries hold that by that command men are enjoined to bear
satisfactory pains for their sins.

CHAP. 7. Causes why we especially reject the Satisfactions of the pretended
Sacrament of Penitence.
THe Sacramental satisfactions, imposed by Priests, require a chapter by
themselves.

I. Here we demand of the Priests Confessors, who has given them that
authority to impose corporal or pecuniary punishments upon sinners, for thereby
they take upon themselves a dominion over the bodies and goods of persons?
Their answer is that Christ gave them that power when he said to his Disciples,
Whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever
you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. As the Pope thereby
pretends to have the power of dissolving contracts, marriages and obligations
of vows and oaths, and to loose subjects from the bonds of allegiance due to
their Sovereign Prince, and children from their subjection to their parents,
and to deliver souls out of Purgatory; So the Priests extend the power of
binding so far as to impose corporal and pecuniary pains, which is indeed a
bold interpretation, very advantageous and lucrative for them. Now the
interpretations of Scripture must be taken from Scripture it self, not from the
Glosses of them that interpret Scripture for their profit, and assign to it a
sense which is lucrative unto the interpreters.

II. I say then that our Adversaries acknowledge with us that the power of
binding and loosing given to the Apostles, Matthew. 18.18. is the same as that of
remitting and retaining sins, given them, John. 20.23. Thus we expound
Scripture by Scripture, when by binding and loosing we understand retaining or
remitting sins, not imposing corporal or pecuniary pains to satisfy Gods
justice; For of that power Scripture speaks not at all. Nothing of that is
found in the Old Testament, for our Adversaries say that then the power of
forgiving sins was not in the Church. Nothing of that is found in the New
Testament, where we find that Christ sending back the woman taken in adultery
told her only, Go and sin no more, without imposing any satisfactory pain upon
her. And Christ in the 5 of John speaks thus to the sick man whom he had
healed, Behold thou have been made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto thee. Of corporal pain, pecuniary fine, reading of the seven Psalms,
self-whipping, or pilgrimage, he speaks never a word to him. And St. Paul, 2
Cor. 2.7, 10. advises the Church of Corinth to forgive the incestuous man, and
himself forgives him for his part, that is, he will have him released from the
Ecclesiastical Censures and pains. But he imposes no penance or satisfactory
pains upon the man, which he ought to perform after the pardon and
reconciliation to the Church.

III. It is true that in the fifth chapter of the first Epistle he delivers that
incestuous man unto Satan to afflict his body, but that was done before the
pardon; not as the Roman Church does, in which satisfactions are fulfilled
after the absolution. Besides they are deceived if they think that the
incestuous man bore that pain to satisfy Gods justice after the remission of
the fault, or that he paid any recompense unto God for his sin. For that
punishment served to amend him, to heal him of that vice, and to give example
unto others. The same Apostle teaches us this doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.20. where he
brings the example of Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom (says he) I have delivered
unto Satan that they may learn not to blaspheme: It was a chastisement not a
satifaction. A chastisement which served to make them hate blasphemy, not to
pay unto God any recompense or satisfaction.

IV. The ancient Church did the same. Then the Pastors imposed austere penances
of many years upon sinners. But these penances were fulfilled before the
absolution. And as these penitences were public, so the reconciliation of the
sinner was done in public. And these penitences were neither pilgrimages, nor
whipping, nor making another to fast for the sinner, nor any pecuniary fine.
All the pain consisted in being kept from the communion, in fasting, and in
public shame. All that, not to satisfy Gods justice, or to pay him any
recompense or expiation: but to humble the sinner, and mend him, and make his
penitence an example to others. Also to show to them that were none of the
Church, that vices were not approved or tolerated in the Church of God. And the
pardon and absolution of the sinner was only as for Ecclesiastical pains, for
the Pastors took not upon them to absolve in Gods judicial seat.

V. When the Priest imposes satisfactions upon sinners, as fasting whipping
and pilgrimages, we would fain know how he is sure that God will accept of that
payment, and hold himself satisfied with that kind of satisfaction. Do they
know the counsel of God about that? Do they know how much satisfaction he
requires for every sin? Who has given them the power to dispose of Gods
right? Who told them that God would submit himself unto their laws, and do even
as they prescribe? Is it not a rash presumption to impose such pains as they
list, and persuade themselves that God will be content with that satisfaction?
For as for the exercise of abstinence and other exercises, which are used only
to mortify the flesh, and humble the sinner, there is no need of equality
between those exercises of humiliation, and the greatness of the sin, because
they are not intended as payments to Gods Justice. But whosoever either of his own
motion, or by the Priests injunction undertakes to satisfy Gods justice by
penal works, must exactly know what number and measure of them is requisite to
satisfy Gods justice, and how far, and with what, and how great payment he
will be paid.

VI. If then for theft, murder, or sacrilege a Confessor imposes on a
penitent for a penance to receive two hundred lashes of a whip, singing psalms
melodiously; or to say a thousand Ave's interlaced with Pater's, turning his
beads; or to say seventy seven times the seven Psalms in a tongue unknown to
the Penitent; or to contribute so much toward the building of a Monastery; or
to go in pilgrimage to St. James in Gallicia: all which are humane inventions
and rather sins then satisfactions for sin, must the sinner repose his
conscience upon these? must he without any declaration of Gods word, hold
himself fully discharged before God? But what if of the thousand Ave's ten be
wanting? What if while he is reading the seven Psalms he runs over them
somewhat too fast, or skips over a page because he is pressed with businesses?
What if of the two hundred lashes he has mist some, or if the last hit not so
hard as the first, shall he lose his labor, or shall God notwithstanding these
defects receive that satisfaction? Dominicus a Soto In 4 Did. 20. qu. 2. Sect.
3.
Dominicus a Soto, and after him Greg. de Valent. lib. de Satisf. cap. 5. Duo
tamen. Etiamsi quis injunctam a Confessario poenitentiam adimpleat, quandoque
tamen contingere, ut pro iisdem peccatis maneat obnoxious alicui poenae,
solvendae postea in Purgatorio, si videlicet spectata imbecillitate poenitentis
and aliis circumstantiis oportuit illi leniorem poenitentiam imponere, quam ut
per eam tota poena devinctus alioqui pro peccatis illis constituta redimi
possit.
Gregorius de Valentia acknowledge the weakness and uncertainty of those
satisfactions, when they say that it happens sometimes that the penitent is
obliged to satisfy in Purgatory for the same sins for which the Confessor has
imposed satisfactions upon him, although he has fulfilled them.

VII. Herein appears besides the uncertainty of those payments, the rashness
of those that impose them. For not only a Priest after he has enjoined these
satisfactions, may diminish or exchange them, but also a second Confessor may
change that which the first has done, and clip or alter the penances which the
first has enjoined, as Eman. Sa. Aphoris. in verbo Satisfactio. Secundus
Confessor ex rationabili causa potest a priori impositam poenitentiam in aliam
commutare, etiamsi priora peccata non audiat, and etiamsi prior fuisset
Episcopus aut Papa. Gregor. de Valentia lib. de Satisf. c. 5.. Alterum quod.
the Jesuits Gregory de Valentia and Emanuel Sa affirm. A second Confessor may
for a reasonable cause change the penance imposed by the first confessor into
another, although he heard not the precedent sins, yea though the first
Confessor were a Bishop, yea though it were the Pope. Between these two diverse
judgments, whereof the one alters the other, the penitent must guess which
of the two is the most pleasant unto God. For if the second think himself
grounded in a reasonable cause, the first thought the same.

VIII. That which increases the uncertainty is, that Tolet. de instruct.
Sacerd. l. 3. cap. 11. Quamvis autem, quantum fieri potest, satisfactio justa
and aequalis imponi debet.
Cardinal Tolet says that the Confessor must, as much as it lies in him,
impose an equal penance, that is, such as may equal the grievousness of the
sin. A thing not only impossible to fulfill, for the causes represented in the
precedent chapter, but also impossible to know. For how could the Priest or the
sinner know what and how great the pain must be to equal the grievousness of
the sin?

IX. Such considerations made Cardinal Eman. Sa, Aphoris. in verbo Satisfactio.
Cajetanus qu. 2. de Satisfactione dicit, neque suscipere neque susceptam
persolvere teneri penitentem ex precepto. Ibid. Scot. 4. d. 18. Gabr. did. 16.
q. 2. Navar. c. 26. number. 20. Johan. Medina 41. de poenit. Improbabiliter dicunt
penitentem posse recusare poenitentiam, si velit in Purgatorii igne satisfacere.
Cajetan to say, that the penitent is not obliged by Gods commandment to
receive the penance, or to accomplish it after he has received it. And it is
like that Scotus, Gabriel Biel, Navarrus, and John de Medina alleged by the
Jesuit Emanuel Sa, slighted penitential satisfaction, when they said that the
penitent may say to the Priest, I will have none of thy penance, for I will
satisfy in Purgatory. Besides, I find no reason why a sinner, without danger,
and without obliging himself to go into Purgatory, may not dispense himself
from fulfilling the penance imposed upon him by the Priest. For he may go to a
privileged Altar, where he may gain a hundred thousand years of pardon, and
easily obtain plenary indulgences, whereby he shall be exempted from all
satisfaction. Bellarmin goes far beyond that, For he told us before that a man
to whom God would fully remit the temporal pain, such as is the fire of
Purgatory, can send back unto God his present, and not accept of that
liberality; choosing rather to satisfy God with his own Torment.

CHAP. 8. Reasons of the Adversaries for humane Satisfactions. Of the
application of the merit of Christ. And of humane merits.
AGainst the light of such an evident truth our Adversaries cover themselves
with darkness. Their custom is to allege texts out of the question, and prove
things which we deny not. They maintain against us that we must do works of
repentance. That we must suffer with Christ, and be conformable to him. That we
must mortify our flesh. That fasting and prayer are acceptable unto God.
Things which we willingly grant, and he must be altogether profane that doubts
of these things. But these are not the points in question between us. The
question about which we differ is, whether our sufferings be satisfactory to
Gods justice, and whether besides Christ's satisfaction we need another
satisfaction? They finding themselves pressed with our reasons, instead of
answering, propound their opinion, as if their bare saying was a proof. And
when they find themselves gravelled and short of reason, they fall to
invectives, taxing us to be enemies of satisfactions, to reject prayers,
fasting, and alms, and to shake off all yoke of discipline.

I. The most ordinary defense, and principal refuge of our Adversaries, is, to
say that Christ's satisfaction is sufficient, but that it has need to be
applied unto us. As if one said that although a medicine be sufficient, yet one
must drink it. And although a plaster be sufficient to heal a wound, yet it
must be applied: Which is true, but nothing to the purpose, as we shall see.

The question then is, to know how this application is done, and by what means
Christ's merit must be applied or appropriated unto us?

1. The holy Writ which sets forth Christ's merit, teaches us also the means
of applying the same unto us, and we cannot learn it from any other. The first
means is the Spirit of God, which seals and printeth the promises of God
through Christ in our hearts. That seal is nothing else but a strong impression
and firm application of the promise of God, whereby the faithful Christian
applies and appropriates unto himself the grace of God in Jesus Christ. Also
holy Scripture says that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith* Ephesians. 3.17.
for faith apprehends Christ, and makes the faithful Christian to repose his
conscience upon Christ's death. The same I say of the preaching of the Gospel,
in which Christ is announced unto us, that we may have fellowship with him, 1
John 1.3. Baptism also is a means to apply Christ unto us, Gal. 3.27. As many
of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, where that term
of putting on, implies an application. And so of the Lords Supper St. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 10.15. The bread which we break is it not the communion of the
body of Christ? These are the ways to apply or appropriate the satisfaction of
Christ unto us, and to make us feel the virtue of the same. No other ways do
we find in the word of God.

2. But our Adversaries have devised another way, of which the word of God
says nothing, and that way is our own satisfactions, of which the chief and
the hardest is the fire of Purgatory. Scripture indeed exhorts us to suffer
with Christ and for Christ, but says not that these sufferings are payments
and satisfactions to Gods justice, or that Christ's merit is applied unto us by
a burning fire. Besides, the exhortations to suffer for Christ, and to subdue
our lusts by abstinence, are of no use but in this life, not after. God exhorts
us to amend, not to be burnt. If God exhorted us to be burnt; such an
exhortation would rather be a condemnation.

3. Note also that here the question is of the payment which Christ has laid
down for us. That payment cannot be applied by making us pay. If any bring to a
prisoner his ransom, enough to make full satisfaction, there needs no other
application, but to receive it, and take it. Christ is he that has fully
satisfied for us by his death; And that ransom is presented unto us by the
Gospel, and we take hold of it by faith; not by whipping our selves, or by
giving money to the Church, or by a torment of some thousands of years in a
fire.

4. It is evident, that as a plaster is not applied by another plaster, nor a
medicine by a medicine, likewise a payment is not applied by another payment,
nor Christ's satisfaction by another satisfaction. Is it not in derision that
they will have the torments which Christ has suffered to be applied to us by
our torments in a fire, seeing that he suffered those torments for that very
end, that we might not be tormented? Must the pain which he suffered to be
applied to us by punishing us, seeing that for that very end he bore a
satisfactory pain for us; to exempt us from satisfying for our selves?

5. We must take heed above all things, that the means of applying the grace of
God unto us, be not contrary to that grace. For that would be the overthrowing
of the nature of things, to seek to apply the Suns light unto us by putting out
our eyes, or to apply a medicine unto us by poison. Yet it is the doctrine of
these Doctors, who will have our pardon in Christ to be applied to us by
punishing us, and his grace by burning us, and Gods mercy by the execution of
his justice. As if God spoke thus to his faithful ones, whom to redeem he has
delivered his own son to the death of the Cross. Come, my dear children, I will
apply my grace unto you by burning you so many ages, and applying the pardon
unto you by punishing you in a burning fire; not to mend you, but to content my
self, and to fetch a recompense and satisfaction from you, although I have
received at Christ's hands, a most entire and full satisfaction for you. This
doctrine is prodigious; This application is an implication of contradictions,
whereby God is manifestly mocked.

6. The example which our Adversaries bring to give some color to that
doctrine, is clearly against them, and helps to set forth the truth. They
bring the example of Kings, who when they will show grace to a felon, will
change the pain of death into fines, and pecuniary pains. For can one deny that
these pecuniary pains are a diminution of the Royal pardon? and that the Kings
grace would have been far greater, if he had exempted the felon from fines, and
paid with his own money all that might be due by the felon, as Christ did, who
paid all our debt, having satisfied both for the fault and the pain? If upon
that they bring reasons why it is useful and honorable to a man to be burnt,
and to satisfy in his own person by his torment, they do no more thereby, but
to show why it was expedient that Christ's satisfaction should be applied unto
us by means contrary to the perfection of that satisfaction.

7. One thing seems to me very considerable. That of the other means of
applying to us Christ's satisfaction, the Pope gives no dispensation by his
Indulgences. With satisfactory pains only he dispenses. Scripture teaches us
the ways whereby Christ is applied unto us: Which are the holy Ghost, the
Preaching of the Word, Faith, etc. From these means the Pope exempteth not, and
his Indulgences go not so far: For this were saying to a man, I exempt thee
from having the holy Ghost: I dispense thee from believing in Christ. The Pope
and his Clergy would be ashamed to speak so. But as for the satisfactions, and
the torment of Purgatory, the Pope exempteth whom he will by his Indulgences.
Whence comes that difference? Is it not because he acknowledges these means
contained in Gods Word to be necessary, but the Penitential satisfactions to be
unnecessary, and that one may be without them? Why do these subtle Doctors go
about to establish their satisfactions by the Word of God, to dispense with
them afterward, and pull down what they have built up? The cause is not hard
to know. It is because to dispense men from having the holy Ghost, and
believing in Christ, would yield little profit to the Pope and the Clergy, and
but few men would buy such Indulgences. But as for exempting the souls from
satisfying in Purgatory, the people are crowding to get a share of that grace.
To obtain it, many run a great way after pardons, many strip their children to
enrich Friars.

8. Note, that toward the souls of Purgatory, the Pope has left the power of
binding, and retained only the power of loosing and delivering from torment,
because no body would give money to be bound. Thus he loses those whom he
cannot bind, and for the dead he has cut off one half of his Keys.

II. That application being thus examined, let us see by what reasons the
Doctors of the Roman Church defend humane satisfactions. Bellarmine alleges
the first Chapter of Isaiah, where God promises the remission of sins to them,
that make themselves clean, that cease to do evil, and give themselves to works
of mercy. Whereby they justify what I said before, that they labor to prove
that which we deny not. We know that God forgiveth none but those that repent,
and ceasing to do evil, by a serious conversion apply themselves to the study
of good works. But the question is, Whether that conversion be satisfactory
before God? That is, Whether God will receive it for a recompense and payment
to his justice, for the punishment of sins after the fault is remitted. The
Text alleged touches that question, neither far nor near. And although they
had proved, that by such an abstinence from evil, the merit of Christ is
applied unto us, yet they should not prove thereby that it is satisfactory.

III. Bellarmine alleges also Dan. 4.27. where Daniel speaks thus unto King
Nebucadnezzar, Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by
showing mercy unto the poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy prosperity. And
Prove. 16.6. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged, and by the fear of the Lord
men depart from evil; or according to the vulgar version, By mercy and truth
sin is redeemed. That Jesuit brings these texts to prove what he had said,
that a man is the Redeemer and Savior of his own self.

But I wonder how Bellarmine did not perceive, that this example of
Nebuchadnezzar a Pagan King, is contrary to the doctrine of the Roman Church,
which maintains only the satisfactions of the faithful for the temporal pain,
and after the remission of the fault. The Roman Church holds that one must be
in the state of grace to satisfy, and believes not that the Pagans and they
that are out of the Church can satisfy at all, because their fault is not
remitted. In vain should they satisfy for the temporal pain, seeing that they
are obliged to the eternal. For it is as if one that is doomed to go to Hell,
should trouble himself to satisfy for the pain of Purgatory. That King then
being out of the Church, in vain Daniel had exhorted him to redeem the temporal
pain, instead of exhorting him to avoid the eternal punishment, by coming into
the fold of the Church. Besides the Roman Church believes that we cannot
satisfy for sins, but only for the pain of sins. Now Daniel says, Redeem thy
sins; not, Redeem the pain of thy sins.

Had this Cardinal known in what sense the word redeeming is commonly taken in
Scripture, he might have discerned that this Text is not to his purpose. That
word redeeming in Scripture, does not signify always paying, nor satisfying,
nor giving a ransom. As when God says so often, That God has redeemed his
people out of Egypt, he understands not that he has paid a ransom to deliver
them, but only he understands that he has delivered them out of Egypt. And
when he says, Isa. 52.3. Ye have sold your selves for naught, and you shall be
redeemed without money. There the word redeeming signifies not paying any
price, seeing that the Text says expressly, that nothing shall be paid for
their redemption. Thus Ephesians. 5.16. Redeem the time, because the days are
evil; where the word redeeming signifies, better employing. And so in many
places of Scripture, this word redeming signifies only delivering from evil,
either a man's self or another, and putting things in better order. Daniel then
advises that King to redeem his sins, that is, to get out of them, and deliver
himself from them. To that the word peruk, the word of the Text, is proper, for
it signifies also breaking and correcting; and this serves to understand the
fore-alleadged text of Prove. 16.

The prudent Reader will consider, that since the way to satisfy Gods justice
is far more evidently delivered in the New Testament then in the Old, our
Adversaries ought to have taken their expressions in that matter out of the
New, not out of the words spoken under the Old Testament to a Pagan King. And
whereas that King was out of the Church, our Adversaries must presuppose, that
he had nevertheless true faith and repentance, and that the culpa or fault of
his sins, and together eternal pains were remitted to him, if they will have
that text to be of any force: For they hold that without that, a man is
incapable of making any satisfaction. I might say also, that Alms are neither
pains nor penal satisfactions, but pleasant works. Unto a wealthy King
especially, Alms cannot be a punishment, nor a penal work serving for
redemption.

IV. The same Doctor proves the necessity of satisfactions, by these words of
John the Baptist, Luke 3.8. Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance; (...).
who also said, Matthew. 3.2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.
But these words of John the Baptist are exhortations to conversion, and to the
exercise of good works, not to satisfy Gods justice with penal works. I wonder
how the Papists can hope to defend Sacramental satisfactions with that Text,
seeing that they hold that the Sacrament of Penitence was not yet instituted at
that time. The Greek word (...), signifies recalling of ones mind, or a
turning of ones spirit, not a satisfaction. John the Baptist said not, Whip
your selves: Make Pilgrimages: Lie upon the hard ground: Eat nothing but fish
for some days, that you may satisfy Gods justice by the payment of the pain,
after the fault remitted. But he exhorts us to repentance and amendment of
life. Bellarmine replyeth, that he that does penitence, must make restitution
of that he has taken from others, and brings some Doctors that say, that for
abstaining more easily from unlawful things, it is expedient to abstain
sometimes from the lawful. All that is true, but is nothing to the purpose. For
to render to every one that which belongs to him, and to use abstinence, are
things conducing to amendment of life, but are not satisfactions unto God, nor
satisfactory pains to pay any recompense to him, or to content his justice,
which has received in Christ's death a full satisfaction. It is ill
apprehending the nature of true repentance, to think that restoring stolen goods
is a satisfactory pain, and to put works of righteousness among satisfactory
pains. Rather he that seriously repents will take a great delight in that
restitution. He will put ill gotten goods out of his house, as if he turned the
plague out of it, or p^uckt out a smarting thorn from his conscience. He will
be so far from putting that restitution among pains, that he would take it as
an heavy punishment, if he were kept from it. This is then the same thing that
we said, and which our Adversaries return to always, that they make medicines
to be payments, amendment of life a punishment, and the study of virtues a kind
of penalty and satisfaction.

V. The same Cardinal alleges, that the sacrifices of beasts under the Law,
were propitiatory, or satisfactory for the guilt of the temporal pain, and that
this was the cause why they offered sacrifices of greater or lesser price,
according to the greatness of the sin. I answer, that it is for one that
understands little in Religion, to think that the death of a beast can be a
propitiation for sins, or for the pain due to sins, whether temporal or
eternal. The Apostle, Heb. 10.4. says expressly, that it is not possible that
the blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sins. Non bove mactato
coelestia numina gaudent.
The very Pagans acknowledged so much. But these sacrifices were called
propitiatory, in a figurate speech usual in Scripture, where signs and
Sacraments commonly take the name of things signified. Thus the Ark is called
the Lord, Psalm 24.7, 8. And circumcision is called Gods Covenant, Genesis 17.10.
And the stone that yielded water in the Wilderness is called Christ, 1 Cor.
10.4. And Christ himself calls bread his body, Luke 22.19. And the cup his
Covenant, in the same place. For the same reason the sacrifices of beasts are
called propitiations for sins, because they were figures of the sacrifice which
the Redeemer was to offer on the Cross. In that sense sacrifices were not only
propitiatory for the temporal pain, as Bellarmine says, but also for the fault
and for the eternal pain. And it is a beastly imagination of his, that
sacrifices of great beasts were more propitiatory then sacrifices of small
beasts, and that to expiate great sins, an Ox had more virtue then a Lamb. In
such offerings the Law regards more the ability of the person, then the
greatness of the sin.

VI. He concludes all the proofs by this argument, Opera justorum eam vim
habent, ut vere ac proprie mereantur.
That since good works truly and properly deserve eternal life, it cannot be
denied that they are effectual to satisfy for the guilt of temporal pain. For
(says he) eternal life is greater then the remission of the temporal pain.

Disputing so, is proving one etrour by another, building a doubt upon an
uncertainty, or rather defending an error with an impiety. For we reject
merits as well as satisfactions, and they are much of the same kind; for
satisfactions are a kind of merits, if by them we merit that the pain be
remitted to us. And both merits and satisfactions derogate from the perfection
of Christ's merit, which serves alike to purchase salvation for us, and to
satisfy for the pain which we have deserved: And no need of contributing our
merits, and paying another price of that saisfaction unto God. Since then we
are saved by grace, it is no more by works, says the Apostle, Romans 11.6. For
by grace are we saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast. The like we have, Romans
6.23. The gift of God is eternal life. If it be the gift of God, it is not a
Purchase made by our merits. Gods election being free, as Saint Paul teaches,
the salvation also is free to which God has predestined us by his election,
as Saint Paul teaches us. Romans 9.15, 16. Romans 11.5.
How should we merit before God, seeing that though we should do all that we
are commanded, yet we should be but unprofitable servants? Luke 17.20. Neither
can we do any good, but by his Grace, being incapable of our selves so much as
to think any thing that is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. Our good works bring no profit to
God. Our goodness extends not unto him, Psalm 16.2. In our best works there
is always defect, infirmity, and matter to ask pardon. And though it were
otherwise, yet between our best works and the Kingdom of heaven, there is
neither equality nor proportion. Such a great good is not bought so cheap. The
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. And though our works should be merits
of condignity, as our Adversaries speak, and an equipollent payment for eternal
life, yet in vain should we go about to pay the price of a purchase ready made,
the right price thereof being sufficiently paid by Jesus Christ our Lord.

In the Word of God we are called children and heirs, not buyers or purchasers
by our merits. Whosoever pretends to get Paradise by his merits, falls into three
inconveniences: For he seeks to defraud God of his glory, and to get by the
merit of his virtue, that which God gives of his free liberality. He
renounceth the title of son and heir of God, to become a buyer and purchaser:
And casts his conscience into doubts and insoluble perplexities. For when
shall he know that he has merited enough? Does he know what value is put upon
each of his works in Gods counsel? Besides he will often present unto God under
the notion of merits, things whereby he is offended. And God will sooner bear
with sins followed with repentance, then with righteousnesses presented with
pride and opinion of merit. Wherefore also these Preachers of merits make
profession to doubt of their salvation; and die uncertain whether they be
children of God or of the Devil. A just payment for their pride, and for
trusting in their merits.

Was there no way to make good works necessary, but to raise their price so
high, as to make them causes of salvation, and the price of the purchase of the
Kingdom of heaven? Are they not necessary enough, when they are set forth as
ways to salvation, means to strengthen our faith, to glorify God, and to
edify our neighbors, and when we are taught that without them it is
impossible to be saved.

It is true that in the Parable of the laborers, Matthew. 20.8. The Lord of the
Vineyard said to his Steward, Call the laborers and give them their hire. And
Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day.
Suppose that in the Parable of the laborers, by the hire eternal life must be
understood: Yet that reward is a free, not a deserved reward, given in
consideration of the person, not gotten by the merit of the work. As Ambrose
says, Ambros. Epist. 1. l. 1. Alia est merces liberalitatis and gratiae, alia
virtutis stipendium, laboris remuneratio.
The reward which is given by grace and liberality is one thing, and that
reward which is given as a stipend of virtue, and a reward of labor is another
thing. And Austin, August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 27. Imputans mercedem
secundum gratiam, non secundum debitum.
God imputes the reward as a grace, not as a debt. Now to him that works is
the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt, says the Apostle, Romans 4.4. It
is so, that a loving father rewards his child's labor, giving him a fine
garment for learning a sentence by heart, or for writing a line with a
trembling hand. He would not do the like to another child that is none of his,
for he regards the person, not the merit of the work. Wherefore in the same
parable of the laborers, they that had wrought but an hour receive as great a
reward, as they that had born the burden of the day. They receive then an
undeserved reward. And Hos. 10.12. God says, Sow to your selves in
righteousness, reap in mercy; showing that to a just labor, God gives a free,
not a deserved reward.

Now that reward is just, and called by the Apostle, the crown of
righteousness, because it is just with God to give what he has promised, and
to give life unto the Believer for whom Christ dyed.

For these reasons, when it is questioned of the purchase of salvation, we
reject that arrogant term of merits, which a Prince would not suffer in a
subject, though his services be never so great. Why should we fear to give too
much praise unto God, or to attribute too much unto his grace, or to humble our
selves too much before him? Why should we make man to divide praise with God,
attributing part of Gods praise unto man's merit? True Religion is that which
gives the whole praise unto God, and to man the whole benefit; humbling man
that God may be glorified; emptying man of all trust in his own virtue, that he
may rely altogether upon Gods promise. Planting in man's heart an humble trust,
not a trembling pride. For as pride is growing, diffidence grows together.
And whosoever will seek in his own virtue a resting place for his conscience
before God, shall find but confusion in the end of his race.

These then are Cardinal Bellarmines proofs in the eighth chapter of the first book
of Penitence. In other places he brings other proofs which deserve not to be
represented, and are common to all our Adversaries.

VII. They say that God having threatened the Ninivites, withheld his judgments
because they satisfied by penitence. They should have said what the Ninivites
satisfied with. For they hold that to satisfy, a man must be in the state of
grace, and that satisfactions serve only to satisfy for the pain after the
remission of the fault. Now we find not that before their penitence God had
declared to them that their fault was remitted, or that they were in the state
of grace. That which staid Gods judgment was the amendment of their life, not
the merit of any satisfactory pain; Fasting and mourning with sackcloth and
ashes, both in them, and in David and others that have afflicted their soul
with a penitent sorrow, were not satisfactions but effects of their grief, and
helps to repentance.

VIII. The Council of Trent to prove satisfactions, says that Conc. Trid.
Sess. 14. c. 8. Dum fatisfaciendo patimur pro peccatis, Christo Jesu qui pro
peccatis nostris satisfecit, ex quo omnis nostra sufficientia est, conformes
efficimur.
we must be conformable unto Christ. Whence they infer that as Christ satisfied
for us, so we must satisfy for our selves. To make the conformity with Christ
complete, these Fathers should have said that as Christ satisfied for us, we
must also satisfy for Christ. But the truth is, that it is impious to affect
to be conformable unto Christ in all things. He is God, he is the Wisdom of the
Father, he is the Redeemer of the world; In these things we cannot be
conformable unto him. Only we must endeavor to make our selves conformable
unto his sufferings, by suffering for his cause, and imitating his
righteousness and holiness to our power. But our sufferings may be conformities
with Christ, though they be not satisfactory and employed to make our selves to
be our Redeemers, and to satisfy Gods justice. We are made conformable unto
Christ by sufferings, when we suffer for righteousness, and for the cause of
Christ, and God makes us pass through shame to bring us to glory. As St. Paul
said Romans 8.17. We suffer with him that me may be also glorified together. We
deny not but that the death and intercession of Christ makes our sufferings to
be of some value, and that for his sake the death of the godly is of great
price before God. But hence it follows not that God makes them worth so much
as to be payments and recompenses and satisfactions unto Gods justice. That
would be on the one side adding unto Christ's satisfaction another satisfaction,
and on the other side infinitely aggravating the afflictions of Gods children,
and making them intolerable, if they must believe that their sufferings are
punishments whereby they satisfy Gods justice, and that God uses them as a
Judge uses felons, not as a father his children.

IX. The same Council reasons thus. Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 8. Sane and
divine justitiae ratio exigere videtur, ut aliter ab eo in gratiam recipiantur,
qui ante Baptismum per ignorantiam deliquerint, aliter vero qui semel a peccati
and daemonis servitute liberati, and accepto Spiritus sancti dono, scientes
Templum Dei violare, and Spiritum sanctum contristare presumunt.
The reason of divine justice seems to require that they that have sinned out
of ignorance before Baptism be otherwise received into grace, then they that
once having been delivered from the servitude of sin and the Devil, that is,
who having been baptized, had no fear to violate the temple of God. These
Fathers hold it convenient unto Gods justice to use those more gently that have
sinned out of ignorance before Baptism, then those who purposely, and by a
profane Spirit have sinned since Baptism. And they say only that it seems to
them, not daring to define any thing about it. By speaking thus they say
nothing against us, who acknowledge that the profanation of Baptism aggravates
the sin very much, and that sins of ignorance are far less then those that are
knowingly, and wilfully committed. But what does that to establish that general
rule, That we must satisfy for sins committed after Baptism, not for those
that were committed before? For how many sins are committed out of ignorance
after Baptism? and how many sins have been committed out of malice and
profaness before Baptism?

In old time Emperors and great part of the Christians would defer Baptism
till they saw themselves near their end. So did the Emperor Constantine and his
son Constantius. No doubt but these men committed many wilful sins in their
life. How many Marrahes and Jews impostors cause themselves to be baptized for
gain, and to avoid the hand of justice? Is it reasonable that the impudence,
the blasphemies, and the hypocrisy which they have used before Baptism be
remitted to them by baptism, and that God exact no satisfaction from them, but
that if after Baptism they become true converts and new men, for the sins
which they shall commit out of inadvertence and infirmity, they make
satisfaction in a fire?

X. But in what text of Scripture have they found, that by Baptism the sins
committed before Baptism be otherwise remitted unto us, then the sins
committed after? Who gave these Gentlemen power thus to cut and clip the
benefit of Christ's merit by their own authority? We must not doubt but that by
Baptism the benefit of Christ's merit by their own authority? We must not doubt
but that by Baptism the benefit of Christ's merit is offered unto us, such as
is offered in the Gospel, 1 John. 1.
for Baptism is a Sacrament and a seal of the doctrine of the Gospel. Now the
Gospel tells us that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. And it is
certain that by Baptism Christ is offered unto us, as he by whom all our sins
are forgiven us. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on
Christ, Gal. 3.27. Where the Apostle uses the word put on, to show that
Baptism applies Christ unto us for the time after our Baptism, for garments
are made to serve in the time to come.

XI. The same Council in the same place says Conc. Trid. ibid. Et divinam
clementiam decet, ne ita nobis absque ulla satisfactione peccata dimittantur,
ut occasion accepta peccata leviora putantes, etc. Procul dubio enim magnopere
a peccat^ revocant.
that it becomes well the divine clemency not to forgive our sins without
satisfaction. And he adds a reason, that if God should forgive us without
satisfaction, thereby we might take an occasion to fall into greater sins,
accounting sins to be but light things. And that satisfactions serve to turn us
away from sin. These Doctors will teach God, what it becomes him to do, not
remembering that the Pope by his Indulgences dispenses with these
satisfactions, and by consequent that such indulgences are ill becoming divine
clemency, and ill agreeing with it. Neither did they consider that this reason
will not serve to establish the satisfactions of Purgatory, which are the
Principal. For Purgatory does not serve to turn from sin, those that are
tormented in it. Had God exempted those souls from that torment and received
them into Paradise presently after their death, there had been no reason to
fear that impunity had made them fall into greater sins. The Reader may observe
also, that by that reason these Fathers make the satisfactory pains to become
castigatory, and serving to turn men from sin; They are then remedies, not
satisfactions. Medicines are no payments. Chastenings are warnings for the
future, not satisfactions for the time past, as Chrysostom says Chrysostom. Hom.
de Poenitentia and confess. Propter hoc imponit nobis poenam, non de peccatis
sumens supplicium, sed ad futura nos corrigens.
. These Fathers of Trent found no other way to defend satisfactory pains, but
by making them to change nature and become castigatory. It is hard to
comprehend how it suits with Gods clemency, to burn his children for many ages
in a fire as hot as that of hell, and that for faults remitted, and for sins
pardoned. This is repugnant to Gods clemency, and more yet to his justice.

Among satisfactions Cardinal Bellarmine approves beating and whipping of ones
self, and maintains that Paul whipped himself, because he said, 1 Cor. 9.27. I
keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, and according to the vulgar
version, I chastise my body. There is in the Greek (...), which signifies
mortifying and bruising with blows. Bellarm. l. 4. de Poenit. c. 6.. de
flagellatione.
I answer that though it should appear that Paul had whipped himself, it would
not follow that he did it to satisfy Gods justice. He might have done it to
beat down his lust, and exercise himself to patience and humility. Which
appears by the example of wrestlers which he brings in the same place, who
hardened their bodies with pains and abstinences, not to satisfy any offended
person, but to inure themselves to labor. And the Greek word signifies not
whipping ones self, but giving hard usage to ones own body, Hieron. ad Eustoch.
de custod. Virgin. nec a pectoris cessasse verberibus.
after the manner of wrestlers that used themselves to hardness, as the same
Apostle says in the 25. verse.

XII. In vain they allege Hierome, whose pictures represent him beating his
naked breast with stones, for which there is no testimony. Hierome said only
that he did beat his own breast, as men use to do when they are in deep sorrow;
Of satisfying Gods justice he speaks never a word.

XIII. To no better purpose the austere life of John the Baptist is alleged
by Bellarmine Bellar. l. 4. de poenit. c. 6.. Insigne.
of whom he says that he had little or no need of repentance and newness of
life, Id. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 5. Johannes plus Deo praestitit, quam sibi ad
peccata expianda opus esset.
and that he gave more to God then he needed to expiate his sins. So he will
have that austerity to have been satisfactory, if not for him, at least for
another. This doctrine belongs not to the Gospel, it is a new Article of faith.
John the Baptist, and Anna of which St. Luke speaks in the second chapter by their
sobriety and austere life, satisfied neither for themselves nor others. That
satisfaction is sufficiently found in Christ. But they did it out of a contempt
of the world which made them neglect the care of their body. A man whose spirit
is altogether bent upon Gods service little cares how he is fed and clad. It is
enough for him to live, and he avoids all things that can either tickle his
flesh or divert him from holy employment. But thereby he does not presume to
satisfy Gods justice, or to pay him any recompense either for his sins, or for
the sins of others.

XIV. They use another reason. Id. de Indulg. l. 2. c. 3.. Primo. Deus voluit,
ut unusquisque nostrum propriis meritis coronam vitae sibi acquirat, etc. Id.
ibid. Deo gloriosius est, and nobis utilius, ut secundae causae non sint
otiosae, sed cum prima causa ad res producendas conveniant.
Bellarmine speaks thus. God would have every one of us to get a crown of life
unto himself by his own merits, And he gives a reason why Saints make
satisfactions, even because it is more honorable unto God, and more profitable
for us that the second causes be acting, and be not idle, but that they concur
with the first cause to bring forth effects. This Cardinal will have frying in
Purgatory to be profitable for a soul, and that it is honorable for us to
satisfy God, and contribute to our own redemption. By that Doctrine they are
most honored that stay longest in Purgatory. And the Pope does wrong to those
souls to fetch them out of that place, and to deprive them of that honor. Yet
in my opinion it would have been more honorable for them to go into Paradise
presently, then to be tormented two or three thousand years in a fire Greg. de
Valentia lib. de Satisf. c. 1.. Et quidem. In Purgatorio poenae non differunt a
poena sensus inferni, ni solum quod ad durationem.
equal in vehemence to that of hell, where Devils are tormented, and to be for
many ages deprived of Gods sight.

XV. For these and the like considerations the Jesuit Gregorius de Valentia,
being pressed in his conscience acknowledges, that it is not much necessary to
labor for these satisfactions. Idem. c. 5.. Quod autem. Cum nemo sciat,
quantus poenae temporalis reatus post contritionem and alia media, quibus ille
minuitur, maneat, non est ex praecepto quidem necesse admodum anxie incumbere
in magnum studium satisfactionis.
Seeing (says he) that no man knows how much obligation remains to the
temporal pain after contrition and other means, whereby the said obligation is
lessened, there is no command that necessarily obliges us to labor much about
satisfactions. And in the same place he disputes against Scotus, Soto,
Cajetan, Ibid.. Quod si. Si manifest videatur poenitentia esse injusta, extra
controversiam est posse illam a poenitente repudiari.
and others that hold that there is no commandment of God that obliges us to
satisfy in this life: although he dissents little from them in the main matter.

XVI. If the penance imposed by the Confessor seem unjust unto the penitent,
the same Jesuit (g) holds that the penitent may reject it, and exempt himself
from it. So that this depends from the judgment of the penitent. Whereby, as
it appears to me, he fills those satisfactions with much uncertainty.

CHAP. 9. That none can satisfy Gods justice for another.
TO defend borrowed satisfactions whereby one man satisfies for another, they
reason thus. Bell. l. 1. de Indulg. cap. 2. Sect. Postremo. Potest uni eidemque
operi duplex merces deberi, altera ex justitia commutativa, altera ex
distributiva. Atqui operi satisfactorio debetur praemium ex justitia
commutativa, operi meritorio debetur praemium ex justitia distributiva secundum
substantiam. Thom. 1. p. q 21. Art. 1. etc. and Sect. Secunda. Opus bonum, qua
part meritorium est, non potest alii applicari: potest tamen, qua
satisfactorium est etc. Nam satisfactio est compensatio poenae, vel solutio
debiti, potest autem unus ita pro alio poenam compensare.
That to the same work a double reward is due, the one according to commutative
justice, the other according distributive. And that to the same work the
remission of the pain is due as it is satisfactory, and the reward as it is
meritorious. As if one said that the payment of thirty pounds, served to pay a
debt of thirty pounds, and together to buy a horse of that price. For (say
they) a work connot be applied unto another man as it is meritorious, but as it
is satisfactory. Satisfaction is a compensation of the pain and a payment of
the debt. Now a man may pay another man's debt. Then contradicting themselves,
they ask in the Mass the grace of God by the merits of the Saints, which is
asking that their merits be imputed and appplyed unto us.

These grounds being laid, they build upon them, and say that Bellarm. ibid. In
dubium revocari non potest, quin ingens omnino cumulus passionum Johanni
superfuerit, quo ipse ad expianda propria peccata non eguit etc. Prophetae
fuerunt viri sanctissimi, ita ut modica omnino pro suis culpis satisfactione
opus habuerint, and tamen tot angustijs and afflictionibus oppressi fuerint, ut
plurima and maxima peccata expiare potuerint etc. Constat enim martyrium tam
plenam satisfactionem esse, ut expiare possit reatum contractum ex quantoris
ingenti numero and magnitudine peccatorum.
Saints and Monks have suffered more then they needed to expiate their own
sins, and that they needed but a very small satisfaction for their faults, and
yet they suffered so many sorrows that by them they might expiate a multitude
of most heavy sins. And martyrdom is such a full satisfaction that it may
expiate the guilt got by sins, though never so great or so many.

One might think that these Doctors intended only to teach, that God in
consideration of the pains which a Saint has suffered remitteth the pain unto
others, and receives their afflictions as payments for others. But this is not
their chief bent. For they leave not the dispensation of these satisfactions
performed by others unto Gods counsel, but send us back to the Pope, Clemens
VI. Extravag. Unigenitus Tit. de poenit. and remiss.
who is the distributor of the same, having a treasure where he lays up all
the superabounding satisfactions, and dispenses them by his Indulgences,
giving twenty thousand, or thirty thousand, or a hundred thousand years of true
pardon, and sometimes full, more full, and most full indulgence, as they speak
that write of this matter. So that when St. Dominick whipped himself with an iron
chain for other men's sins, it must not be imagined that God presently received
that satisfaction for such and such men according to his good pleasure; But
that the Pope has gathered that overplus into his treasure, and distributes it
to them that come to get pardons at Rome and other places where it pleased his
Holiness to place remission of sins. There the contributions are made, and a
great treasure of money laid up. For it is not just that pilgrims get so many,
spiritual graces for naught.

According to the same doctrine Priests will injoin satisfactions to a penitent
which he must perform either by himself or by another; so that if he may find
one that will fast or whip himself for him (which is not done without money)
they believe that this is allowed and reckoned in Gods counsel.

I suppose that setting forth this doctrine is confuting it; And that it is of
those wares that are spoiled, and smell ill as soon as they are brought to the
open air. We should go beyond the terms of the present question if we examined
the impiety of these expressions, that Gcdoweth a reward unto man by the rule
of justice, making God a debtor unto man. Also I pass by that impiety that a
man pays more satisfactions to God then he needs, to expiate his own sins.
And that treasure of the Church, unknown to the Church of the Old Testament,
under which the high Priests did not gather the supererogatory labors of Noah
and Abraham, to convert them to payment for others. Of this also the Apostles
say nothing, nor of that overplus of satisfactions, nor of that distribution
committed to the Roman Prelate. As also, we have heard before the confession of
two Cardinals, Cajetan and Roffensis, and of Navarrus, and Gabriel Biel, and
many more, acknowledging that in all Antiquity, no mention is made of that
doctrine. For Christ's satisfaction being sufficient, what need to add more
satisfactions to it, and such satisfactions as God did not promise to accept,
and which are infinitely under the merit of Christ? As if to the light of the
Sun shining in its strength, one should add the light of a candle. And what
need to add to that which is infinite? Experience shows, that under that
borrowing of other men's satisfactions, a traffic of Indulgences is set up; and
that they that have money, are thereby made more negligent in good works. For
with their money they may buy Masses and Suffrages, and have part in all the
penal works of the brotherhood, to which they have contributed.

But what? all that is a deep sink of error. It will be enough for the present
Question, to understand what reasons they bring to defend those borrowed
satisfactions.

I. They bring the Article of the Creed, I believe the Communion of Saints. We
answer, that the Articles of the Symbol are taken out of the doctrine of the
Gospel. Now the Gospel speaks indeed of the Communion of Saints, whereby the
godly keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. For in the Church
(says the Apostle) there is one body and one spirit, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.
even as we are called in one hope of our calling. One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, One God and Father of all. We are brethren in Christ, fellow members
of the same spiritual body, fellow soldiers in the warfare of Christ's cause,
fellow-travellers in this world, fellow-heirs of Gods Kingdom. So many bonds
must make us sensible of our Brethrens afflictions, and breed in us a mutual
fellow-feeling. This is the communion of Saints which we find in the Gospel.
But that our labors and pains can be satisfactions for the sins of others, it
is more then God teaches us, and of that there is not one word in his Word.
Gal. 6.5. 2 Cor. 5.10. Psalm. 49.7.
But there we learn that every man shall bear his own burden. And that every
man shall receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad. And that none can redeem the soul of his brother.
Romans 2.6.
And that God will render to every one according to his deeds, not according to
the works or sufferings of others. As in the Civil society, the communion of
fellow-Citizens goes not so far, as that one can eat or sleep for another;
likewise the communion among Saints goes not so far, as that one may satisfy
for another, and expiate his neighbors sins, and believe in God for his
brother, and answer for him in Gods judgment: For so it might happen that one
should be saved for the other, and that Philip should enter into Paradise for
his neighbor. The Spirit of God says, Rev. 14.13. that blessed are they which
die in the Lord, and that their works follow them. If their works follow them,
they enter not into the Popes treasure, and are not converted into payment for
others. Aug. lib. quaest. de Veteri and Novo Test. qu. 102. Ipse invenitur
dixisse, Filia, fides tua te salvam fecit. Vides itaque nullius adjutorio sed
unumquemque fide sua salvari.
Austin agrees to this, We find (says he) that Christ says, Daughter, thy
faith has made thee whole. Thou see then, that without the help of any one,
every one is saved by his faith. Wherefore the wise Virgins had no oil to
supply the want of the foolish: And the fore-alleadged Text, Psalm 49.7. is
very positive to this purpose, None can by any means redeem his brother, nor
give to God a ransom for him. We see Tertul. lib. de Pudicitia, cap. ult.
Cyprian. de lapsis.
in Tertullian and Cyprian, that in their time it was the custom, to shorten
the penitence prescribed unto the Penitent, at the request of Martyrs detained
in Prisons. Against which custom these Fathers are declaiming, saying, that the
righteousness of the one, cannot be a satisfaction for the other.

II If God has sufficiently rewarded the sufferings of the Saints, yea
infinitely more then they can deserve, though they were meritorious; with what
reason can they be made after that, pay-masters of debts, and making
satisfaction by those very works, for which they have been more then
sufficiently rewarded? As if those Saints said to God, Thou have most amply
rewarded us for those works whereby we have deserved salvation, but it is just
that these same works serve yet for a payment for many others. If God answered
them, Your works are not meritorious, but as for those for whom you will
satisfie^ and take upon you to pay their debts, Christ who has satisfied for
you, has also fully satisfied for them: I know not what their answer might be.

III. In vain do they reply, that we are members of the same body, which ought
to help one another. For the faithful Christians may very well help one
another, without taking upon them to do impossible things the one for the
other, and such as God does not require, and that are useless besides. For it
is to no purpose to undertake the paying of a man's debts for whom Christ has
fully satisfied. Here the question is of the communication of superabounding
satisfactions, when one has done more then he needs to expiate his own sins.
Now among the members of the body of the Church, none shall be found that have
paid unto God more then he owes, and given him any thing above the reckoning.

IV. Cardinal Bellarmine in the first Book of Indulgences, chap. 3. alleges
these texts, 2 Cor. 12.15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for your
souls. And 1 Timothy 2.10. I endure all things for the elects sake. But in these
texts Saint Paul understands not that he will suffer death, to satisfy the
justice of God for the Corinthians, and to be in some sort their Redeemer, as
the same Cardinal says; or that he suffers afflictions for the elect to
satisfy for them. Nay, he suffered to encourage and strengthen them by his
example. He chose rather to suffer all things, then to be wanting to them by
fainting in his labor, and bowing under the affliction. But to pay for them,
it is that he never thought on.

V. The text most insisted upon by these Gentlemen is, Col. 1.24. I rejoice in
my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake, which is the Church, whereof I am made
a Minister.

But there the Apostle speaks not of the satisfactory afflictions of Christ,
for to those there is nothing wanting, and no part of them behind. But he
speaks of the afflictions and combats that Christ suffers yet every day in
his body, when his Church is oppressed. For the holy Scripture says, that the
afflictions of the Church, are the afflictions of Christ, because the Church is
one body with him. When faithful Christians who are his members are persecuted,
his hands and feet are pierced with nails again: When they are stripped of their
goods, the lot is cast upon his coat again. As on the other side, when the head
is crowned, the whole body has a share in that honor. When Saul persecuted
the Church, Christ cried unto him from heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? Acts. 9.4.
although he was in his glory. And in the last day he will say to them that
have not clad his poor members, In as much as ye did it not to one of the least
of these, Matthew. 25.43.
ye did it not to me. And what shall he say then to them that stripped them?
Wherefore 1 Cor. 12.12. Saint Paul by this word Christ, understands the whole
body of the Church, which comprehends both the head and the members. These are
the afflictions of Christ that are behind, and some part of them shall be
behind still, and all his sufferings not filled up, till the last day, when the
combat shall be ended. And these afflictions are not satisfactions to Gods
justice, but combats and trials, wholesome exercises, Liveries of our war, and
conformities of the members with their head, yea in their suffering for
righteousness, not in sattisfying Gods justice as he did.

For Saint Paul saying that he suffers for the Church, means not that he
suffers to satisfy Gods justice for the Church, or that he will be the
Redeemer of the Church in any sort, or that he intends that after his death
Christians shall ask salvation of God by his merits, as it is sung Quorum
precibus and meritis rogamus, ut in omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur auxilio.
in the Mass every day. But he suffered for the Church, that is, to edify the
Church by his constancy, and encourage others by the example of his fidelity
and perseverance, as himself says, Phil. 1.12, 14. that the things which
happened unto him, (meaning his sufferings) fell out unto the furtherance of
the Gospel: So that many of the Brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by his
bonds, were much more bold to speak the word without fear.

It is so, that the Ancients understood that Text. Austin upon Psalm 61.
expounding that text, by the sufferings of Christ, Passiones Christi non in
solo Christo, immo passiones Christi non nisi in Christo, si enim Christum
intelligas, caput and corpus passiones Christi non nisi in Christo, etc. Si
enim passiones Christi in solo Christo, immo in solo capite, unde dicit quoddam
membrum ejus, Paulus Apostolus, ut suppleam quae desunt pressurarum Christi in
carne mea.
understands those that he suffered in his body, and by Christ he understands,
the head and the body together. Then he adds, If the sufferings of Christ be
in Christ alone, yea in the head only, why does one of his members, Paul the
Apostle, say, that I may fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ in my flesh?

And Aquinas in his Comment upon that place: The Apostle says, Et ideo dicit,
adimpleo ea quae desunt, passionum Christi, id est, totius Ecclesiae cujus
caput est Christus.
I fill up that which is wanting to the sufferings of Christ, that is, of the
whole Church, whose head Christ is. And a little after, expounding in what
sense Saint Paul said, that he suffered for the Church. Hoc enim deerat, quod
sicut Christus passus erat in corpore suo, ita pateretur in Paulo membro suo,
and similiter in aliis; and pro corpore quod est Ecclesia, quae redimenda per
Christum. Sic etiam omnes Sancti patiuntur propter Ecclesiam, quae eorum
exemplo roboratur.
This was wanting, that as Christ had suffered in his body, so he should suffer
in Paul his member, and likewise in other members; and that for the body which
is the Church, that was to be redeemed by Christ. Thus also all the Saints
suffer for the Church, which is confirmed by their example. Note that the
sufferings of the Saints serve for examples, not for satisfactions.

Lombard in his Comment upon that Epistle of Saint Paul expounding the same
text, Passionibus quas sustineo pro vobis confirmandis in veritate Evangelii;
and adimpleo ea passionum Christi quae desunt. Suas passiones dicit esse
Christi, quia nostrae passiones, qui sumus Christi membra, Christi sunt.
The afflictions which I bear to confirm you in the truth of the Gospel: And I
fill up that which is wanting in the sufferings of Christ, because we are his
members. Of superabounding satisfactions, to satisfy for the Church, he speaks
not one word, in the exposition of that text.

Anselmus in his Comment upon that text, personates Paul speaking thus, I
rejoice in sufferings, to confirm you in the truth of the Gospel: And I fill up
that which is wanting of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh, that is, the
things that Christ has not suffered in his flesh, I suffer in my flesh, for
the increase of his body, which is the Church, for the sufferings of Christ are
not in Christ alone.

Then having copyed out Austins words, he makes the Apostle speak thus, There
is still part of Christ's sufferings behind, which I suffer every day, for his
universal body, which is the Church. Si enim ab eruditione fidelium cessarem,
has passiones ab infidelibus non sustinerem. Sed quia semper Ecclesiae studeo
prodesse, semper adversa cogor tolerare.
For if I gave over teaching the faithful ones, I should not bear these
sufferings by the infidels; but because I study to be useful to the Church
always, I am constrained to bear adversities always. This was the end of the
Apostles sufferings for the Church, the increase and instruction of the Church.

What more? Our Adversaries pressed by the truth, begin to reject the
interpretation of Bellarmine and other Advocates of humane satisfactions.
Estius, a Doctor and Professor of Doway, in his Comment upon this text,
expounds thus these words of the Apostle, I suffer for his body, which is the
Church, that is, that the mystical body which is the Church may be gathered and
perfected. He means that not only his sufferings are fruitful to the Church,
but also that he aims at this in suffering, that his sufferings may be
profitable to the Church. Hinc autem Theologi quidam putant ostendi Sanctorum
passiones fidelibus prodesse ad remissionem poenarum, quae vocatur indulgentia.
Quae quidem doctrina etsi Catholica and Apostolica sit atque aliunde satis
probetur, ex hoc tamen Apostoli loco nobis non videtur admodum solid statui
posse. Non enim sermo iste quo Apostolus dicit se pati pro Ecclesia, necessario
sic accipiendus est, quod pro redimendis peccatorum poenis quas fideles debent
patiatur. Quod forte non nihil haberet arrogantiae.
Hence some Divines hold, that it may be inferred, that the sufferings of the
Saints serve to the faithful ones for the remission of the pains, which is
called indulgence. Which doctrine, though it be Catholic and Apostolic, and
be sufficiently confirmed by other proofs, yet it seems not to me to be solidly
established by this text of the Apostle. For this speech whereby the Apostle
says that he suffers for the Church, must not be of necessity so understood,
as if he suffered to redeem the pains of sins, which the faithful ones owe.
Which perhaps could not be said without some arrogance. Note that this Doctor
affirms, that this Doctrine is Catholic and Apostolic, and that nevertheless
one cannot speak so without some arrogance.

CHAP. 10. Answer to the invectives of our Adversaries upon this matter. And of
their reproach to this Author, that he is a Friars son.
WHen our Adversaries see their weapons broken and made useless, their manner
is to make amplifications of scolding and railing; as they that have no more
stones to throw, will cast dirt.

They reproach us, that by abolishing satisfactions, we make men negligent in
good works, and make them sink in the mire of vices. That we reject all kinds
of abstinences. That we open the gate to licentiousness. That we teach Votaries
to break the vow of Celibat, to wallow in carnal delights. That of that number
was Du Moulin's father, whom they affirm to have been a Celestine Friar, who
chose rather to lead a licentious life, then to keep his vow. The Author of the
Buckler of the Catholic Faith.
Wherefore they advise Du Moulin not to speak ill of a Monastical life, and to
say no more that Friars have put vices and idleness under the shadow of the
Altar, and to spare his fathers memory. They attend that exhortation with a
hail of foul words, calling him an Atheist, a Seducer, a profane Buffoon, etc.

I answer, that though we were as black as they make us, and our life as odious
as they would have it, their cause would be never the better for that, nor
humane satisfactions established, nor the merit of Christ made less effectual.
While the perfection of that precious merit remains firm by proofs out of the
Word of God, all their invectives against our persons do not touch the cause,
and change not the Word of God. Yea many honorable persons in the Roman
Church, to whom our life and conversation is known, will give a better
testimony of us. But they that belch out such foul reproaches, are some
scolding Writers, disciples to father Veron, men whom the Pope keeps tied by
the belly, whose pride and ignorant impetuosity is worthy of compassion, and
whose Miter is so deep about their head, and over their eyes, that they cannot
see the light.

We acknowledge indeed, that among us too many persons have a life repugnant
unto their profession. Yet we may affirm, that vices among us are not approved,
and that we have a great number of virtuous persons, who although they whip not
themselves, yet will mortify their lust. They observe not distinction of
meats, but live in perpetual sobriety. They make no vow of Celibat, but live
chastely, and their Conjugal bond is more holy then the Monachall vow. They
undertake no Pilgrimage to visit relics, but they live as strangers and
pilgrims in the earth. They read not seven Latin Psalms to punish themselves,
but their delight is continually to meditate the Word of God, and their civil
employments are sweetly interrupted with perpetual prayers. Their Pastors
impose not upon them for a penance to give unto the Church, but themselves are
freely charitable to the afflicted. And by these good works they pretend not to
satisfy God, knowing that Christ has fully satisfied for all. But all the
good works which they do, and all the afflictions which they bear for the Word
of God, are free will offerings, thanksgivings to God, exercises of Piety, and
helps to salvation, their bruises are glorious, and their reproach honorable.
It is enough for them to glorify God, and serve him according to his Word,
without pretending to pay him by torments, and to satisfy his justice.

As for the vices that are among us, herein they differ from the vices of the
Roman Church, that among us vices are infirmities, but in the Roman Church they
are Laws, and go for virtues. Eman. Sa, Aphor. in verbo Episcopus, cap. 20.
Episcopus potest procedere contra quemcunque ob peccatum mortale, nisi esset
jure permissum ut meretricium.
In no Church but the Roman, whoredom is permitted, but there Brothel-houses
are established, even by the Popes authority. Insomuch that the Jesuit Emanuel
Sa, makes no difficulty to say, that the trade of whoredom is permitted by
right. Innoc. III. Decret. lib. 2. Tit. 24. c. Sicut nostris. Juramentum contra
utilitatem Ecclesiasticam praestitum non tenct.
No Church but the Roman, teaches that an Oath taken against the profit of the
Clergy, obliges not. Conc. Constant. Sess. 19.
That a Prince is not obliged to keep faith (though sealed with an Oath) unto
an Heretic. And that it is lawful to use equivocations before Courts of
Justice. It is proper to the Roman Church to dispense subjects from the Oath of
Allegiance sworn to their King, and to give remission of sins, upon condition
of committing treason and murder; of which we have brought many examples, and
will bring more. No Church but the Roman, puts alms and prayers among
satisfactory pains, whereby a man is punished with serving God. No Church but
the Roman, makes a public traffic of Indulgences, Benefices, Dispensations,
etc. No Church but the Roman, bestows Bishoprics upon little children, and
Abbeys upon Captains. There in the reception of Bishops, an Oath of fidelity to
the Pope is exacted of them, without any mention of God, or Obligation laid
upon them to preach, and to teach, according to the doctrine of the Gospel. I
pass by the sale of the remission of sins, which we have represented, and shall
represent again in this work. The maintaining of the rebellion of children to
their parents, when they shut up themselves in a Monastery, to avoid their
authority. The reading of fabulous Books, and amorous tales tolerated, whilst
the reading of Scripture is forbidden. Conc. Lateran. ult. Sess. 1. Officiales
ad pedes Sanctissimi Domini nostri tactis sacrosanctis Scripturis praestiterant
corporale juramentum.
The Cross put upon the Popes slipper which he gives to kiss. The Holy
Scripture set at the Popes feet at the entry of Councils, as it were to
testify that the Word of God is subject to him: And many the like things
infinite to number. All these things are not vices of private men, but public
Laws and Rules of the Church, or customs past into nature, which have the
strength of a Law.

It is true, that in the Roman Church they enjoin satisfactions and
abstinences. But Rome, whence these rules came, is the sink of profaneness.
There vices against nature, are turned into nature and custom; and all the
pomp of public devotions, is matched with contrary actions, which make the
whole to appear a collusion fit to be laughed at. There on the one side, you
may see the nastiness of Capucins; on the other side, the gorgeous pomp of
Cardinals. In the place whence the Law for Celibat comes, Brothel-houses are
open, and whoredom is permitted. There, while Comedies are acted in houses,
bands of Penitents whip themselves in the street, which is another kind of
Comedy. There out of zeal to the Catholic Religion, on the one side they burn
Heretics for believing in Christ alone, on the other side the Synagogues of
Jews are tolerated, which maintain that the Lord Jesus was an impostor. There
you have the Jesuits, which take upon them to be learned, and together the
ignorant Friars which profess ignorance. There is the liberal alms of the
Hospital of the Holy Ghost, and together the traffic of Benefices, and the
sale of Dispensations and Absolutions. There the humility of his Holiness,
washing the feet of the poor, and giving his feet to Emperors and Kings to
kiss. And while he calls himself the servant of servants, he gives and takes
away Kingdoms. So that it seems that devotion there serves to give a color
and a shelter unto vices. If any coming from that center of corruption, comes
into a place where our Religion is established, he thinks himself transported
into a new world, and either laughs at our simplicity for not knowing the rules
of living at ease, or gives glory to God, acknowledging that nothing roots out
vices, but the doctrine of the Gospel.

Read the Authors that have let out their pen unto the Pope to lie in his
favor, and the Popes domestic servants, as Baronius, Genebrardus, Platina,
Trithemius, Theodoricus a Niem, Fasciculus temporum, and the like; you shall
find that the most prodigious Heathen Emperors were sober and just in
comparison of the Popes. And that for eightscore years, from the year 883. to
the year 1049. none sat on the Papal See but creatures of harlots, perjured
men, thieves, adulterers, and Necromancers. As the Devil taking the outward
figure of a man's body is short in one point, that he cannot imitate the
brightness and the life of the eye: So superstition is an Ape of true Religion,
but cannot attain the purity of conscience, and the light of the truth.
Wherefore these Gentlemen shall do wisely when they deal with us, to be sparing
of reproaches, lest they oblige us to speak of their lives, and to turn over
the skirts of the party mentioned in the seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation.

In all this discourse against the Roman Church, I mean not the people, among
whom I know that many lead a civil honest life, and approve not these rules. I
speak of those only, who by an express profession corrupt Religion, and hide
the holy Scripture from the eyes of the people, and being tied with a vow unto
the Papal See, confine all Religion to the establishing of the Empire of the
same.

As for their reproaches, that we entice Votaries to break their vow, and that
Monks coming out of Convents, take Sanctuary among us to live licentiously, and
shake off the yoke: I do freely acknowledge, that I have known many that are
come out of Monasteries, who being of ill conditions when they were Monks, did
not cast off their ill conditions with their Frock. Being bred in idleness, and
loving licentiousness, they come to us to bring vices among us. Hardly of an
hundred that come out of Convents, five prove good. If the character of
Priesthood be indelible, sure that of Monkhood is far more indelible. Those few
that take honest and godly courses after they are come out of Monasteries, are
those that have stayed there but little, or that were especially moved with the
Spirit of Gods fear, and enlightened by him with a greater measure of his
knowledge. If such men for their domestic businesses, or to avoid temptations,
take wives, living honestly and with conjugal chastity, herein they follow the
Apostles counsel, and obey Gods Word, which they are more obliged to obey then
unjust laws, and a rash vow which ensnareth consciences, and is not approved by
the Word of God.

Had my Father been of that number, I would think it no disgrace to me, or to
the honor of my Ministry. But the coyners of that untruth ought at least to
have stayed for my death, that they might lie with more liberty. They should
have specified also of what Monastery my Father was Monk, and when he came out
of it. Which shall not be found. For he being called to Gods knowledge from his
tender years, he consecrated himself to the holy Ministry, in which he served
God with great fidelity for the space of threescore years, and to his lives
end, His holy life, his honorable conversation, his brave mind in his
continual afflictions, which he bore cheerfully for the Gospel, his fervent
zeal, his vigilance in his calling, his pleasing and affable behavior, which
he seasoned with a meek gravity: These, I say, were as far from the air of the
Cloister, as heaven is from earth, and the Mass from the Gospel. His extraction
and his life known at Orleans where he was born, sufficiently confute that
fable, of his ever being a Monk. No wonder if they dare tell lies of a dead
man, seeing that while I lived in Paris, serving in the Ministry of the
Gospel, Preaching and writing for the cause of Christ, the news of my
conversion to the Roman Religion were publicly preached in Paris in many
pulpits, already they provided Benefices for me: Already (as it was preached) I
prepared my journey to ride Post to Rome. Already in a certain Church, the
people stayed expecting to hear me make my declaration. Such tricks will
astonish the people for a season, and an untruth that was believed for three
days, has done some effect. But the prudent will say, That a lying doctrine
cannot be defended but with other lies: And that if we must not preach the
Truth to please men, much less ought we to say untruths to please God.

Leaving the persons, let us return to the doctrine, and affirm that the
doctrine which rejects satisfactions, is so far from corrupting manners, that
there is no shorter way to virtue. Nothing obliges us more to love God, then
the knowledge of the love which he has born to us, forgiving us freely by
Christ, requiring of us no satisfactory pains, and no torments in a fire to
satisfy his justice. The true motives that stir up piety, are not the fear of
a fire, nor the opinion that we pay a recompense unto God, nor the ambition of
being our own Redeemers, but filial love kindled by free redemption, and the
infinite love which God has born to us in Christ. Wherefore from the
commemoration of Gods grace and mercy, the holy Scripture uses to infer
exhortations to an holy life. Thus the Apostle, Romans 12.1. Exhorts us by the
mercies of God, that we present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
unto God, which is our reasonable service. And Saint Peter teaches us, that
Christ his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being
dead to sin, should live to righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. The Law it self by the
consideration of Gods mercy, calls upon us to love him, showing that God
shows mercy unto them that love him. The most tender and the most powerful
provocation to love God, is the sense of his love. That man corrupts Gods
graces, that turns them into occasions of deboistness, and changes Christian
liberty into licentiousness, and the peace of conscience into a carnal
Lethargy, and the remission of sins into a permission to sin.

Many times indeed, it is useful to fear Gods judgments, and tremble under his
hand, to turn us away from vices. But it is but a step to go higher, that after
we have been retained by fear, we may use our selves by little and little to
serve him out of love, and with a willing obedience. As when needles make the
thread to enter into the cloth, they pass, but the thread remains; so fear of
punishment serves to bring free obedience, and filial love into the heart:
Fear passes, and love succeeding, casts out fear, as Saint John 1 John 4.18.
Luke 1.74, 75.
teaches us; but love remains, whereby we serve God without fear, in holiness
and righteousness, before him all the days of our life.

And when the question is of keeping men from sin by the fear of punishment (as
there is need of it many times) is not the fear of Hell far more sufficient for
that, then the fear of Purgatory? Our Savior Jesus made use of that fear, when
he said to his Disciples, Luke 12.5. I will forewarn you whom you shall fear;
Fear him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell, yea I say
unto you fear him; but of Purgatory and Satisfaction, he says never a word
unto them. We ought also to represent unto men the evident judgments whereby
God in this very lise punishes the contemners of his Word. And these
instructions are no less effectual to awake sinners, although the pains of Gods
children be not reckoned for recompenses, and satisfactions to Gods justice.
God forbid that ever we come to that presumption, to produce our works or our
sufferings before Gods judgment, as a payment to his justice, saying, Lord it
is true that I have offended thee, but I have paid thee for it; I have made a
Pilgrimage to Saint James in Gallicia; I have eaten nothing but fish so many
days; I have given so much money to the reformed Austin- Friars, or to the
Recollect Friars; I have whipped my self so many days, and when I was not in the
humor to whip my self, I have got another to do so much for me. O abuse,
abuse! Deplorable seduction! Let us return to Christ, and repose our selves
altogether upon his satisfaction, if we will both give glory to God, and find
rest for our consciences. And let us not bend our minds obstinately to pay God
in spite of his heart, and to satisfy his justice, lest that he make us pay
the whole debt in spite of our heart, and exact from us an entire satisfaction
to his terrible justice.

CHAP. 11. What tyranny the Popes have exercised over England for some Ages
under color of absolution and satisfaction. And from what horrible bondage
England was delivered by the light of the Gospel.
SInce the end of Cardinal du Perrons book was to shake the constancy of his
Majesty of great Britain, and to induce him to submit his Crown to the Papal
See, I think it expedient, yea and necessary to show what was the condition of
the English, and what the ignominy and bondage of the Royal Crown under the
Empire of the Roman Prelat. This matter of satisfactions leads us to that
discourse. For it was a principal engine of the Pope to bring Kings under his
feet, for him to tread upon their neeks, and to prey upon England with the
highest insolency.

The Dispute about Investitures and Collation of Benefices, is that for which
most blood has been spilt in Europe, since Christian Religion was planted in
it. Upon that quarrel above an hundred battles were fought since Gregory the
VII. besides sieges of towns, and wasting and ransacking of Provinces. As in
the fourth and fifth Ages, the word consubstantial was the mark of the
Orthodox, and in our days going to mass is the mark of Roman Catholics; so in
the eleventh and twelfth Ages, to maintain that the right of Investitures and
collation of Bishoprics and Abbeys belonged not unto Kings and Princes, but to
the Pope, went for the mark of a true Christian, and they that suffered for the
defense of the Popes claim, were called Martyrs, and put in the list of Saints,
and were sure to do miracles after their death.

In old time Popes were created by the authority of the Emperors, who also
punished and deposed Popes. They employed them sometimes about Embassies and
other services, as a Sovereign Prince will send his subjects and servants on
his errand.

The Kings of Italy took of the Bishops of Rome three thousand crowns for their
investiture; as of the Archbishop of Milan, and that of Ravenna, two thousand
for theirs, according to the express law of King Athalaricus in Cassiod. var.
l. 9. ep. 13.
Cassiodorus. That law was made about the year of Christ, 533.

The Emperor Justinian having shortly after recovered Rome and Italy, continued
the same Law, commanding that the Patriarchs should pay (and the Roman as well
as the others) to the Emperors coffers, twenty pounds weight of gold which come
to about three thousand French crowns. This is to be seen in the Novel. 123. c.
3. Jubemus beatissimos Archiepiscopos and Patriarchas, hoc est, seniores Romae
and Constantinopoleos and Alexandriae and Theopolcos and Jerosolymorum,
siquidem consuetudo habet Episcopis aut Clericis non minus quam 20. libras auri
dari, etc.
one hundred twenty third Novel of Justinian, in the third chapter

But the Roman Empire being pulled down in the West, and Italy being fallen
into the hands of the French, the Pope was enriched by the immense liberalities
of Pepin, and Charlemagne, and Lewis the Meek, and from a Bishop was suddenly
made a temporal Prince. Being thus raised he took advantage, after the death of
Lewis, of the dullness of his successors, distracted with great wars, to make
his keys to clink with a great noise, and to terrify the Princes and nations
on this side of the Alps, with the thunder of his excommunications (For as for
the Grecians his neighbors, who at that time held still part of Italy, they
never cared for the roaring of his Bulls) By little and little the Papal empire
did so increase, that in the end the Popes made bold to strike at the Crowns of
Emperors and Kings, and shoot anathema's against them, giving and taking away
Kingdoms, putting interdicts upon their Provinces, and exposing them for a prey
to the next Conqueror. Yea they came to Extra Unam Sanctam de Majoritate and
obedientia.
bear themselves for Lords of the whole temporal of the world no less then of
the spiritual, because it is written Behold two swords etc, that is, the
spiritual and the temporal sword.

The height of the Popes power and glory, and together the depth, and as it
were the midnight of the darkest ignorance, was from the year 1073. upon which
Gregory the VII. entered into the Papal See, and the year 1517. when Leo the X.
having published great Pardons over all the Papal Empire began to sell heaven
for ready money and put to sale remission of sins and deliverance of souls from
Purgatory. This moved the people to search the Scriptures to know what ground
such an infamous traffic might pretend in the word of God. In all that
interval which was of 444. years, Holy Scripture was a book shut up unto the
Princes and nations of the West, and their whole Religion consisted in
adoration of relics and new Saints doing miracles in pilgrimages, in service
of images, in visions of souls returning from Purgatory, in running to get
pardons, in founding Abbeys for satisfaction and redemption of the sins of the
founders, in making Croisada's for expedition into the Holy Land, and in
trembling under the Popes thunderbolts. Hardly was Christ acknowledged among
the Saints. Till in the end they bethought themselves to give him his Feast
which they call Gods Feast, that Christ might not be alone without a holy day.

That Gregory the VII. was the first Pope that made bold It was in the year.
1075.
to ponounce a sentence of deposition from the Empire against Henry the IV. a
wise and valorous Emperor, transporting the Empire to Rodolphus Duke of Suaben.
But that bold attempt turned to the confusion both of Gregory and of bis
creature Rodolphus: For Rodolphus was defeated and wounded to death by Henry,
who also degraded Gregory as guilty of high treason, making him fly to
Salerno, where soon after he died for grief. Also Henry besieged Rome and took
it. Sigebert. An. 1085. Confessus est Deo and Sancto Petro and toti Ecclesiae,
se valde peccasse in pastoralicura, quae ei ad regendum commissa erat, and
suadente Diabolo contra humanum genus odium and iram concitasse.
Sigebert who lived then, and Matthew Paris, almost his contemporary, and
Cardinal Benno a domestic of that Pope, write that when he saw himself near
his death he called a Cardinal, the most confiding of all his friends, to whom
he confessed that he had greatly offended in the pastoral charge committed unto
him, and had drawn the wrath of God upon mankind by the Devils instigation.

This quarrel began, because the Emperors after the Canonical election of the
Bishops and Abbots of their Empire, used to invest them with the lands and
lordships belonging unto the Bishopric or Abbey, putting a ring and a staff
in their hand, and to receive the oath of allegiance from them. For the said
Prelates holding many noble lands in the Empire by the concession of the
Emperors, and having a vote in their election and in the greatest business of
the Empire, the Emperors thought it just and necessary that the said Prelates
should make some acknowledgment of it, and should not be received into a degree
so important to the State, without the states consent, and without
acknowledging the Emperor to be their Lord and Master. Besides, the Emperors
according to the custom of the ancient Emperors which I represented before,
would take some present in money from the said Prelates (which yet was a small
thing in comparison of that which the Popes took since, and take still for the
Annat, now that they have deprived the Emperor of his right) And herein the
Emperors thought themselves grounded in right. For besides that the Churches,
Abbeyes, and Priories were founded by the liberality of Emperors and Princes of
the Empire, the Emperor maintained armies for the defense and security of the
said Prelates, wherefore it was reasonable that they should contribute toward
the charges.

The Kings of England had the same right in their Kingdom. So at the same time
that Popes disputed those investitures against Emperors, they labored also in
England to pluck that flower from the Kings Crown, and to draw the profit to
themselves. The first that stirred that quarrel in England was Anselm
Archbishop of Canterbury; for when the Kings of England needy and greedy of
money borrowed of the Clergy great loans never to pay again, he to exempt
himself from the subjection of Kings, labored to make his Archbishopric to
depend merely on the Pope, not on the King, although he had got it by the free
gift and concession of the King.

That Anselme then being promoted in the year 1092. to the Archbishopric by
King William Rufus, the King having given him freely that great and rich place,
soon after would extort from him a great sum of money for the exigence of his
businesses, as claiming a recompense for his gift. Anselm refused to give it,
and stealing privately out of England, went to Pope Urban the II. who at that
time was violently prosecuting, against the Emperor Henry the IV. the quarrel
of investiture, begun by his predecessor Gregory the VII. This Urban liking the
prudence and dexterity of Anselm made use of his counsel, and gave him the
Archbishops pall, thereby voiding the investiture which he had received from
King William, and obliging him thereafter to depend on him; As also he did, so
behaving himself ever since, as holding his Archbishopric by the Popes
ordination, not by the Kings concession. Whereby the King incensed, interdicted
to Anselm the entry into his Kingdom, confiscated the lands and estate of the
Archbishopric, and declared by an express Edict that his Bishops held their
places and estates merely from him, and were not subject unto the Pope for the
same; And that he had the same rights in his Kingdom, as the Emperor had in the
Empire. To which all the Bishops of England subscribed. Neither did any of them
contradict it, but the only Bishop of Rochester as a Suffragant to the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

By the intervention of friends Anselm made his peace; But being returned from
Rome, and keeping a strict league with the Pope, he began again soon after to
dissuade the Clergy from receiving investitures from the King, wherefore he was
constrained to fly the second time out of the Kingdom, and his estate was
again seized upon and confiscated, of which he had obtained restitution at his
return.

He came then to Pope Urban, who received him with honor as a confessor
suffering for the cause of Christ. The year after, Urban kept a Council at
Clermont in Auvergne, where he granted full pardon of all sins to all that
should contribute for the expedition into the Holy land, Matthew. Paris in
Gulielmo Rufo. Baronius.
and to them that should go in person, he promised a particular degree of glory
and a pre-eminence in Paradise above the vulgar sort of Saints. In the same
Council he decreed that thenceforth it should not be lawful, for any Prelat or
Ecclesiastical person to receive the investiture or collation of a benefice or
Church-dignity from the hand of any Lay-person. But the Princes laughed at these
Decrees and retained the possession of these investitures.

In the year 1099. King William and Pope Urban dyed. Henry the I. succeeded
William, and Paschal the II. succeeded Urban. This King Henry finding his
conscience charged with many crimes, among other things, with taking the
Kingdom from his elder brother Robert, vowed unto God for satisfaction for his
sins to found an Abbey, and together sought to be reconciled with Anselm, and
called him again. But Anselm being obliged with an oath to the Pope prevailed
with the King that a Council should be gathered at London, Where he declared
the order he had from the Pope that no Layman should have the power to confer
any investiture, and began to degrade the Bishops promoted by the Kings
nomination, and refused to consecrate some Bishops named by the King. The King
angry banished him out of his Kingdom presently, and confiscated his estate.

While these things past in England, Pope Paschal prosecuted the quarrel of his
predecessors against the Emperor The letters of that Emperor Henry the IV. to
Philip King of France are found in Sigebert in the year 1106. This history is
related at large by Helmodus Priest of Lubec in the book entitled Chonica
Sclavorum. See also Baronius in the life of Paschal.
Henry the IV. and seeing that all the enemies whom the Pope had raised against
him had been overcome ad defeated, he did so work upon the Emperors own son,
that he made him rebel against his father, and that son coming upon his Father
at unawares, with an army surprised him at Confluence, took the Crown, the
Scepter, and Imperial robe from him, and degraded him from the Empire. This
broke the heart of the venerable old man charged with so many victories, who
dyed soon after with grief, so forsaken, that Pope Paschal would not suffer him
so much as to be buried.

That new Emperor Henry the V. having slain his father past presently into
Italy, where the Pope hoping to be recompensed for helping him in his
conspiracy against his Father, found himself deceived; For when he pressed him to
renounce the rights of investiture which his ancestors (as Sigebert says) had
enjoyed above three hundred years, the Emperor grew very angry, and laying
hold of this Pope Paschal, committed him to a close prison: Neither would he
release him, till he had renounced his claim to the Investitures and Collations
of Benefices, saying to him in scorn, that which Jacob said to the Angel
wrestling with him, I will not let thee go, before thou have given me thy
blessing. Paschal then to redeem himself out of captivity, granted to Henry,
that both he and the Popes after him, should leave unto the Emperors the
peaceable enjoying of the Investitures of Ecclesiastical dignities, by the ring
and the staff. Also that none could be consecrated Bishop, without an
investiture by the Emperor. And to make this agreement more authentical, the
Emperor and the Pope mutually obliged themselves by Oath upon the host of the
Mass, which they received together. But because that Oath was extorted, the
Pope did not think himself obliged to keep it. So he broke that agreement, and
excommunicated Henry, and all Princes usurping Investitures.

That accident confirmed Henry the I. King of England in a resolution, to
retain the Investitures of his Kingdom. And that order was kept in England for
a long time. Only the Popes, that they might not wrong their pretenses by a
long prescription, would send the Pall to some Prelates invested by the King,
confirming that which they could not alter, and giving an approbation which was
not desired of them.

In the year 1142. Pope Eugenius came to Paris, where that he might usurp the
right of investiture, and deprive the King of it, he gave the Archbishopric of
Bourges to one of his domestics, Chancellor of the Apostolical Chancery, named
Peter Aimery, without the consent of King Lewis, a Prince very much given to
obedience unto the Papal See. Matthew. Paris in Henrico I.
Yet the King was so angry at it, that he swore upon the holy relics, that
never so long as he lived, Aimery should set his foot in Bourges. But the Pope
knowing the Kings timorous nature, excommunicated him, put his person in
interdict, and gave order that in France, in all places where the King came,
divine service should cease, and all his Court was deprived of the Communion.
This lasted three whole years, till the famous Bernard Abbot of Cleruaux come
to the King, and persuaded him to receive the said Archbishop. But because by
so doing, the King brake his Oath made upon the holy relics, he was enjoined
for satisfaction to take a journey to the holy Sepulcher in Syria, to fight
against the Saracens. In which journey, the King miserably lost the flower of
his Nobility, and returned afflicted and full of confusion.

Matthew. Paris, an. 1154. p. 88. Cum Archiepiscopus divina celebraret mysteria,
hausto in ipso Calice, ut aiunt, veneno obiit.
About that time dyed Henry Archbishop of York, being poisoned in the Chalice of
the Sacrament. And it was no small question, Whether the blood of Christ might
he poisoned.

After Henry the I. of England, came Stephen, and after Stephen, Henry the II.
a potent Prince, who besides England, held Normandy, Anjou, Poitou, Saintonge,
and Guienne: Matthew. Paris, in Henrico II. p. 91.
That King so potent, was weakened with an inward combat of contrary desires;
for being very superstitious and scrupulous, yet he was very ambitious, and
extraordinarily eager to maintain his rights, that of investitures especially.

Helmoldi Chronicon.
In the year 1155. (the year in which Frederick Barbarossa held the Popes
stirrup, the left instead of the right, to abuse him, but the next day was
forced to hold the right) King Henry the II. desirous to invade Ireland, and
having no just title to it, writ to Pope Adrian to desire his leave to subdue
Ireland, to reduce it into the way of salvation. Not but that the Irish were
Christians, but they yielded little obedience to the Pope, who got no money
from that Island. The Popes letters in answer to Henry, are related by Matthew
Paris, whereby that Pope gives him leave to make that conquest, upon condition
that he should impose a Tax of a penny a year upon every house of Ireland, to
the profit of the Papal See; and that he should hold that Kingdom by the Popes
grant, as a fee of the Roman Church. Sane omnes insulas, quibus Sol justitiae*
Christus illuxit and quae documenta fidei Christianae susceperunt, ad jus
sancti Petri and sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae non est dubium pertinere. Baron.
For (says he) there is no doubt but that the Islands upon which Christ the
Son of righteousness is risen, and that have received the instructions of the
Christian faith, belong to Saint Peter's right, and to the holy Roman Church.
And upon that he exhorts Henry to instruct that Nation in good manners, and
in obedience to the Church.

In the same year at Argentueil near Paris, was found our Saviors coat without
seams, made for him by his mother in his infancy, and grown with him. There was
found some writing upon it, which made that to be known which had not been
perceived in 1154. years.

Then also was burnt at Rome, one Arnould, who preached with great applause
that the Pope had nothing to do to meddle with temporal things. And he was
burnt by the command of Pope Adrian, who soon after was suffocated by a fly
which he swallowed with his drink. A wonder, that he that was God on earth, and
whom Kings worshipped, could be Uspergensis.
suffocated by a fly. Alexander the III. succeeded him, who Sainted King
Edward the Confessor, dead above a hundred years before.

Matthew. Paris, Baronius.
In the year 1162. King Henry the II. of England preferred his Chancellor Thomas
Becket to the Archbishopric of Canterbury; a prudent and industrious man, and
learned, as the time was, but sufficiently stored with ambition. He received
that preferment from the King, without any investiture or consent from the
Pope. Yet the Pope not long after sent him the Archbishops Pall. This
displeased the King, who soon after assembled a Council at Clarence, where all
appeals to Rome were forbidden, and all the Prelates declared that they held
their Offices and Benefices from the King, and from none else; to which orders
the said Archbishop Thomas was also consenting.

But a while after this Prelate changed his opinion, and protested that he was
sorry to have consented to the Kings Ordinances, and to the Conclusions of the
Council, and to show his repentance, he cut off himself from the Communion.
Then he stole away into Flanders, and from thence to Rome to Pope Alexander the
III. Whereupon the King renewed the same Laws, and decreed that every person,
whether of the Clergy or Laity, that should appeal to the Pope, should be
committed to prison, and proceeded against: The goods of Thomas he caused to be
seized, and banished both him and his kindred. Clergymen were forbidden to go
beyond the Seas without leave, and surety for their return. A strict order was
made that no Mandate from the Pope, should be received into the Kingdom of
England: And that Peter's pence, which the Pope raised by the Poll in England
every year, should be seized into the hands of his Majesty's Officers.

But Thomas being come into France, excommunicated with burning Candles and
ring of Bells, all that under pretense of maintaining the Kings right, did
hinder the profits of his Holiness; then he retired to Saint Colomb of Sens,
where King Lewis did liberally entertain him. But King Henry angry that Pope
Alexander maintained Thomas, whom he called his rebellious subject, Matthew.
Paris, page 103.
forbad all his subjects to yield any subjection to the Pope.

In the year 1170. King Henry caused his eldest Son Henry to be crowned King of
England by the hands of the Archbishop of York. Which Thomas, though banished,
took very heavily, and excommunicated the said Archbishop and all his adherents
in that action, for he pretended that the right of crowning Kings belonged to
him.

King Henry after the Crowning of his Son, passed into Normandy, where King
Lewis by his intervention so prevailed, that King Henry and Thomas met and
spoke together. And when it was required that Thomas should kiss King Henry in
sign of reconciliation, Thomas coming near the King, said to him, I kiss you
for the honor of God, or for Gods sake. At which the King offended, would not
receive the kiss, as if Thomas had given him to understand, that he kissed him
not for his own sake. So nothing was done for that time. But soon after, King
Henry Matthew. Paris in Henr. II. page 117. Cum autem Rex and Archiepiscopus in
partem secessissent, bisque descendissent and bis ascendissent, his habenam
Archiepiscopi Rex tenuit, cum equum ascendisset.
persuaded by some Prelates, met again with Thomas at Fronceuaux, and did that
which no man would have believed. For twice he held the bridle of Thomas his
horse. For that Prelate was not contented to have received that honor once,
but he alighted again, that the King should do him that submission once more,
as also he did. Thus that Priest practiced Apostolic humility.

After this triumph, Thomas returned into England full of glory. Where instead
of bringing and keeping peace, he was the bearer and proclaimer of an
excommunication and sentence of deposition against the Archbishop of York and
his Adherents, who had taken upon them to Crown the young King in his absence.
But the King hindered the execution of that sentence. Such was then the power of
the Keys, such was the abominable pride of the Popes slaves.

The next year after, the same Thomas excommunicated solemnly the Lord
Sackvill, appointed by the King Vicar of the Church at Canterbury; because he
did derogate from the rights of the Church to please the King. Matthew. Paris, p.
19. Robertum quoque Brook, qui equum quendam ipsius Archieiscopi victualia
deferentem ad dedecus ejus and ignominiam decurtaverat, solenniter
excommunicavit.
He excommunicated also one Robert Brook for curtailing a horse that carried
victuals to the Archbishops house. For which reason the King being then in
Normandy, sent over four of his servants to the Archbishop, to command him to
absolve those whom he had unjustly excommunicated, and take off his suspensions
from others. Which command when the Archbishop despised to obey, the King began
to grieve very sore before his servants, and to lament his condition. This
moved the same four men whom the King had sent before, to return into England
to the same Archbishop, whom they found in the Church of Canterbury at three a
clock in the afternoon, and calling him Traitor to the King, they slew him,
and dashed his brains upon the floor. His last words when he dyed were, I
commend my self and Gods cause unto God, and to the blessed Mary, and to the
Saints, Patrons of this Church, and to Saint Denis.

Here the lightness of the peoples minds appeared. For the same men that
detested the pride of that Thomas, began to worship him after his death,
compassion moving them to devotion. King Henry himself showed a deep sorrow for
it, and though he protested himself innocent of that fact, yet he sent
Ambassadors to the Pope to make satisfaction about it, and to undergo such a
penance as the Pope would impose. But the Pope would not so much as receive his
Ambassadors to kiss his feet, and would not see them: And in great wrath spoke
of excommunicating the whole Kingdom of England, and putting an Interdict upon
it, which (in his account) was sending all the English into hell. As long as
that King made Edicts, whereby he forbad his subjects to yield any obedience to
the Pope, or to receive any Bulls or Mandates from Rome, the Pope did not
trouble him, and used no threatening. But as soon as he began to humble himself,
the Pope trod under his feet, the Majesty of such a great King. And he made the
King to buy his absolution at a dear rate. He enjoined him to suffer appeals
from England to Rome. To quit his rights and claim against the liberties of the
Church, that is, to the Investitures. To keep two hundred men of arms in pay
for the Holy War: Of which pay, the Popes Assigns were to be the Receivers. And
that in England they should celebrate the Feast of the glorious Martyr Saint
Thomas of Canterbury. The words of the Bull are these. Districte praecipimus,
ut natalem Thomae Martyris gloriosi Cantuariensium olim Archiepiscopi, diem
videlicet passionis ejus, solenniter sub annis singulis celebretis, and apud
eum votivis orationibus satagatis peccatorum veniam promereri.
We strictly charge you, that you solemnly celebrate every year the birthday
of the glorious Martyr Thomas sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, that is, the
day of his Passion; and that by devout Prayers to him, you endeavor to merit
the remission of your sins.

To make the satisfaction complete, King Henry passes from Normandy into
England, stays at Canterbury, strips himself naked, and is whipped by a great
company of Monks, of whom some gave him five lashes, some three. Of which
satisfactions imposed on Henry by the Pope, Machiavel speaks thus in the first
Book of the History of Florence. Le quali cose furono da Enrico accettare, and
sottomesse si a que^l giudicio un tanto Re, che hoggi un homo privato si
vergognarebbe sottomettersi, etc. Tanto le cose che paiono sono piu da discosto
che d'appresso temute.
These things were accepted by Henry, and so great a King submitted himself to
that judgment, to which a private man in our days, would be ashamed to submit
himself. Then he exclaimeth, So much things that have some show are more feared
afar off, then near hand! Which he says, because at the same time the Citizens
of Rome expelled the Pope out of the City with disgrace, scorning his
excommunication.

Then began the relics of Saint Thomas to do miracles: Insomuch that King
Lewis, who had entertained Thomas at Sens, passed over into England to worship
him, and made his devotions to his relics. That with the Canonization of that
Saint, and the commandment made unto the world to pray to him, put this Thomas
in very great credit. Yet it is hard to say for what Article of the Christian
faith this Martyr suffered, seeing that his banishments were only for
investitures, and collations of Benifices, and pecuniary matters. Thus by Gods
permission the mystery of iniquity was growing. King Westminster. Anno 1179.
Ludovicus consummato voto peregrinationis suae ad votum ad propria inter
Doverum and Witsand navigando sine aliquo impedimento remeavit; and quia in
mari nimis timidus erat and timens pericula, dicens, esse plusquam humanum
transfretare, petiit beatum Thomam ut in illo Transitu nullus pateretur ex illo
tempore naufragium.
Lewis at his return fearing the storm, though his passage was from Dover to
Callice, and saying that to cross the Seas was but a thing more then humane,
prayed to St. Thomas the Martyr, that from that time none should suffer
shipwreck in that passage.

Matthew. Paris, in Henrico II. Westmon.
At that time Pope Alexander the III. held a Council at St. John of Lateran of
Rome where they consulted about the extirpation of the Albigeois. And he gave
order that the Archbishops visiting Churches, should content themselves to
ride with an attendance of fifty horses.

In the year 1189. King Henry the second of England dyed. Hs son Richard
surnamed Coeur de Lion succeeded him. In the sixth year of his reign West. an.
1196. Matthew. Paris, p. 175.
Walter Archbishop of Rouen, displeased because the King was fortifying the
Castle of Andeli, put whole Normandy in interdict, made divine service to cease
over all the country, shut up Churchyards, and forbad all ringing of bells;
and for a quarrel between the King and himself, excommunicated the whole
people, so that no Norman entered into Paradise unless he would take part
against the King. Then he ran away to Rome, where he was kindly received.
Matthew. Paris p. 175.
At the same time William Bishop of Ely the Popes Legate was making a progress
through England with a train of fifteen hundred horse. Matthew. Paris, an. 1197.
p. 184. Archiepiscopus Rothomagensis in Normanniam sententiam tulerat
interdicti. Jacebant corpora defunctorum insepulta per plateas civitatum and
vicos, quae viventibus foetorem non minimum incusserunt.
That interdict having lasted two years, the afflicted people were in great
confusion, because they saw themselves deprived of the divine service, and cast
out of the communion of the Church for a quarrel in which they had no hand, the
burying places shut up, the dead bodies cast out in the streets, sending forth
such a stink that the whole country was infected with it.

In the end King Richard was necessitated to send Ambassadors to Rome to plead
his cause against the Archbishop. The agreement was made with these
conditions. That the King might fortify the castle of Andeli, because it was a
frontier near the French. But that to appease the Archbishop, and make him
take off the interdict from the country, the King should give to the
Archbishop all the mills of Rouen, to enjoy them as his own, both he and his
successors; Also all the Kings demaines at Diepe, and at Louviers, and the
forest of Haliermont, with all the appurtenances of the same. That being done,
they began again to sing Mass in Normandy, and by the Popes order Paradise was
opened again unto the Normans. Then also the order of the Dominicans first
appeared, which was approved and confirmed by Innocent the III. With that
order, and that of the Franciscans, England was presently filled.

The fear of the interdict in those days kept Princes and Nations in such
fear, that there was nothing that the Pope could not obtain of the Sovereigns,
as soon as he threatened their land with an interdict.

In the year 1199. King Philip August of France Matthew. Paris, in Johanne Rege,
p. 191.
imprisoned Peter de Douay elected Bishop of Cambray. And at the same time King
John of England kept the Bishop of Beauuais prisoner, whom he had taken in
battle armed cap a pe. But both these Kings were constrained to release their
prisoners by the threatening of Innocent the III. to put France and England in
interdict. Which if he had done, from the Mediterranean sea to the border of
Scotland divine service had ceased, Churches and Church yards, had been shut up
all, the people had been excommunicated. It was that same year that breasts of
flesh grew upon an image of the Virgin Mary in Damascus, as (d) Matthew Paris
relates. In the same time one Thurical an Englishman was in a rapture carried
in the night to Purgatory, of which St. Nicolas is Governor; Where also he saw
the mouth of Hell, whence a stinking smoke issued out, which, as it was
revealed to him, 203. and 207.
came out of tithes detained or ill paid, because there those men were horribly
punished who had ill paid the tithes due to the Church. There also he saw the
souls for which no Masses were sung, put to a longer and sorer torment, and
those poor souls were barefoot, and had their bellies flayed and raw. He saw
also the souls that came out of that fire besprinkled by St. Michael with holy
water. This is very exactly related by Matthew Paris a Monk of St. Albons,
superstitious according to the age that he lived in. Then also came the
Minorite Friars into England, their Order being but lately instituted.

This King John was unfortunate in war, and ill beloved of his own subjects.
King Philip August of France, took from him Normandy, Anjou, Tourain, Poitou,
and part of Guienne. After these losses, being retired into England, he began
to oppress the English, and tyrannically to rob the substance of the Nobles and
the Clergy. Whereby he gave fair play to Pope Innocent III. a man as crafty and
stirring as ever was any, for he brought that King upon his knees, and got his
ends of him, at the first occasion of quarrel, which was this.

The Pope having chosen Cardinal Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury
without the Kings consent, the King angry at it, sent some soldiers to
Canterbury who used the Monks of Canterbury as traitors and expelled them out
of England. Matthew. Paris, and Westmonast. in Johanne.
He sent also reproachful letters to the Pope, upbraiding him that the Popes
got more money out of England then out of any Kingdom, and yet delighted to
bring it into trouble, and to incroach upon the liberties of the Crown;
threatening, that if the Pope continued in these courses, he would shut up all
the passages out of his Kingdom, that no money should pass out of England to
Rome; saying, that he had Prelates of sufficient capacity, and needed not to
ask justice of those that were far from him.

Had a victorious King, well beloved of his subjects, spoken thus, the Pope
would have given him fair words, and spoken like a father, that bears with a
fatherly meekness the infirmities of his dearest son. So had his predecessors
born with all threatenings and ill words of William Rufus, Henry the I. and
Henry the II. before Thomas Beckets death. But with this John, a weak and ill
advised Prince, he behaved himself otherwise. For after Letters of admonition,
he gave order to some of his most confiding Prelates in England, that if the
King should continue that language, they should put an interdict upon all
England. Which was speedily executed. And Westmon. An. 1214. Interdictum
duravit sex annis quatuordecim septimanis and duobus diebus.
England remained under the interdict six years, and three months and a half.
Whereby not only the King and his Court but also all the people of England, who
had nothing to do with that quarrel, were excommunicated. In that long time how
many thousands of men died in the great Kingdom of England? who by the rules of
the Roman Church, and by the Popes judgment, are eternally damned; and that
not for heresy, nor for any crime of the People, but for a quarrel between the
King and the Pope, about some investitures of Churches and collations of
Benefices, and money-matters. Matthew. Paris, in Johanne, p. 217. Cessaverunt in
Anglia omnia Ecclesiastica Sacramenta praeter solummodo confessionem, and
viaticum in ultima necessitate, and baptisma parvulorum. Corpora quoque
defu^ctorum de civitatibus and villis efferebantur, and more canum in biviis
and fossatis sine orationibus and sacerdotum ministerio sepeliebantur.
Then (says Matthew Paris, who was an eye witness of all that disorder) all
the Sacraments of the Church ceased in England, saving only the Confession and
the Communion of the Host in the last necessity, and the Baptism of little
children. And the dead bodies were carried out of the towns, and as if they had
been the bodies of dogs, they were buried by the high ways, and in ditches;
without prayers and without service of Priests. By the same interdict
(according to the custom of the interdict) Masses, Mattens, Vespers, all
public service and ringing of bells was forbidden, and the Kingdom was exposed
to rapin and prey, and given to any that could conquer it. Only the King was
not yet excommunicated by name, but that was done the next year after. Next,
the same Innocent deposed John from the Kingdom of England, and absolved the
English from the Oath of their allegiance, Westmonast. an. 1211. and 1213.
Matthew. Par. in Johanne. Ad hujus sententiae executionem scripsit Dominus Papa
potentissimo Regi Erancorum Philippo, quatenus in remissionem omnium suorum
peccatorum hunc laborem assumeret, and Rege Anglorum a solio expulso, ipse and
successores sui regnum Angliae perpetuo jure possiderent, etc. Statuit
praeterea, ut quicunque ad expugnandum Regem illum contumacem opes impenderint
vel auxilium, sicut illi qui sepulcrum Domini visitant, tam in rebus quam in
personis and animarum suffragiis in pace Ecclesiae secure permaneant.
Westmonast. an. 1213. Matthew. Paris in Johanne. Johannes Dei Gratia Rex Angliae,
etc. volentes nos ipsos humiliare pro illo qui se pro nobis humiliavit usque ad
mortem, gratin Spiritus inspirante, non vi interdicti nec timore coacti, sed
nostra bona spontaneaque voluntate, ac communi consilio Baronum nostrorum,
conferimus and libere concodimus Deo and sanctis ejus Apostolis Petro and Paulo
and sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae matri nostrae ac Domino Papae Innocentio ejusque
Catholicis successoribus totum regnum Angliae and totum regnum Hiberniae, cum
omni jure ac pertinentiis suis pro remissione omnium peccatorum nostrorum and
totius generis-nostri tam pro vivis quam pro defunctis, and a modo illa ab eo
and ab Ecclesia Romana tanquam secundarius recipientes and tenentes, in
praesentia prudentis viri Pandulfi Domini Papae Subdiaconi and familiaris:
Exinde praedicto Domino Papae Innocentio ejusque Catholicis successoribus, and
Ecclesiae Romanae secundum formam subscriptam fecimus and juravimus homagium
ligium in praesentia Pandulfi. Si coram Domino Papa esse poterimus, idem
faciemus, etc. Ad indicium autem hujus nostrae perpetuae obligationis and
concessionis volumus and stabilimus, ut de propriis and specialibus reditibus
nostris praedictorum regnorum pro omni servitio and consuetudine quae pro ipsis
facere debemus, salvis per omnia denariis beati Petri, Ecclesia Romanam ille
marcas estrelingorum percipiat annuatim, etc.
and commanded Phillip August, King of France, that for the remission of his
sins, he should invade the Kingdom of England with force of arms, giving to
those that should follow the King in that conquest, the remission of all their
sins, and the same graces and pardons, as to them that visit the Holy
Sepulcher. Whereupon the said King Philip, partly to obtain the remission of
his sins, partly to make himself master of England, raised a mighty Army
whilst Innocent was laboring to make the English to rise against their King.

This moved King John to humble himself under the Pope, and to receive such
conditions as were best pleasing to his holiness. The conditions were, that the
King should yield unto the Pope the whole right of Patronage of all the
Benefices of his Kingdom. That to obtain absolution of his sins, he should pay
to the Clergy of Canterbury, and to other Prelates, the sum of eight thousand
pounds sterling. That he should satisfy for the damages done to the Church,
according to the judgment of the Popes Legate or Vicelegat. That the said John
should resign his Crown into the Popes hands, with his Kingdoms of England and
Ireland: for which letters were formed, and given to Pandulfus the Popes Legate.
The words were these. I John by the grace of God King, etc. freely grant unto
God and to the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and to the holy Roman Church our
mother, and to the Lord Pope Innocent, and to his Catholic successors, the
whole Kingdom of England and the whole Kingdom of Ireland, with all the rights
and all the appurtenances of the same, for the remission of our sins, and of
all our generation, both for the living and the dead; that from this time
forward we may receive and hold them of him, and of the Roman Church, as second
after him, etc. We have sworn, and swear unto the said Lord Pope Innocent, and
to his Catholic successors, and to the Roman Church, a liege homage in the
presence of Pandulfus. If we can be in the presence of the Lord Pope we will do
the same, and to this we oblige our successors and heirs for ever, etc. And for
the sign of this our perpetual obligation and concession, we will and ordain,
that out of our proper and especial revenues from the said Kingdoms, for all
our service and custom which we ought to render, the Roman Church receive a
thousand marks Sterling yearly, without diminution of St. Peter's pence; That
is, five hundred marks at the feast of St. Michael, and five hundred at Easter,
etc. And if we or any of our successors presume to attempt against these
things, let him forfeit his right to the Kingdom, etc.

Although the King did this most unwillingly, and with a heart full of rage and
anguish, yet he swear (and it is inserted in the Letters) that he did this with
a good will, of his own motion, and by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. And
at the same instant he did homage to the Pope, as a vassel to his Liege Lord in
the person of Pandulfus the Legate, and put at the feet of that Legate a sum of
money which Matthew. Paris in Johanne p. 228. Pandulfus pecuniam, quam in arcam
subjectionis Rex contulerat, sub pede suo conculcavit, Archiepiscopo dolente
and reclamante.
the said Legate trod upon with his foot in sign of subjection. All this was
done juxta quod Romae fuerat sententiatum, as it had been ordained at Rome, Id.
p. 227.
as Matthew Paris says, that one may not think that King John did this with
his own motion, and unconstrained, although they made him swear that he had
done it of his good will, and by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

All that being done, yet the Legate went away without taking off the Interdict,
and without absolving the King from his excommunication, which he might have
removed with speaking one word. But he returned beyond the Sea, carrying with
him a mass of treasure squeezed out of the purses of the poor English. And
being come to the coast of Normandy, he found King Philip August with a great
Army, and a fleet of a thousand ships, staying only for the wind to pass into
England to conquer it. To whom the Legate declared from the Pope, that he
should not bring his Army over, nor undertake any thing against England,
because it belonged to the Pope, the King of England being now become the Popes
Vassal, and England the patrimony of Saint Peter. At which Philip expressed a
great indignation, seeing himself thus affronted by the Pope, who had made him
spend a vast sum of money, to raise a great Army to conquer England, promising
him the remission of all his sins, and now disappointed him, and after he had
given him England, forbad him to enter into it. Wherefore notwithstanding the
Legates prohibitions, the King would have continued his design, had not the
Earl of Flanders forsaken him, returning with his Troops into his Country,
because he would not offend the Pope. Whence followed a bloody war between
France and Flanders.

Matthew. Paris, in Johanne, p. 229.
But King John full of confusion and anguish, cast himself down on his knees
before the Archbishop and other English Prelates, begging with tears to be
absolved from the excommunication; which in the end, out of their fatherly
compassion, they granted. Yet was not the Interdict taken off.

At the same time Innocent the III. published the Croisada against those that
were reproachfully called Albigeois and Vaudois, because they did not
acknowledge the Pope, called upon none but God alone, had no images, did not go
to Mass, denied Purgatory, and read the Scripture. The Pope gave the same
graces to them that should spill the blood of these poor Christians, as to them
that crossed themselves to go to the holy Sepulcher and fight against the
Saracens. The chief promoter of that war was Dominick, the Author of the Order
of Dominicans, who put above two hundred thousand of them to death.

In the mean while, King John was storming and eating his own heart with
sorrow, seeing his Crown thus miserably enslaved. And his Barons forsook him,
being angry that he had subjected his Crown to a foreign power. Matthew. Paris,
an. 1213. p. 233.
He then finding no help from any Christian, was brought to such a despair,
that he sent Ambassadors to a Mahumetan Prince, Amiral Murmelin or Miramolin
King of Barbary and Granata, offering him the Kingdom of England, and promising
to be his Vassal, if he would deliver him from his subjection to the Pope. But
that barbarous King would not accept of the gift, and despised King John, who
now for his last refuge had recourse to the Pope. Noverat and multiplici
didicerat experientia, quod Papa super omnes mortales ambitiosus erat and
superbus pecuniaeque sititor insatiabilis, and ad omnia scelera pro praemiis
datis aut promissis cereus and proclivus.
King John (says Matthew Paris) had learned by many experiences that the Pope
was above all men of the world ambitious, and proud, and insatiably thirsty of
money, flexible and prone to any wickedness for recompenses either given or
promised. He sent to him then a great sum of money, beseeching him to
excommunicate the Archbishop and the Barons of his Kingdom. At his request,
Innocent sent into England a Legate called Nicolas Bishop of Thusculo; into
whose hands John resigned his Crown, and did homage to him, as representing the
Popes person, whom he acknowledged his temporal Lord, and Sovereign of the
Kingdom. This was done before the great Altar of Paul's Church at London. Matthew.
Paris, page 236, 237. Exacta est and innovata illa non formosa sed famosa
subjectio, quae in manum Domini Papae diademate cum regno resignato tam
dominium Hiberniae quam regnum subjicit Anglicanum.
And the Deed whereby that resignation of the Kingdom was made unto the Pope,
was renewed and sealed with Gold, whereas the former was sealed with lead only.
And the said Legate assumed then a full power to dispose of the Ecclesiastical
Offices of England, without the consent either of the Archbishop, or the
Bishops of the places. Whereby (says Matthew Paris) he got the indignation and
curse of many, instead of the blessing. And Pandulfus sent to Rome, to exalt
King John's goodness and humility to the Pope, and to aggravate the pride and
insolency of the Archbishop, Bishops, and Barons of England that opposed him.

Finally, in the year 1214. the Interdict was taken off by the Legate, the Mass
restored, the Churches and Churchyards opened, and the people reconciled by
the Popes concession, upon condition that the King should give to the
Archbishop and Bishops, that had the charge of taking off the Interdict, forty
thousand marks.

But the Barons of England, sore grieved to see the Crown of England so
debased, asked of the King the enjoying of some liberties and privileges which
he had sworn unto them. These demands having caused a great dissension between
the King and the Barons, the King referred the whole unto the Pope, as unto his
Liege, of whom he held the Crown. Idem p. 236.
The Pope having heard the Kings complaints by his Ambassadors, said with an
angry countenance, Will the Barons of England put down from the Royal seat a
crossed King, who has put himself under the protection of the Apostolic See?
Will they transfer the demain of the Roman Church to another? By Saint Peter I
cannot leave that injury unpunished. Wherefore by express Bulls, he took away
all the privileges of the English Nobility, and dispensed King John from
keeping his promise unto them, and threatened the said Barons with an Anathema
in case of disobedience: That dealing he grounded upon this reason, Quia nobis
a Domino dictum est in Propheta, Constitui te super gentes and regna, ut
evellas and destruas, and aedifices, and plants.
That to the Pope in the person of the Prophet God said, I have set thee over
Nations and over Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and
to throw down, to build, and to plant. And by other Letters he commanded the
Barons like a King, not to exact of King John the fulfilling of that he had
sworn unto them.

But the Barons did not care for the Popes Mandate, wherefore they were all
excommunicated by the Pope, and their Lands and Lordships put in Interdict. The
Prelates of England were commanded to publish that sentence over all England
with burning Candles, and ringing of Bells. At the same time, the Pope
suspended Simon Langton Archbishop of York from his place, at the request of
King John: And his brother Stephen Langton likewise. A worthy recompense for
their helping of the Pope to make the King the Popes subject. The cause of
their suspension was, that they had refused to publish the excommunication of
the Barons of the Kingdom, but it was published by others appointed for that by
Pandulfus, who was joined in Commission with the Legate.

The next year, which was the year 1215. Pope Innocent the III. did gather a
Council of the whole Papal Empire at Rome in the Church of Laterane in which
there was neither deliberating, nor consulting with the Assembly, Matthew. Paris,
p. 262. Recitata sunt in pleno Concilio capitula 69. quae aliis placabilia,
aliis videbantur onerosa.
but only reading of threescore and nine Chapters of Ordinances made by this
Pope Innocent. By the third Chapter, power is given to the Pope to take away
the lands of Princes and Lords, and to give them to others. Bulla ad liberandam
sub finem Conc. Lateran. An. 1215.
There also it was spoken of the voyage and conquest of the Holy Land, and a
degree of glory in Paradise above others, was promised unto them that should
perform that journey in their own person. To them that would not go, but only
contribute to the journey, no more was given, but the remission of all their
sins, and by consequent eternal life. These last having a smaller share, were
to content themselves with the Kingdom of heaven. But as for those that would
neither go, nor contribute, Innocent declared unto them, That they must answer
him for it before God in the day of judgment.

Then also was the persecution doubled against the Vaudois and Albigeois. And
the Clergy of York, named Walter de Gray Archbishop of York, who obtained his
Investiture at Rome: Whence he parted, having first obliged himself Matthew.
Paris, in Johanne, page 263. Episcopus memoratus rediit in Angliam, obligatus
in furia Romana de december millibus librarum legalium estrelingorum, etc.
Extorsit Papa infinitam pecuniam de unoquoque praelato.
to pay unto the Pope ten thousand pounds sterling, which in those days was
enough for a Kings ransom. That was the end for which the Pope had been so long
debating about the right of Investitures. That was the fruit of the Martyrdom
of Thomas Becket. By the same way the Pope extorted from the Prelates of
England an incredible sum of money. The King obtained from the Pope, that the
Barons of his Kingdom, who had been excommunicated only by the great, and in
general, should be excommunicated by name, by a second excommunication. But
the Barons and the Citizens of London laughed at that excommunication, saying,
Ibid. page 267. Quod non pertinet ad Papam ordinatio rerum Laicarum, etc. Proh
pudor marcidi ribaldi qui de armis vel liberalitate minime norunt, toti mundo
propter excommunicationes suas volunt dominari.
That it belonged not to the Pope to rule secular affairs, seeing that the Lord
had left no more to Peter and his successors, but the disposition of
Ecclesiastical things. Why does the mad covetousness of the Romans extend to
us? What have Apostolic Bishops to do with our Knighthood? These are the
successors of Constantine, not of Peter, etc. O shame! effeminate ribalds, that
know not what belongs to arms or honor, will domineer over all the world by
their excommunications.

But the Barons seeing the King too strong for them, sent to Lewis son to
Philip August King of France, to beseech him to pass with an army into England,
promising to put the Crown of England upon his head. And for assurance, they
sent to King Philip four and twenty of the noblest of the land for hostages.

While that Lewis made himself ready to pass into England, a Legate called
Walo, came from the Pope to King Philip, to beseech him from the Pope not to
suffer his son to come into England, because John was a Vassal of the Roman
Church, and England was the Popes demain. That crafty Pope spoke to King Philip
with respect, because he saw him beloved of his subjects, and because he knew
his power and his courage. And although Philip, notwithstanding the Popes
desire, sent his son over with an Army to take England from the Pope, and
expel the Popes Vassal from his possession, yet the Pope shot no
excommunication against him. Yea, when the Legate called England the patrimony
of Saint Peter, Philip answered to the Legate in high scorn, Westmonast. An.
1216. Regnum Angliae Patrimonium Petri vel Ecclesiae Romanae nunquam fuit, nec
est, nec erit, etc. Et si Papa hunc errorem tueri allectus novae dominationis
libidine contumaciter decreverit, exemplum omnibus regnis dabit perniciosum.
That the Kingdom of England had never been, nor was, nor ever should be the
patrimony of Saint Peter. And that if the Pope would arrogantly defend that
error, being drawn to it by the greedy desire of a new domination, he should
give a most pernicious example unto all Kingdoms. To which all the French Lords
there present added, That they would stand till death for the defense of that
Article.

Yet when Lewis was come into England, and had taken from John the most part of
his Kingdom, the Legate coming into England, excommunicated Lewis with Candles
burning, and Bells ringing, and all his adherents. The death of King John
having appeased the wrath of the Barons, and cooled their affections to Lewis,
made Lewis to return into France.

John being dead, his son Henry the III. succeeded, and almost at the same time
Frederick attained to the Empire, who Uspergensis. Cuspinianus. Blondus. Matthew.
Paris. Collenutius.
obliged himself by Oath unto the Pope to pass into Syria to conquer the Holy
Land. Two years after his promise, he embarked himself at Brindissi in
Calabria to go into Syria, but being constrained to return to Land, by reason
of the indisposition of his body, Gregory the IX. excommunicated him, accusing
him of perjury. Yet soon after he imbarqued himself again, and happily arrived
into Syria, where he achieved many great exploits against the Saracens, and
conquered Jerusalem. But the Pope did not for all that take off the
excommunication. And in the very day of the triumph, when thanks were given to
God for that glorious conquest, and the amplification of Christian Religion,
the Clergy by the Popes order, would not admit him to the Communion, but turned
their backs to him as to an execrable man. But the Pope made it soon known for
what reason he had been so urgent to send him away. For, as soon as the Pope
saw him engaged in a difficult war, far from home, he invaded the Lands of
Frederick in Puglia, and went about to take Lombardy from him: Neither did he
care to free him from the excommunication, although he had accomplished his
vow. Matthew. Paris, in Henrico III. pap. 346.
Yea the Knights Templers, the Popes creatures that were sent by him into the
Levant, knowing that the Emperor would go to Jordan to wash himself,
advertised the Sultan of the Saracens of it, that he might take Frederick. But
the Sultan abhorring that perfidiousness, sent the Letters of the Templers to
Frederick, to warn him to look to himself. The Pope himself hindered the
auxiliary forces of the Croisada that were going to help Frederick, and would
not suffer them to advance. This forced Frederick to abandon the holy Land, and
to return into Italy to reconquer his own Country, which the Pope had taken
from him. The Pope frighted, took off the excommunication presently, yet upon
condition that the Emperor should pay him two hundred thousand ounces of Gold.

Yet he continued to set on the Princes and Commons of Germany to rebel
against Frederick: And so great was his hatred against Frederick, that
Cuspinian and Crontzius in An. Chr. 1249.
Crontzius write, that he sent Letters to the Sultan of the Saracens, to
persuade that Mahumetan to make war against him. But God gave victory to
Frederick every where, for he defeated in many combats, all the enemies which
the Pope raised against him. So great was his animosity against that Emperor,
that when forces of the Croisada came out of France, or England, or other
parts, to sail into Syria, to defend Jerusalem and the Holy Sepulcher against
the Saracens, Matthew. Paris, in Henrico III.
he stopped them, and gave them the same Graces and Indulgences, as if they had
performed the journey into the Holy Land, upon condition that they should turn
their arms against Frederick, whose power lay heavy upon him, because he
stiffly maintained the rights of the Empire. The Pope came so far, as to give
the Empire to Robert Brother of Lewis the IX. King of France, upon condition
that he should conquer it. Idem, page 500.
But Robert sent back to the Pope his present, both because he sent him no
money to furnish him for that conquest, and because he found it very strange,
that the Pope would give that which was none of his: Also because he showed
himself an enemy to a great and virtuous Prince, who had done and suffered so
much, bravely fighting for the cause of the Christians against the Infidels.
Then he added, that the Popes are lavish of the blood of others, and that their
end is to tread all the Princes of the world under their feet, and to put on
the horns of pride.

In the mean while, persecution grew sore against those whom they called
Vaudois and Albigeois, against whom the Pope caused the Croisada to be
preached, and an infinite number of them to be massacred. Then also Saint
Francis and Saint Dominick were making miracles, and preaching obedience to the
Papal See. Id. Henric. III. page 279.
And as Pope Innocent the III. at Rome, was carrying in procession the face of
Christ Printed in a linen cloth, that face turned it self with the beard
upwards, as Matthew Paris relates. Which moved Innocent to compose a Prayer to
the same image, and to give ten days of Indulgence to all that would adore the
image, saying that Prayer. These are the words of it, Solve sancta facies
nostri Redemptoris, in qua nitet species divini splendoris; Impressa panniculo
nivei splendoris; Dataque Veronicae signum ob amoris, etc. Nos ab omni macula
purga vitiorum; Atque nos consortio junge beatorum. Salve vultus Domini imago
beata, etc. Nos deduc ad propria, O felix figura! Ad videndum faciem quae est
Christi pura.
Hail thou holy face of the Redeemer; In which shines the appearance of
divine beauty; Printed upon a cloth of snowy whiteness, and given to Veronica
as a token of love; Purge us from all spot of vices, and join us to the company
of Saints. Hail thou face of the Lord, blessed image; Lead us to that which is
thine, O happy figure! to see the pure face of Christ. The whole prayer speaks
to the image, as if it heard the prayer.

But in England the Popes tyranny grew sorer every day. For Henry the III.
being come to the Crown, gave the homage of his Kingdom to the Pope, and
renewed the Oath of fidelity and subjection, and the promise of paying a
thousand marks yearly to the Pope.

Innocent the III. being dead, in the year 1219. Honorius the III. succeeded
him, and Matthew. Paris, An. 1220. page 299. Sanctorum Catalogo ascripsimus,
universitatem vestram monemus and exhortamur in Domino, quatenus ejus apud Deum
patrocinia devote imploretis.
at his entry to the Papacy made an English Saint called Hugh, with a command
to pray to him, and to celebrate his Feast.

In the year 1223. King Henry being yet very young, the Pope, as his Sovereign
in temporal things, declared him Major, and capable to conduct his own
businesses.

In the year 1225. the Pope sent Otto his Nuntio into England, who exacted of
every Conventual Church two marks of silver. The next year after, a Council was
held at Westminster, where the said Nuntio read in full Assembly the Popes
Letters, in which the Pope said, Matthew. Paris, page 314, 316.
That a scandal was cast upon the Roman Church: And that the ancient reproach
and disgrace of the Court of Rome, was the covetousness of riches, which is the
root of all evils. Especially because none could get any business done in the
Roman Court, but with many presents, and with greasing the Officers with money.
But because the poverty of the Romans was the cause of that evil, it was the
duty of the English, as natural sons, to relieve the poverty of their mother,
because without their liberality, the Roman Court could not preserve her
dignity. That the way to remedy that reproach, was, that the Pope should have
in every Cathedral Church, and in every Abbey and Monastery of England, two
Prebends, of which he should enjoy the fruits. And in the same year, the same
Pope called a Council at Bourges, where he made the same motion by his Legate.
But he found contradiction from the Clergy of France, and could not compass it.

After Honorius, Gregory the IX. was Pope. It was he that compiled the
Decretals, and the same whom the Romans expelled out of Rome, for the Citizens
of Rome never cared much for the Popes excommunications.

This Pope needing money for his War against the Emperor Frederick, sent a
Legate into England named Stephen, who exacted of the people of England the
tenth part of all their moveable goods, that is, of all their flocks, rents,
fruits, wares, offerings and gifts to the Church: Id. page 349. Habuit ex iisdem
literis authoritatem contradictores excommunicandi and Ecclesias interdicendi.
And the said Legate had power to excommunicate all that should refuse to pay,
and to put the Churches in Interdict. The Prelates he enjoined upon pain of
excommunication, to make that collection speedily and without delay. All that
should cross such an holy work, he declared excommunicated, ipso facto. He
would be paid in new coin, and of good weight. He took the tithe, even of the
corn in the first blade, that is, of the crop of the year after. In these
exactions he was so urgent and so griping, that the Parishes were forced to
engage the Chalices and Church plate, to satisfy his covetousness. And he had
certain usurers with him, who lent money upon double use, to those that had no
ready money. This caused a great clamor and lamentation over all the Country,
but without effect. That money was employed by the Pope, to invade many Towns
belonging to the Emperor in Italy. And the Emperor could not defend them,
because he was engaged against the Saracens in the Levant, where he took
Jerusalem, and put the affairs of the Christians in a flourishing state. And he
had utterly destroyed the Saracens, if the injuries which he received from the
Pope had not recalled him.

Matthew. Paris, page 358, 359.
Then the Benefices of England were possessed by Italians and other creatures of
the Pope, to the great grief of the English. To the Bishop of Rochester it was
revealed in vision, that King Richard, and Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury,
with a Chaplain of his, were come out of Purgatory all in one day.

p. 386.
Scarce was the collection ended, made by Stephen the Legate, when the Pope made
peace with the Emperor, but the money was not restored. And another Nuntio
came from Pope Gregory, who (as Matthew. Paris says) argumentosas extorsiones
excogitans, inventing extorsions grounded upon fair reasons, sent Nuntio's with
power of Legates, who by Sermons, Exhortations, and Excommunications, Ibid. Per
regnum Angliae infinitos reddiderunt extorres and mendicos.
brought an infinite number of English men to mendicity, and turned them out of
their houses. This was done under a pretense of contributing to the expense of
the Holy War, of which himself hindered the success, and yet he promised to them
that should contribute money for it, the remission of all their sins, and to
them that should go in person, an augmentation of glory.

Ibid. Si qui proficiscentium illuc ad praestandas usuras juramento tenentur
astricti, creditores eorum per Ecclesiarum Praelatos ut remittant iis
praestitum juramentum, and ab usurarum exactione disistant eadem praecipimus
districtione compelli.
By the same Bulls, every man that was indebted, was exempted, and could not be
arrested or sued by his Creditors, as long as he had a Cross upon his
shoulders, which was the mark of those that were associated into the Croisada:
And the reason given for that exemption, was, that such a man was become the
Popes man, and had put himself in the protection of the Church. By the same
Bulls also, power was given to the Nuntio's or Legates, to dispense with the
vow for money. So that he that had crossed himself for the voyage to the Holy
Land, might redeem himself from the vow, paying to the Legate, that which he
should have spent in the journey, and so stay at home, and enjoy the same
spiritual graces, as if he had performed the whole voyage. The Bull ended with
this exhortation, Accingantur ergo omnes filii adoptionis divinae ad obsequium
Jesu Christi, etc. Felici commercio laboribus suis, qui cito transeunt, eternam
requiem mercabuutur.
Come then, and let the children of divine Adoption prepare themselves to yield
obedience unto Christ, changing their quarrels into bonds of love, believing
that being truly confessed and contrite, by an happy traffic, and by their
labors, which do but pass, they shall purchase eternal rest. Given at Spoleto
the third of September, the eight year of our Pontificat.

The Exactors and Collectors of that money, were the Franciscans and
Dominicans, who would to day put the Cross upon a man's shoulder, and oblige him
with an Oath to the voyage, Ibid. Quibus data fuit potestas cruce signandi and
votum data pecunia relaxandi, etc. Signatos hodie cras data pecunia a crucis
voto absolvebant. Westmonast. an. 1240. Absolvebantur per praedicatores and
minores pecunia interveniente multi cruce signati in scandalum Ecclesiae.
and to morrow release him from his Oath for money.

Reason and right did require, that these great sums of money should have been
employed to defray the Princes that raised Armies for the deliverance of the
Holy Land. Among whom, he that most freely exposed his life, and that of his
subjects, with an incredible expense, was Lewis the IX. of France, who reigned
then; A Prince worthy to have been born in a better age, being a rare example
of meekness and justice, and one that partly discerned the errors, and sighed
under the Popes tyranny. That great Prince soon after undertook that voyage,
but to his great ruin, confusion of the Christians, and destruction of his
Kingdom. Yet the Pope never gave him any part of the money raised for that
expedition, nor to the Emperor, nor to any Prince, that paid Armies, and
fought for that quarrel. All was poured into the Popes coffers, as into a gulf,
and by him employed to make war against Frederick, for he broke presently the
Covenant sworn to him. So in effect, all the money contributed by devout souls,
for the conquest of the Holy Land, was employed to hinder it, and to find other
work for Frederick, who alone was more able to promote that conquest, then all
the rest together.

While the Pope exercised that horrible tyranny over England, Matthew. Paris,
page 394.
the Senate and Citizens of Rome were mastering the Pope, and were so far from
giving him money, that they would have money from the Pope, pretending an old
right for it. The difference was about some lands which the Roman Senate
claimed, as belonging to the Roman County, but the Pope said that they belonged
to his Bishopric; alleging for himself Christ's words, who had promised, that
the gates of hell should not prevail against the Church; Whence he inferred,
that in that quarrel, the Senate and the Roman people, might not hope to
prevail against him. For all his inferences, they turned him out, and burnt his
houses, and called the Emperor Frederick. Who being one of the wisest and
meekest Princes that ever were in the world, instead of helping them, corrected
their insolence, and would resent none of the injuries which Gregory had done
him. At the same time that good Emperor demanded the sister of Henry the III.
of England for his wife, and had her.

Id. p. 403, 404, 405.
At that time also certain usurers set up in England, called Caursins, who by
usuries and strange arts devised in Italy, ate up the poor people and the
Clergy. The King himself was most deeply in their debt. The Bishop of London
would have represt them, but because they were maintained by the Pope, he could
not effect it. The Franciscans and Dominicans were preaching up the Popes
power, and drawing all the confessions to themselves, and every day obtained
privileges to the prejudice of the Parochial Priests, who became almost
useless. The State of England was deplorable, for hungry Italians of the baser
sort, with Bulls and Warrants from the Pope, came daily to fleece the people,
and to raise such sums of money as they would demand upon the Clergy. If any
denied what they demanded, he was presently excommunicated. And they that held
the great Benefices, were strangers that were but the Popes Farmers. This made
Matthew Paris, that lived then and beheld these things, to lament Matthew. Paris,
p. 424. Facta est filia Sion quasi meretrix effrons non habens ruborem. Quotide
vilissimae personae and illiteratae bullis Romany armatae in minas statim
erumpentes, etc.
that the daughter of Sion was become like a shameless harlot that could not
blush, by the just judgment (says he) of him that made an Hypocrite to reign,
and a Tyrant to domineer.

The abovementioned Legate Otho came again into England, Idem, page 425. Rex
ei usque ad confinium maris occurrit, and inclinato ad genua ejus capite usque
ad interiora regni deduxit officiose.
King Henry went to meet him, even to the Seaside, and as the Popes Vassal,
cast himself down before the Legate, touching the Legates knees with his head.

In the year 1238. the Archbishop of Antioch would not acknowledge the Pope his
superior, and preferring himself before him, Idem, page 465.
excommunicated the Pope, and the Papal Court, and the Roman Church, being set
on to do that by German Archbishop of Constantinople, who called himself
Universal Bishop. The same year the persecution was very sore against the true
Christians, which were opprobriously called Albigeois, Vandois, Paterius,
Buggerars, in the same manner as they call us now Hugonots and Calvinists.
Great number of them were burnt in Flanders, at the instigation of a Dominican
called Robert Buggerar.

The oppression and extorsions of Rome growing every day in England, the
Bishops met at London, and the Legate with him, who propounded new devices to
get money, and a new way of exaction. The Bishops answered him, that the Roman
Court had quite exhausted England, and that it was impossible for them to
furnish any more. So the Assembly was broken without concluding any thing.

The Legate putting off his plot till another time, took his way toward
Scotland, to rake all the money out of it, as he had done in England. Idem. in
Henr. III. page 481. Antequam Legatus regnum Scotiae intrasset, occurrit ei Rex
Scotiae non acceptans ingressum suum. Dixit enim, quod nunquam aliquis Legatus
excepto illo solo in Scotiam intravit. Non enim, ut asseruit, opus erat.
Christianitas ibi floruit, Ecclesia prospere se habebat.
The King of Scotland hearing of it, came to meet him upon the borders, and
forbad him to come further into his Kingdom, saying that he was the first
Legate that ever entered into Scotland, and that Scotland had no need of any,
since without that Christian Religion flourished, and the Church prospered in
the Kingdom. The Legate then went back, and returning through Ibid. Rebus
Ecclesiasticis pro libito ordinatis pecuniam non minimam cogendo.
England, did so order the businesses of the Church, that he got no small sum
of money.

Then was brought into England a Mandate of the Pope, to publish in all the
Churches, with Bells ringing and Candles burning, the excommunication of the
Emperor Frederick. Which was executed, though with the Kings great grief,
because the Emperor had married his sister. And the people of Milan rebelled
against the Emperor, and sacked the neighboring Cities belonging to him with
cruelty almost unparalled, having for their head a Legate whom the Pope had
sent to them. Upon which Matthew Paris expresses, what the sense of the world
was at that time. Fear and horror filled the hearts of men, because the Papal
party cared neither for Prayers, nor for Masses, nor for Processions, etc. But
put all their hope in treasures of money, and in rapine, and with shameless
impudence ran to the sword and revenge.

The best Benefices of England being possessed by Italians, and Romans
especially, base in birth and conditions, and promoted to those places by the
Popes Agents, that were sent thither with a full power to do all things at
their pleasure, and to take from the English Prelates the power of conferring
livings, the said Prelates Id. ib. page 495.
writ to Pope Gregory, Letters full of lamentations; being justly punished. For
having helped the Popes to bring down the power of their Kings, under a
pretense of maintaining the liberties of the Church, they had put the Popes
fetters about their own legs, and drawn a hard bondage upon themselves. While
Kings were in power, the Pope called them Simoniacks that gave some little
present to the King, when they received the Investiture. But after that the
Pope had taken that power from the King, he took an hundred times more from
them then ever the King did.

This Pope by his Bulls full of fervent exhortations, had published the
Croisada over all France, Germany, and England, exhorting by the compassions of
God, and by the zeal of Christian Religion, and by the hope of salvation, all
good Christians, to go to the help of Christians oppressed in Syria, and to
deliver Jerusalem, and the place of the Cross, and the holy Sepulcher, out of
the hand of the Infidel Saracens, promising the remission of all sins, and an
augmentation of glory in Paradise, to all that should die in that voyage. Upon
these exhortations a great number of Pilgrims crossed themselves, Matthew. Paris,
page 497.
and having appointed their randevouze at Lions, met there well armed, and
furnished, and full of courage. As they were ready to march, a Legate came from
the Pope, who forbad them to go further, and commanded them to return every one
to their own home. At which they grew so angry, that much ado there was to keep
them from killing the Legate and his men. For (said they) to obey the Pope, and
for the cause of the Crucifix, we have undertaken this voyage: We have sold or
pawned our lands, we have borrowed money upon great use, and now we are sent
back to our houses. This happened in the year 1242.

In the mean while, England was sore troubled with new exactions; and the Pope
sent Letters to all the subjects of the Empire, to absolve them from the Oath
of Fidelity and Obedience, sworn to Frederick their Lord, commanding them to be
faithful in unfaithfulness, and obedient by disobedience, as p. 499. Persuadens
ut essent in infidelitate fideles, in inobedientia obedientes. Sed tantum
promeruit Romanae Ecclesiae improbitas omnibus execranda, quod a nullis vel a
paucis meruit Papalis authoritas exaudiri.
Matthew Paris says. But (says the same Author) the wickedness of the Roman
Church execrable unto all was the cause that none or few cared to obey the
Papal authority. The Emperor writ to the King of England, his brother in law to
expostulate with him because he suffered him to be excommunicated, and with
such disgrace in his Kingdom, and that moneys should be raised in England
continually by the Pope, to make war against him. The Kings answer was, that
being the Popes vassal and homager, necessity did lie upon him to yield all
obedience to his Holiness.

Yet upon these letters from the Emperor, King Henry desired the Legate Otho to
go out of England, but the Legate would not do it, and found new ways to get
money for his Master. The English Lords and Gentlemen were selling their Lands
and Manors to the Clergy to perform that voyage to the Holy Land, to which
they had bound themselves by vow, upon the Popes command. Id. p. 507.
Incoeperunt ipsi Praedicatores Fratres and Minores Cruce signatos absolvere a
voto suo, accepta tamen pecunia, quanta sufficere videbatur unicuique ad
viaticum ultramarinum. Et factum est in populo scandalum cum schismate.
But the Dominicans and Franciscans received power from the Pope to dispense
those that had crossed themselves from their vow, taking so much money from
them as they should have spent in their journey. And at the same time the Pope
who had crammed many Italians and Romans with the best benefices of England,
began to squeeze these spunges, and got from them the fifth part of their
revenue, toward the charges of his war against the Emperor. Then some English
seeing so much money go out of England, continually, came to the King, and told
him, Domine Princeps nominatissime quare permittis Angliam fieri in praedam and
desolationem transeuntium, quasi vineam sine macerie, omni communem viatori, ab
apris exterminandam? etc. Quibus talia persuadentibus ait, Nec volo, nec and
Domi^ aliquipae contra^ere. Et ^ova quaedam facta est in populo desperatio
nimis deploranda.
Most Illustrious Prince, why do you suffer England to be brought to
desolation, and to become the prey of them that go by, like a vine without
wall, exposed to travelers, and left to be destroyed by the wild boars? etc.
To whom the King answered. I will not, I dare not contradict My Lord the Pope
in any thing. Whence the people was brought to a most deplorable despair. But
the Legate having got the fifth part of all the revenues of strangers, did the
same to the English, and the Archbishop led the dance, paying eight hundred
marks to the Legate for the first payment; the rest was exacted from him, and
from all others with all violence.

Scarce was that exaction done, when one Peter de la Ronse came from Rome. Id.
p. 515. Per eosdem dies venit in Angli exactorem in pecuniae exactio omnibus
saeculis inaudita and execrabilis. Misit enim Papa, Pater noster Sanctus, q^^
erat emungere. Angliam, Petrum Rubeum qui excogitata muscipulatione infinitam
pecuniam a miseris Anglis
Of him Matthew Paris an eye witness speaks thus. In those days came into
England a new exaction of money unheard of in all ages and execrable. For our
holy Father the Pope sent a certain exactor into England called Petrus Rubeus
[or Peter of the Bryar] who having invented a certain kind of mouse-trap did
learnedly catch an infinite sum of money from the miserable Englishmen. He
would come into the Chapters of Monks and Prebends, and made them believe that
such and such a Prelat had secretly promised such a sum of money, and by
promises and threatenings extorted money from them, making them swear that in
six months they would not tell it to any body: Without saying to them the
cause why the Pope had such a sudden need of money, but leaving them to
presume that there was some great business concealed from them. Upon that the
Prelates and Abbots came to the King and told him, Ibid. Domine Rex suggillamur,
nec licet nobis clamitare, jugulamur, nec possumus ejula^
Sir, We are beaten, and we are not suffered to cry; They cut our throats, and
we cannot lament. A thing impossible is enjoined us by the Pope, and an
exaction detestable unto all the world, etc. But the King turning himself to
the Legate there present, told him, My Lord, these miserable seducers reveal the
Popes secrets; They detract and will not obey your will. Do with them what you
think good. I give you one of my best castles to put them in a sure hold. So
they were forced to pay all, that the Legate was pleased to demand of them.

The same year Earl Richard the King of Englands brother, as valiant and
generous as his brother was base and low spirited, went out of England,
carrying with him the flower of the English Nobility, and made the more have
because news was come of the miserable case of the Christians in the Levant
where the Christian party was sinking apace. Being come to St. Giles in low
Languedock to go to Marseille, a Legate met him, who forbad him from the Pope to
go further, dispensing the said Earl from his vow. The Earl highly
discontented answered, I have taken leave of my friends, I sent my money and my
arms before; Now that I am ready to take ship, I am forbidden to go. He
resolved then, notwithstanding the Popes prohibition, to perform his voyage,
and embarked himself Id. p. 518. Detestans Romanae Ecclesiae duplicitatem cum
magna mentis amaritudine.
detesting the double and treacherous dealing of the Roman Church, with a great
bitterness of spirit.

That Peter de la Ronse having not the title of Legate got into Scotland, and
did that which none ever did before him, for he carried away three thousand
pounds out of Scotland to put into the coffers of his Holiness.

While the Pope was plundering England, he was raising an immense sum of money
in France by a Legate sent purposely. Which sum exceeding the Popes
expectation, he repented to have made truce with the Emperor Frederick, seeing
that he had got so much of the sinew of War, and commanded Cardinal John
Colonna to bring word to the Emperor that he would not keep the truce. Which
when that Cardinal, whose family was potent in Italy, refused to do, and
exchanged some injurious words with the Pope upon that subject, Idem. p. 522.
Quod cum Regi Francorum innotuisset, praecepit pecuniam totam quam in terra sua
mellitis sermocinationibus and fellitis comminationibus messuerat, ab eodem
Legato extortam reservari.
King Lewis the IX. hearing of that passage, prohibited that the money (which
was yet in France) should be delivered to the Popes Assigns or transported out
of the Kingdom.

The same pope perceiving that whenever he demanded money of the body of the
English Clergy oppositions were formed against it, Matthew. Paris. p. 522. Papa
de pecunia congreganda vigil contemplator significavit Legato, ut non sicut
prius omnem Clerum convenire attemptet, etc. Imo potius singulatim quemlibet
eorum, etc.
writ to his Legate that he should deal with the Clergymen one by one, and
fleece them one after another. And he sped that way.

It was about this time, namely in the year 1240. that Baldwin, keeping by
force the Empire of Constantinople which the French and other pilgrims of Syria
had surprised, and held it by right of convenience, Ibid. p. 527. Necessitate
ingruente and thesauri ca^ntia, etc. sig^ificavit Reg^ Francorum ^^e Imperato^
^^lduinus, quod si ipsum pecunia destitutum vellet de thesauro efficaciter
juvare ipsi Regi pro antiquo dilectionis and cons^^uinitatis foedere conferret
coronam Domini.
being in great want of money, writ to the King of France Lewis the IX. that
the holy Crown of thorns of our Savior was found, and that if he would help
him with a sum of money, he would send it to him. This meek King, and of easy
belief treated with the said Emperor for a great sum of money, and bought that
Crown which was put in the Holy Chapel of Paris with great solemnity. Shortly
after the Venetian^ having bought a piece of the true Cross for two thousand
and five hundred pounds, sold it again to the same King Lewis for double the
price. The King himself carried it bare-head and barefoot to our Lady of Paris.
And the Pope gave to it forty days of true pardon.

Ibid. p. 532. and 530. Rex in ampliori Regia Westmonasterii pransuru^ ^egatum,
quem ad prandium invitaverat, in eminentiori loco mensae, scilicet in sede
Regali, quae in medio mensae est, non sin^^ultorum obliquantibus oculis
collocavit.
In the year 1241. King Henry the III. of England made a great feast in
Westminster hall upon Christmas day. In the midst of the table was the Kings
chair under the Canopy of State, according to the custom. It was a thing
without example that any but the King durst sit in that Royal Chair,
especially upon a day of extraordinary solemnity. Yet the King acknowledging
himself the Popes vassal, and no Sovereign, yielded that place to the Legate
Otho, to the great heartbreaking of all that were present, and to the disgrace
of the English Nation.

Shortly after, the Legate returned to Rome, Matthew Paris bears him this
testimony, that excepting the Church plates, and ornaments of the Churches,
there remained not so much money in England as Otho had extorted. And that he
had conferred partly by his own, partly by the Popes will, above three hundred
of the best Prebends and Rectories of the Kingdom. Whereby the Kingdom was left
languishing and desolate as a Vine exposed to those that pass by, and destroyed
by the wild boar of the woods.

The same year, the Convent of Burg in England received an Apostolic mandate
from Pope Gregory the IX. that they should give to a certain man whom the Pope
would recompense a Benefice of a hundred marks a year, a great revenue in those
days. And certain sharkes coming from Rome, went from Church to Church, and
from Convent to Convent, and taking the several Monks apart told them, Matthew.
Paris. p. 536. Vocatisque Monachis dixerunt, Ecce fratres and amici, imminet
vobis ad manum magnum Papale beneficium; Postulat enim a vobis quod vos
deberetis flexis genibus and junctis manibus ab eo humillime postulare.
Brethren and friends, you have power in your hand to receive a great benefit
from the Pope, For now he asks of you that which you should ask of him with
bended knees and joined hands in all humility. The summary of the motion was
that he asked them some money as an offering of sweet savor. Upon which
Matthew Paris, an eye witness of these doings, speaks thus; Ibid. p. 535. Adeo
invaluit Romanae Ecclesiae insatiabilis cupiditas confundens sas nefasque, quod
deposito rubore velut meretrix vulgaris and esfrons omnibus venalis and
exposita usuram pro parvo simoniam pro nullo inconvenient^ reputavit.
In this time by the permission and procurement of Pope Gregory, the insatiable
greediness of the Roman Church, got such strength, confounding right and wrong,
that putting off all shame, she became a common and impudent strumpet, selling
and prostituting her self unto all, holding usury to be a small thing, and
simony to be no inconvenience. Ibid.
At the same time the bones of Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury were working
abundance of miracles. The Emperor had six mighty armies to resist the enemies
which the Pope by his practices raised against him in several places

New Dominicans and Franciscans came from Rome into England in great numbers,
to preach the Croisada, which they did so effectually that many crossed
themselves for the voyage of the Holy Land; And the same preachers granted to
them the remission of all their sins. But three days after they released them
from their vow and gave them leave not to stir out of England. So they changed
the corporal satisfaction into a pecuniary punishment. By which means even
women and children, that they might have remission of all their sins, took the
cross and the vow of the Croisada, and then redeemed their vow with money. Thus
the Friars collected vast sums of money. And what became of it, Matthew Paris
says that it was not known.

This Legate Otho Matthew. Paris in Henr. III. p. 547. and 554.
had left two Vice Legates with power of exacting, interdicting, and
excommunicating, who daily committed a thousand extorsions. One of them named
Petrus de Supino took a turn into Ireland. Out of which (though money was thin
sown there) he raked in few days fifteen hundred marks. Then returning with a
mandate from the Pope, he exacted the twentieth part of the goods of the whole
Island, and his fellow Petrus Rubeus did the same in Scotland. Then hearing
that Pope Gregory was very sick, they crossed the sea in have, and went toward
Rome laden with wealth. But in their journey they were taken by the Emperor,
Id. p. 555.
who made use of their money, and committed them to close prison, and besieged
a place in Campania where the Pope had put his Money and his Nephews. The
Emperor having made himself master of the place, hanged the Popes Nephews as
rebels to his Majesty. The Pope hearing of it, was oppressed with such grief that
he dyed. The Emperor kept many Cardinals prisoners, among others Otho the
plague of England, because they would have assembled themselves in Council by
the Popes authority without his leave.

After many quarrels among the Cardinals, Galfrid Archbishop of Milan was
chosen Pope, who did not last long, and dyed having been Pope but sixteen
days. The Cardinals were 21. months before they could agree about the
election of a successor. The Emperor angry at it, besieged them at Rome, and
the King of France sent them Ambassadors to declare to them, that Ibid. p. 582.
Hoc audacter significabant confisi de antiquo privilegio suo per sanctum
Clementem bealo Dionysio concesso and obtento, qui concessit Apostolatum eidem
Dionysio super gentem Occidentalem.
if they did not choose a Pope, the French would elect one for them, grounded
upon their ancient privilege granted by St. Clement unto St. Denis, whom he
established Apostle over the Western people. The Cardinals frighted, in the end
chose one Cardinal Sinebald, who leaving his name of Baptism called himself
Innocent the IV.

The orders of Dominicans and mendicant Friars had been but 24. years in
England, and already had built magnificent Convents over all the Kingdom, and
governed all the houses of great persons, got great legacies, drew to
themselves all the confessions, and many believed that salvation could not be
had without them. They were factors, sollicitors, and executors of Apostolic
Mandates, and bearers of pardons; they had the Kings ear, and debased the
orders of St. Benedict and St. Austin; Doing to other orders, and to Parochial
Priests that which the Jesuits do now unto them. Yet between these two new
Orders there was a great deal of envy, the Franciscans calling themselves
Minors, and by consequent more holy; and the Dominicans calling themselves
Majors and therefore preferrable.

In the year 1244. one Martin came into England with full power from his
Holiness to exact money, to suspend, to interdict, and to excommunicate all
that should any way oppose him. He would command this Abbot or that Prior
Paecipiens per literas districte illi Abbati vel illi Priori, ut ei equos,
quales decebat specialem Domini Clericum insidere, transmitterent.
that they would send him horses such as were fit for an especial Clark of the
Lord Pope to ride on. If they alleged any excuse, he suspended them from
their benefices. The Churches and Prebends that fell void, he kept in his own
hands, till he was pleased to bestow them upon his Nephews and Cosins.

And whereas David Prince of Northwales was vassal to the King of England Id.
p. 604. and 605. David volens collum suum de sub jugo fidelitatis Domini Regis
excutere, ad alas Papalis protectionis confugit spondens se tenere partem
Walliae eum contingentem ab ipso Papa. Cui favit Papa, and contra Regem
rebellanti sinum aperuit.
Pope Innocent the IV. deboisht him from the alleagiance sworn to Henry the
III. his Lord, and made him his vassal, obliging him to pay five hundred marks
a year to the Apostolic See in sign of subjection. So David by the Popes
instigation shook of the Kings yoke, and put his country under the Popes
subjection, promising to hold his whole country from the Pope. Whence long
wars followed.

The miracles of Edmund of Canterbury being daily multiplied, Commissioners
were deputed by the Pope to enquire of those miracles, and to inform his
Holiness about them, to know whether he ought to be canonized and listed among
the Saints: but the Commissioners made a relation to the disadvantage of the
said Edmund as unworthy to be Sainted. Wherefore it was concluded that he
should not be canonized, and the request of the Monks of Pontigny, where the
the said Edmund lay buried, was rejected as unjust.

The forementioned Martin (whom the English called Masty, It is like that the
English in those days called a masty dog a Mastin, as the French do now; and
that they made an allusion of Mastin with Martin.
because of his insatiable greediness) Matthew. Paris libro supradicto p. 622.
received an unheard of power from the Pope, and more ample then any before, of
which he had several letters, and produced sometimes one, sometimes another,
according to the exigence of the case, and many scroles of parchment sealed
with lead, in which nothing was written, and those blanks he filled according
to his own pleasure. He made his address unto the King, beseeching him in the
Popes name to help him to get ten thousand marks before hand of the English
Clergy. And he brought forth letters of Pope Innocent to the Clergy of England,
where these words are found. Being constrained by necessity, we have recourse
to you confidently, and by the counsel of our brethren, we desire and expressly
admonish your generality, and by Apostolic writings we exhorting command and
commanding exhort you, that you relieve the Roman Church with such quantity and
sum of money as our dear son Martin, Clark of our Chamber, shall declare unto
you, etc. And that you so accomplish that which we desire of you, that we may
commend your devotion, and that we be not constrained to proceed otherwise
against you about that matter. Thus in case of denial he threatened to force
them to it by excommunication. And that Martin was grown so insolent, and such
a severe exactor that he would send, now to an Abbot, now to a Prior,
commanding him to send him so many great horses, so much provision for his
house, such a quantity of curious stuffes for his train. Martinus remisit eis
quae ei missa fuerunt, asserens insufficientia, and praecepit eis ut meliora
sibi sub poena suspensionis, and anathematis transmitterent. Suspendit autem
omnes a collatione beneficiorum, 30. marcas valentium and supra, donec suae
satisfactum foret cupiditati. Unde miseri Anglici acerbiorem, quam o^im
subieerunt filii Israel, se doluerunt in Aegypto Britannica tolerare servitutem.
And when he had received what they sent, he would send it back with contempt,
saying that it was not good enough, and commanded them to send better upon pain
of suspension and excommunication. And he suspended all the Prelates from the
collation of livings of thirty marks a year and above, till they had satisfied
his greediness. Wherefore the miserable English complained that they were under
a harder bondage then ever the Israelites in Egypt.

War being happened between the English and the Scots, they made peace upon
certain conditions. But because a Vassal ought not to conclude peace or war
without the consent of his liege Lord, peace could not be made without the
approbation and ratification of Pope Innocent the IV.

The same year the Prince of North- Wales continuing in his rebellion against
Henry the III. King of England, obtained of the Pope with money, and with the
renewing of his promise, of paying five hundred marks a year unto the Pope, to
be absolved and dispensed from the Oath of Allegiance which he had made unto
Henry, saying, that it was an extorted Oath.

In the year 1245. the Pope caused the excommunication of the Emperor Frederick
to be published again in all the Churches of France. That excommunication being
given to a Parochial Priest of Paris to publish it, he pronounced it in these
terms. Hearken all of you, I am commanded to pronounce an excommunication with
Candles burning and Bells ringing against the Emperor Frederick. Not knowing
the cause why, I know only that there is an irreconcilable quarrel and hatred
between him and the Pope. I know also, that the one does wrong to the other,
yet which of the two is in the wrong, I cannot tell. But him that does wrong to
the other, I excommunicate as far as my power extends. The poor Priest was
punished by the Pope, but the Emperor sent him presents.

The Pope had a desire to come into England, and pass through France, but the
passage through France was denied him. And the King of England was advised not
to let him come into his Kingdom. In the mean while, Martin was continuing to
wast poor England, sucking the substance of the people and the Clergy, and most
part of the Benefices of England were held by Italians. In the end, the the
Nobles of the Land were forced by the heavy oppression to assemble themselves,
and to give order that all the Papal letters which daily came into England with
new tricks to catch money should be stopped. A bearer of those trumperies was
taken, and all his Bulls and leaden Seals were taken from him, and he laid up
in close prison. About the same time, in Rogation week, the Popes Wardrobe at
Lions was burnt with an accidental fire, and there the letters of homage and
submission made to the Pope by King John, were consumed, as Matthew. Paris page
638.
relates.

In the end, the King seeing his Kingdom exhausted by the extortions of the
Roman Court, although he trembled under the Papal power, yet he commanded
Martin to depart out of the Kingdom, and for a farewell told him, Diabolus te
ad infernos inducat and perducat.
The Devil lead thee, and bring thee into hell. But Martin going away, left one
Mr. Philip, to whom he resigned the power he had from the Pope. Being come to
the Popes presence, who was then at the Council of Lions, he complained of the
King of England. The Pope then remembering, that both the King of France and the
King of England had denied him the entry into their Kingdoms, said in great
wrath, and with an angry countenance, page 640. Expedit ut componamus cum
Principe vestro, ut hos Regulos conteramus recalcitrantes. Contrito enim vel
pacificato dracone, cito serpentuli conculcabuntur.
It is expedient that we compound with your Prince Frederick, that we may crush
these petty Kings that kick against us; for when the Dragon is once bruised or
appeased, we shall soon tread upon these small Serpents.

In that Council, the canonization of Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury was moved
again with great instance, but was rejected the second time by the Pope, and
that Saint wanting the Popes favor, lost his cause for this time also, and was
judged unworthy to be a Saint.

The fourth day, an unusual thing happened: The Pope himself preached in a
Church of Lions. His text was Lam. 1.12. All ye that pass by, behold and see,
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me; then he
compared his sorrows to the five wounds of Christ; The first was the inundation
of the Tartars; the second the Schism of the Grecians; the third the heresy of
those that were called Patterins, Buggerars, Jovinians, and Vaudois. The
fourth, the desolation of the holy Land. The fifth and the most smarting, the
Emperor Frederick, the Churches enemy and persecutor, whose heresies and
sacriledges he set out at large.

In that Council the people and Clergy of England, complained by Deputies of
the extortions and robberies of the Roman Court; but their complaints were not
regarded.

There a sentence of deposition against the Emperor Frederick was pronounced by
the Pope, whereby he was declared fallen from the Imperial power, and all the
subjects of the Empire, as well in Germany, as in Italy, Sicily, and Province,
were absolved from the Oath of Allegiance sworn unto the said Emperor, with a
prohibition by Apostolical authority, to yield any obedience unto him, or to
lend him any assistance, upon pain of excommunication. The Electors also were
commanded to elect another Emperor; the Pope keeping the power to himself to
provide for the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, pretending that the disposition
of that Kingdom did particularly belong to him.

There also an order was taken for the voyage of the Holy Land, the Pope taxing
himself to pay the tenth part of his revenue, and condemning the whole Clergy
to pay the twentieth part of theirs, for three years. He appointed the
Apostolic Officers to be receivers of that contribution. He made an order,
that all that should enter into the Croisada, should be exempted from all
tributes, taxes, and subjection due to secular Lords, because by crossing
themselves, they put themselves under the protection of the Apostolic See. By
this means the Kings lost as many subjects, as there were men that would put a
Cross upon their shoulder, for then they claimed themselves to be the Popes
subjects. Creditors were prohibited to exact any thing of those that were
crossed, because they were under the protection of the Church. Page 653. Nos
ergo etc. omnibus qui laborem istum in propriis personis subierint, and
expensis, plenam suorum peccaminum, de quibus fuerunt veraciter cord contriti
and ore confessi, veniam indulgemus, and in retributione justorum salutis
aeternae pollicemur augmentum. Eis autem qui non in personis propriis illuc
accesserint, sed in suis duntaxat expensis juxta facultatem and qualitatem suam
viros idoneos destinaverint, and illis similiter, qui licet in alienis expensis
in propriis tamen personis accesserint, plenam suorum peccatorum concedimus
veniam.
And to those crossed men was promised, besides the remission of all their
sins, an augmentation of glory in Paradise. To those that should not go in
person, but contribute with their means, defraying others that would go for
them, no more was promised but the remission of all their sins. Those that
should go in person defrayed by others, if they dyed in that voyage, that Order
assured them that they should not go into Purgatory, but they were to content
themselves with eternal life, and might not pretend to a degree of glory in
Paradise above the common sort.

Many other Laws were made and published by the Pope sitting in that Council.
For since Gregory the VII. it was no more the Popes custom to assemble Councils
to deliberate with the Bishops, but only that the Bishops should receive laws
from the Pope, and approve them by their silence. Wherefore also Matthew Paris
says, that of the things decreed, p. 658. Quaedam eorum ante Concilium,
quaedam durante Concilio, quaedam vero post Concilium, sunt statuta.
Some were decreed before the Council, some during the Council, some after the
Council. Upon the dissolution of the Council, a Prelate made a Sermon for a
farewell to the City of Lions, wherein he told the people that the Council had
made a great reformation in the City, for whereas there were many
Brothel-houses in the Town before the sitting of the Council, now (said he) we
leave but one, reaching from one end of the Town to the other. Ibid.
That the Popes Officers were appointed Collectors of the money to be raised
for the voyage of the Holy Land, was displeasing unto many, who knew that it
was usual with the Popes Officers, to put all such contributions into the Popes
Coffers, who converted them to another use, and indeed to his own. The Pope
sent into England a Copy of the Letters Patent of King John, whereby he
subjected the Crown of England to the Papal See, and presented it to all the
Prelates of England to sign; which they did all but the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who refused it.

The same year King Lewis the IX. gave the Pope leave to come into France, as
far as Clugni, but no farther. The King greatly desired a reconciliation
between the Pope and the Emperor, because himself was preparing for the
expedition into the Levant, and had need of the help of Frederick, a warlike,
prudent and meek Prince, as ever any was in the world, formidable to the
Saracens, and one that might stop the passage of the French, because he held
Corsica, Sardinia, and the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily; But p. 662.
the good King could obtain nothing of Pope Innocent. Matthew. Paris says, that
Innocent labored to induce Lewis to make war with Henry King of England, whom
he called in contempt a petty King: And though there was a sworn truce between
the two Kings, yet the Pope would have King Lewis to break it. But Lewis would
never condescend to it, being a Prince that religiously kept his word.

There was a second interview between the King and the Pope, being then at
Lions, where the King used his utmost endeavor to appease the Pope, and
reconcile him with the Emperor. The Emperor desirous of peace (although the
deposition fulminated by the Pope was without effect, and had wrought no
diminution of his power) offered unto the Pope to pass into Syria, and
reconquer the Kingdom of Jerusalem with his own strength and cost, and never to
return, but die there; asking no more but his absolution from the Pope. And the
King represented unto the Pope the commandment of Christ, who will have us to
forgive seventy times seven times, and says that the sinner that converteth
and humbles himself, must not be rejected. He protested against the Pope,
saying, that by this obstinacy he should be the cause of the ruins which
Christian Religion should suffer. But the good King lost his labor, and Matthew.
Paris, in Henric. III. page 676. Rex Francorum recessit iratus and indignans,
eo quod humilitatem quam speraverat in servo servorum, minime reperisset.
returned with great indignation, because he had not found in the servant of
servants, the humility which he looked for.

The same year, which was 1245. a Parliament was assembled at London, where in
the Kings presence some Articles were made, called Gravamina regni Angliae, The
grievances of the Kingdom of England; where the oppressions of the Popes, and
the grinding of the Kingdom by the Court of Rome were represented, and how
Italians succeeded other Italians in Church Livings: And that by the new
clause, non obstante, Scriptures were enervated, the obligation of Oaths
broken, all Laws and Customs abrogated, and that the English were constrained
to go plead in the Court of Rome, whence they returned ill handled, after they
had a long time consumed themselves in expenses. Page 680.
That Letters came from Rome, which not only taxed such and such men in so much
money, but enjoined them also, to find and entertain constantly a certain
number of men at arms to serve the Roman Church in the wars, with men and arms,
according to the will of his Holiness. It was also represented, that once the
Pope considering some rich stuffs of Church-Ornaments of some English
Clergymen, had a desire to have them: And that when he enquired where they
were made, he was answered that they were made in England, and how upon that
the Pope said, England is the garden of our delights, a garden truly
inexhaustible.

The Pope writ to the Cistercian Monks, that they should buy for him some
Aurifrisia.
cloth of curled gold; which was done at the charges of those Monks: Whence,
says Matthew Paris, Page 683.
many had the covetousness of the Church of Rome in execration. The same Author
relates, that three of the wealthyest Clergymen of England being dead, without
making a Will, and having left a great sum of money, and much precious stuff,
Pope Innocent sent Dominican and Franciscan-Fryars into England, to preach and
make it pass for a Law, That the goods of every Clark dying intestate, belonged
unto the Pope.

When the King was going to oppose both this, and the levies and impositions
which the Pope had lately laid upon the Land, Letters came from the Pope,
containing an absolute Page 686.
command to raise a great sum of money out of England, and that within twenty
days, without further delay; appointing certain English Prelates to be
Collectors of the same, and giving them power to proceed against those that
should refuse to pay, with Ecclesiastical censures. Such was then the use of
Saint Peter's keys.

The King, though used to bondage, was nettled at this, and prohibited that
extortion of his people. The Pope angry at it, misused the English that were in
his Court, saying to them, Page 687, 688, 689.
The King of England kicks against us, and his Council has a relish of
Frederick, I also have my Council, which I will follow. And he writ to the
English Prelates, that upon pain of excommunication and suspension, they should
before the Feast of the Assumption, bring the sum which he had prescribed unto
his Nuntio resident at London. The King was frighted with this, and the Popes
command was executed without delay. The Popes Factors and Promoters were the
Franciscans and Dominicans, who gave the remission of sins for money, released
the excommunications for a certain rate, and made usurers and extortioners to
bring to them all their ill gotten goods, instead of restoring them to the
right owners. By their means also the Pope, besides the matrimonial causes,
Page 694.
drew to himself all Testamentary causes, and the cases of perjury, as nearly
concerning the conscience. And still these Factors of Rome alleged some
specious cause; saying, that the money which they exacted was to defend the
Emperor of Constantinople, or to resist the Sultan of Damas. But whatsoever it
was for, still the Pope was the Receiver.

At the same time the Pope gave leave to King Lewis the IX. to take the tenth
part of the Ecclesiastical revenue of France, the King in exchange gave him
leave to take the twentyeth part of the same revenue, and that for three years.

The Pope seeing that he could not pull down the Emperor, and that the virtue
and power of Frederick turned the edge of his spiritual sword, sought to make
him away by treachery, and suborned four of Frederick's servants, James de
Morra, Theobald Francisco, Pandulph de Phasanelles, and William of Saint
Severin, to stab their Master. Matthew. Paris, page 690, 691. Negotium aperte se
gerere Romanae Matris Ecclesiae praedicant, ac praedictae mortis ac
exhaereditationis nostrae summum Pontificem sicaccesserunt incentorem. Hoc
ipsum captivi praefati in spontanea and extrema confessione sua, qua^do mentiri
nesarium existimant, morientes coram omnibus sunt confessi.
Two of them, Theobald and William, being taken, confessed publicly when they
were brought to the execution, that they were set on by Pope Innocent to do
that deed. The whole story is related at large, in letters written by the
Emperor himself to Henry the III. of England his Brother in law, and by other
letters of Walter d' Ocre the Emperors Clark, written to the same King.

Scarce was the last extortion ended, when a new one began: p. 693.
And the King gave way that six thousand marks should be raised upon England,
because the Pope had need of it. That money was sent to the Lantgrave, whom the
Pope had named Emperor instead of Frederick: That Emperor admired the baseness
of the English, who suffered the Popes to strip them; whereas the Popes (said
he) fugunt fugientes and fugiunt fugantes; the Popes oppress those that fear
them, and tremble before them that resist them.

The King having made some demonstration, that he bore that yoke impatiently,
and let fall some words of discontent which were related unto the Pope, the
Pope was so incensed, that he would presently have put an Interdict upon the
whole Nation of England. Upon which a grave remonstrance was made to him by
Cardinal John, an Englishman by birth, and a Cistercian Monk, who represented
to him, That the Holy Land was in danger; That the Greek Church had made a
Schism from the Roman Church; That the Tartars were pillaging Hungary; That the
Emperor was an enemy to his holiness; That France had a grudge against him, as
being impoverished by so many exactions, upon pretense of the Holy War; That
the very people of Rome had expelled him out of Rome; Therefore that his
holiness having enemies enough, he needed not to create more, lest he should
see in a short time a general revolt; And that it was no wonder if England,
like Balaams Ass, being sore laid on with blows, had spoken some words. But all
this good counsel did not mitigate him. And to confirm him in his violent
courses, presently Ambassadors came to him out of England with deep submissions
from the King, and a promise of greater obedience for the time to come. The
Pope grown more arrogant with that humility, commanded all Prelates and
beneficed men of England residing in their livings, to send him the third part
of their yearly revenue, and the non-resident the half: With the addition of
the clause, Non obstante, which derogated from all customs, abrogated all
promises and oaths, and revoked all sorts of privileges.

In the end, after many denyals about the Canonization of Edmund Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Pope to stroke the English, Canonized him, and made him a
Saint, seven years after his death. The Bull of the Canonization is expressed in
arrogant terms, and are worthy to be represented for their extravagant pride.
Westmonast. an. 1246. Novum matris Ecclesiae gaudium, novi Sancti celebritate
jucundae laetitiae referimus gaudio a coelesti collegio, de collegae novi
consortio agi festum exultanti animo nuntiamus, etc. Laetatur nimirum se tam
clara sobole illustratam, quae digno ab omnibus attollenda praeconio, and
devota veneratione colenda, manifest declarat ad haereditatis aeternae
participium admittendos, qui ipsam matrem Ecclesiam fide ac opere profitentur,
and nullum in supernam posse gloriam, nisi per eam tanquam regni coelorum
clavigeram, introire.
We announce unto you the joy of our Mother the Church by the Celebrity of a
new Saint; and the Heavenly College keeps Holy day for the society of a new
companion. The Church rejoices to be illustrated with such a clear race, which
ought to be exalted by all with condign praises, and must be served with a
devout veneration. And openly declares, that those must be received to the
participation of the eternal inheritance, that profess the Mother Church by
word and work, and that none can enter into the glory that is above, but by
her, as the bearer of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. By that
Mother Church, he understands the Church of Rome, to distinguish her from the
other Churches that are subject unto her. And he says, that since the same
Mother Church bears the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, none can enter into
Paradise, nor be made a Saint, but by her means. Of that new Saint, he speaks
as if he had begun to be a Saint in his Canonization, although he was dead many
years before. And to abuse the Christian world, he tells them that piece of
good news, that the Saints of Paradsie keep Holy Day, because a new companion
is come to them. That monster believed that the Saints of Paradise took it
kindly at his hands, that he had given them a new companion. Wherefore he
exhorts the Christian Nations in these words, Rejoice with great joy that a
new Patron before God is accrewed unto you, one that stands before him to be a
gracious intercessor for your salvation. This was received as Gospel Truth; And
it would have been abominable heresy, to make a question whether such a man
was a Saint, and ought to be served and called upon, since the Pope who has
all power on earth had commanded that he should be. The English had this for
their money, after so many extortions of the Court of Rome; That Court sent
them a new English Saint for their comfort.

Soon after Blanch Queen Regent of France, came over to worship that Saint,
representing to him that he had found refuge for his exile in France, and
beseeching him not to be ungrateful. She said then, Westmonast. anno, 1247. Hoc
recolat sanctitas tuae non ingrata tibi haec and tuo Thomae fecisse profugo and
egenti. Matthew. Paris, page 693.
My Lord, most holy Father, Edmund Confessor, etc. I beseech thee to confirm
that which thou have mercifully done toward us: Confirm the Kingdom of France
in a peaceable and triumphant solidity, and let not thy Holiness be ungrateful,
but remember what we have done to thee, and to Thomas exiled and poor.

In the year 1247. the French Nobility made a League against the oppression of
the Pope and the Clergy to maintain their ancient rights and privileges, which
were daily usurped by them. The Pope brought to great fear, instead of
punishing the Leaguers, greased the heads of them with fat Benefices, and gave
them all kind of Indulgences.

He sped better in England, for at the same time two Franciscans John and
Alexander being come into England with power of Legates, the King gave them
leave to make a collection over all the Kingdom: They had power of
excommunicating all that would refuse to pay. They were riding upon great
horses, with gilded saddles and magnificent clothes, exacting money with
extreme rigor. The only Bishopric of Lincoln they taxed in six thousand marks;
the Abbey of Saint Albons in the like sum.

To the same end, in the same year the Pope dispatched diverse Nuntio's over all
the Provinces of France, to gather money by way of loan. But Page 700. Quod cum
Regi innotuisset suspectam habens Romanae Curiae avaritiam prohibuit, nequis
Praelatus regni sub poena amissionis omnium honorum suorum taliter terram suam
depauperaret. Et sic cum sibilo and derisione omnium Papales Legati sophistici
inanes and vacui a regno recesserunt.
(says Matthew Paris) the good King Lewis suspecting the avarice of the Roman
Court, forbad that any Prelate of his Kingdom should thus impoverish his Land
upon pain of confiscation of all his goods. Thus these Sophistical Legates
returned empty, being hissed and mocked by all.

But England, though twice more fleeced then other Lands, durst not kick
against the Pope, because the Pope pretended that England belonged to him, and
that the King was his Vassal. The Pope sent into England another Martin, his
Capellan, with authority of a Legate, though he was not dignified with that
name, to glean the remnant of the money of the Kingdom, and one John le Roux
into Ireland, who returned from it with six thousand marks. To the same end,
one called Godfrey a Roman, was sent into Scotland.

In the mean while Lantgrave whom the Pope had elected Emperor instead of
Frederick, as he went with a mighty army to his Coronation, was met with Conrad
son to Frederick, who defeated the said Lantgrave who dyed few days after out
of sorrow of that overthrow. Henry another son of Frederick having taken a
nephew of the Pope in Italy hanged him, and was for it excommunicated by the
Pope with the most horrible and direful execrations that his Holiness could
devise. These rubs made the Pope send into England for new levyes of money, p.
706.
with power to the Collectors to excommunicate all refusers without appeal and
delay, and without excepting any. The Abbot of St. Albons (of which Monastery
Matthew Paris was Monk) refused to pay and appealed to the Pope, and sent to
Rome to plead his cause. But his Deputies staid very long in the Court of Rome
before they could get a judgment, till in the end having bribed some Officers
they obtained a hearing and were condemned to pay two hundred marks unto the
Pope, besides other costs amounting to an hundred marks more. That sum (says
p. 707. Tandem praecipientibus amicis in Curia venalibus and conductitiis finem
fecerunt Domino Papae pro ducentis Marcis. and sic donis and expensis omnibus
computatis absorbuit illius Curiae Charybdis insatiabilis trecentas Marcas.
Matthew. Paris) was swallowed up by the insatiable gulf of the Roman Court.

In the same days at the instance of the Popes Ministers a sum of eleven
thousand marks was granted to the Pope by the Parliament assembled at Oxford;
and besides the forementioned sum of three hundred marks, the Abbot of St.
Albons was taxed in eight hundred. Also Earl Richard the Kings brother and
William Longespee, because they belonged to the Croisada, obtained the Popes
license to raise a collection from the people.

To comfort the people of England in that oppression, in the year 1250. a
crystal bottle full of the blood of Christ was sent from the Holy land into
England. The King received that present with great joy, and carried that bottle
between hi^ two eyes, barefoot, in a beggars habit from Paul's Church to
Westminster, with great pomp and sad apparel. It is not known in England now
what became of that blood. Thus were the Christian nations amused and abused
and accustomed to bondage. To all that should visit the said bottle was given
an indulgence of six years and an hundred and forty days.

The same year page 708, 709, and 716.
the Pope sent a Legate into Norway, the Cardinal of St. Sabin to celebrate the
ceremony of the Coronation of King Haco, who in thankfulness for the honor
which the Pope did him, sent him fifteen thousand marks of silver. This Legate
returning made England his way; And as if it had been to show that rapine is
the indelible character of the Roman Court, in three months that he sojourned
in England he got four thousand marks with many gifts, then went on his journey
laden with booty.

An. 1248. Matthew. Par. page 724.
It was in this time that King Lewis the IX. embarked himself at Marseilla with
the flower of his Nobility, Gentry, and strength of his Kingdom to recover the
Holy Land. The crowd was so great that many could get no room in the fleet, and
came to the Pope to offer him their service. But the Pope contented himself to
unload them of their money, and to empty their purses, and to send them home
with dispensation and absolution. In the mean while Dominicans and Franciscans
sent by the Pope were preaching the Croisada in England with great vehemence,
and with such effect that Id. p. 740. Praedicantes pro negotio Crucis homines
cujuscunque aetatis, sexus, conditionis, vel valoris, immo etiam valetudinarios
vel valetudinarias, and agrotantes and senio deficientes cruce signaverant, and
in craftino, and etiam in continienti pro quocunque pretio crucem a cruce
signatis deponentes.
great number of English, yea the sick and the women crossed themselves for the
voyage, and few days after, yea at the same time, the same Friars dispensed
them with their vow for a certain sum of money. So they got a great booty.
West. An. 1250. Permissum est in Anglia jam quasi licite, ut habitarent
Christiani usurarii inter Christianos, Papa protegente, cum sit usura in
utroque Testamento condemnata.
Then also by the Popes authority usurers were established in England.

The business of the French in the Levant going to wrack, King Lewis wanting
relief was writing with great urgency for help of men and money. Which moved
many English Lords and Gentlemen to sell or pawn their land, and having
prepared themselves with great cost, they would begin their journey. Matthew.
Paris, p. 759. Papa per literas suas, sicut and ipse Rex per verba imperiosa
districte sub poena excommunicationis inhibuit, nequis eorum contra Regis
voluntatem qualecunque periculum Rex Francorum subiret, aut discrimen,
transfretaret.
But upon King Henry's solicitation, Papal letters came to forbid them to go,
upon pain of excommunication. Thus poor King Lewis having more generosity then
success was forsaken and finally taken by the Saracens, and his army consumed
by famine and the sword. The Emperor Frederick desired the Popes absolution,
offering to go in person into Syria to relieve the French, but the Pope never
would hearken to it.

France was then mourning for this sad news, yet did not the Pope abate any
thing of the money covenanted before, between the King and him to be raised out
of France, when France was in prosperity; but he took over all the Kingdom the
tithe of all things, even of the least. Of which Matthew Paris Idem. p. 772.
relates an example. One of these Collectors sent by the Pope met with a petty
Clark carrying holy Water with an Asperges to a Village, and some pieces of
bread; He asked him what he got yearly by that labor. The poor Clark answered
that the whole profit was not above twenty sous a year. Then (said the
Collector) two sous of it belong to me, and extorted the same of him, although
his principal trade was begging. The people of France irritated with such
exactions, and especially because the Pope hindered the Kings relief spoke thus.
Matthew. Paris Ibid. Heu! Heu! quanta mala nobis Papalis superbia parturit, quae
tam procaciter Frederico restitit humiliato, etc.
Alas, alas! how many evils does the Popes pride bring upon us, so insolently
resisting Frederick humbled before him, refusing to receive any satisfaction
from him, but rather provoking him to bitterness of heart! etc. O misery! How
much Christian blood is shed in the Holy Land! How much in Germany! How much in
Italy! etc. Oh that this Pope was born in an ill hour! etc.

King Lewis having yielded Damietta, and given the securities required for his
ransom, returned to ou Acre.
Acon, whence he sent his brothers into France, Adolph Count of Poitiers, and
Charles Count of Provence; and the Duke of Burgundy with them, with a command
to expel the Pope out of Lions, as a man that took no care of Christian faith,
if he continued to hinder the Emperor Frederick to come to his help, because
Frederick was he only that could remedy so many evils. page 773. Fredericum,
qui solus inter Christianos tantis posset mederi periculis, ad pacem Ecclesiae
revocans humiliatum ipsum ad hoc induceret, ut ipsi Regi jam pene desperato
su^ur^^ co^pet^ co^^rat and ^stinum. Alioquin ipsi Dux and Comites Dominum
Papam tanquam in odio obstinatum and de honor Chistianae fidei minime curantem
a sede removeant Lugdunensi.


In this general adversity of Christendom yet the Pope continued to tread
England under his feet. Which made the King (though patient even to stupidity)
so bold as to write letters full of liberty to the Pope: Wherein he represented
to him how the English being driven out by the Popes authority, base and wicked
men that understood not the language, and by consequent incapable of preaching
and feeding the flock were installed in the best Churches and benefices. That
the Pope disposed of all the vacant Churches, and the Patrons were deprived of
their right. Then having set forth all the extortions and violences which the
Pope made the English to suffer, he added. p. 776.
Thou Pope, Father of Fathers, why suffer thou the climats of Christians to
be so contaminated? Justly then art thou turned out of thy Town and See, and
art thrust into exile like another Cain. Thine enemies Fredericks followers
prosper, but thou flyest before them that pursue thee, and they that pursue
thee are swift and mighty. Thy bulls cast forth lighnings against those that
submit themselves to thee, but lose their strength against rebels. Every where
the Prelates being suspended from the collation of benefices, the provisions are
made unto persons unworthy, barbarous, and unknown, who under pretense of
seeking the milk of the ewes of the Lords fold, take the flesh, shear the
fleece, (...) take off the skin, and pull out the guts, etc.

The Pope who had fulminated, and put Kingdoms under interd^ ^or less offenses,
answered not one word, and supt up this affront, because ^^ expelled out of
Rome, and stood in fear of Frederick; And the French Ki^ ^rothers that were
returned from the Holy Land had declared to him the ^y liked not his being at
Lions, Id. page 71^ ^ant illi dicti Regis fratres quod per avaritiam Papae
totum evenit infortunium memoratum. Ipse enim (...) ^ignatos, ne in succursum
Regis advenirent, pecunia corruptus impedivit.
Because (said they) the Pope by hi^ ^ousness was the cause of all the
misfortune happened to the King; That h^ corrupted with money had hindered the
crossed men to come to the King^ ^bsolving them from their vow, etc. For these
causes Innocent prepari^ ^ange his abode, desired the King of England to
receive him into his City of Bordeaux. But the King would neither refuse nor
grant, but put off his answer.

Then dyed that great and magnanimous Emperor Frederick the II. whose sons and
his bones also remained excommunicate. Conrad son to the said Frederick
maintained himself by arms in Italy against the Pope. The Pope to resist him
caused the Croisada to be preached against him, Id. page 800. Statuens
re^^b^tion^m mirabilem, ^mnium peccatorum remissionem ampliorem vid^licet quam
pro peregrinatione in terram sanctam facienda. Nam siquis contra Conradum
signaretur, signatus and signati, pater and matter, omnium peccatorum suorum
veniam consequeretur.
giving to those that should take arms against Conrad the remission of all
their sins, and more graces then to those that made the voyage of the Holy
land. For not only he that crossed himself, but his Father and Mother obtained
the remission of all their sins. Many Frenchmen bewitched with superstition
crossed themselves for the Popes war against Conrad. But Ibid.
Queen Blanch the Kings Mother and Regent in his absence, by the counsel of the
Nobles seized upon the estates of those crossed men. For they said, This Pope
to increase his dominion raises war against the Christians, and forsakes the
King our Lord who undergoeth so many adversities for the Christian faith. And
the Queen said, Let them be paid by the Pope that fight for the Pope. Also the
mendicant Friars that preached that Croisada, and were the Popes receivers and
Collectors were roughly dealt with. The Pope not speeding that way, and Conrad
strenghtening himself daily, that young Prince beloved and honored of all was
soon after poisoned, yet by the speedy help of Physicians he recovered.

Then An. Christ. 1252.
lived in England a good Prelat Bishop of Lincoln, who among the darkness of
that age had a glimmering sight of the errors of Popery; and maintained that
for promoting unworthy persons to Ecclesiastical charges, and for the horrible
abuse of excommunications and the ill use of the keys, the Pope was an
heretic. He said that the Pope made no conscience to destroy souls, and
therefore that he was the Antichrist. That Bishop (says Matthew. Paris in Henr.
III. p. 847. and 848. Episcopus dolens de jactura animarum per Papalis Curiae
avaritiam suspirans ait, Christus venit in mundum ut animas lucraretur. Ergo si
quis animas perdere non formidat, no^^e Antichristus merito dice^dus?
Matthew Paris) grieving for the loss of souls by the covetousness of the Papal
Court, would sigh and say, Christ came into the world to gain souls, Then he
that fears not to destroy souls, ought he not justly to be called the
Antichrist? And he detested the Popes bulls in which this clause was contained,
quod in subsidium Terrae sanctae impendentes, tantundem recipient indulgentiae,
quantum pecuniae largientur. That they that contribute for the relief of the
Holy land, shall receive as much indulgence, as they shall give money. He
detested also that shameful traffic, whereby the Pope bestowed a Bishopric
upon an ignorant man, and never made him Bishop, calling him elect only; Ibid.
Omne genus avaritiae, usuram, simoniam and rapinam, omne genus luxuriae,
libidinem, gulam and ornatum, quae in Curia illa regnant, detestaretur.
And in general the covetousness, the usury, the simony, the rapine, the luxury
of all sorts, the impudicity, the gluttony, the magnificence in clothes that
reigned in the Papal Court. Such were the discourses of that Prelat on his
deathbed, and he foretold that the Church should not be delivered from the
Egyptian bondage, but with the point of the sword. So dyed that Prelat.

But before he dyed, he writ letters full of admonitions unto the Pope; Which
when the Pope had read, he said with a ghastly squint look, and in terrible
anger, Id. page 844. Quis est iste senex delirus, surdus, and absurdus, qui
facta audax imo temerarius judicat? Per Petrum and Paulum, nisi moveret nos
innata ingenuitas, ipsum in tantam confusionem praecipitarem, ut toti mundo
fabula foret, stupor, exemplum, and prodigium. Nonne Rex Anglorum noster est
Vassalus, and ut plus dicam, mancipium?
Who is that old doting deaf and absurd fellow, who thus boldly and rashly
gives his judgment of our actions? By Peter and Paul, did not our natural
ingenuity move us, I would cast down the man into such a confusion, that he
should be a fable, an astonishment, an example, and a prodigy unto all the
world. Is not the King of England our vassal, or rather our slave? He may
imprison him by our commandment, and bring him to the lowest ignominy. Some
Cardinals there present labored to appease his Holiness. But the death of that
Prelat put him out of the Popes power. It was not put to the question at Rome,
whether he should be canonized after his death.

But when the Pope had a mind to command the Deane and Chapter of Lincoln to
cast the bones of this Prelat out of the Church with shame, page 855, and 868.
Matthew Paris says that he appeared by night unto the Pope, and rebuked him
with fearful words; At which the Pope became in a manner half dead: And they
that waited on him in his chamber had much ado to bring him to himself again.
But he lived but a little while after this accident, and dyed of a pleuresie,
sore pressed with a pain of his side in the same place where he said that the
Bishop of Lincoln had hit him with the end of his staff.

King Conrad being dead in the flower of his age, his brother Mamfred succeeded
him in the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily. And Pope Alexander, a hater by
inheritance of the posterity of Frederick sent an army of threescore thousand
men against him. But his army was beaten, and the Popes forces received many
defeats. His remedy was to send Franciscan and Dominican Friars about, to
preach the Croisada against Mamfred, and promise to all that should help the
Pope in that war the like graces and pardons as to those that should cross
themselves against the Saracens. That Croisada being preached in England, many
Id. page 877. and 885. Mirabantur, quod Papa tantum eis promitteret pro
sanguine Christianorum effundendo, quantum pro cruore Infidelium aliquando.
were offended that the like grace was given to those that should shed
Christian blood as to those that should fight against the Infidels.

King Henry the III, had crossed himself a little before for the Holy Land, and
had vowed with an oath to go in person. But Pope Alexander Dedit eis potestatem
absolvendi Dominum Regem Cruce-signatum a unto suo, ne iret in terram
Jerosolymitanam, ita tamen ut iret in Apuliam.
gave power to his Legates to dispense him from keeping his oath, so that he
would come into Italy to make war in person against Mamfred enemy of the Roman
Church. Not that Mamfred was accused of any heresy, but because being
victorious in war, he ran to the very gates of Rome. Matthew. Paris p. 886.
In the mean while the Pope taxed every Bishopric, Abbey, and Priory of
England in sums that exceeded their whole revenue; And the remission of sins
was sold to the people for ready money.

This King Henry the III. heard three Masses every day. Going through France
Matthew. Paris Suppl. page 997. Contigit aliquando Ludovicum Francorum Regem cum
Henrico super hoc conferentem dicere, quod non semper missis sed frequentius
sermonibus audiendis est vacandum; Cui faceta urbanitate respondens ait, Se
malle amicum suum videre, quam de eo loquentem audire.
and discoursing with the good King Lewis, he told him of his devotion and
assiduity to hear Masses: The good King rebuked him for it, and told him that
he needed not to hear so many Masses, and that it had been far better to hear
Sermons; showing thereby that he had no great devotion to the Mass. But King
Henry answered him that he had rather see his friend then to hear of him.
Matthew. Paris, page 958. Rex juraverat provisiones Oxonienses se inviolabiliter
servaturum, and paenituerat eum jurasse talia, metuens notam perjurii misit ad
Papam secreto r^gans, ut ab hoc se juramento absolveret, quod facillime
impetravit.
It was that Kings custom to make vows and oaths according to the exigence of
his businesses; then to obtain a dispensation from the Pope and permission to
break them. Wherein the Pope did willingly gratify him, and never denied him
a dispensation.

Matthew. Paris page 950.
After so much constant obedience to the Pope he was very near to have been
excommunicated, but he prevented that thunderbolt by sending five thousand
marks of silver to the Pope.

This poor-spirited King being gone, a generous and valiant King, prudent and
beloved of his subjects came in his room. This was Edward the first, who
seeing his crown impoverished, and his people exhausted by the Popes
extortions, made to himself amends with the goods of the Clergy; and despising
the Popes Legates, and all his mandates made use of the revenue of Abbeys and
Priories and other benefices, and retained for himself all the money that used
to be sent to Rome. The Popes suffered it patitiently, and durst not offend
that warlike King, well beloved of his people. And so, under the following
Kings, England was more or less subject unto the Popes, according as the Kings
had more or less vigor. And the horrible schisms and confusions, whereby the
Roman See was torn soon after, gave other businesses to the Popes.

This Narrative containing a summary of the Ecclesiastical history of England,
from the beginning of the quarrels about the investitures (which began to grow
hot in the year 1094. until Alexander the IV. who was made Pope in the year
1254.) will serve as a scantling to show the heaviness of the yoke of the Papal
domination, how hard the bondage of England was, and how shameful the
debasement of that illustrious Crown, in the time when the holy Scriptures
being hidden unto the people, the Pope reigned in England with absolute power.
The Sunshine of the Gospel, which arose in England about seven-score years
ago, has scattered this darkness, and by destroying the error, has also
destroyed the servitude. So that in the Kingdom of England, which God was
pleased to favor with inestimable graces, our Saviors saying was fulfilled.
You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, Joh. 8.

In this relation, I have followed the history of Matthew Paris, both because
he was a superstitious Monk, not to be suspected in this cause, and because he
writ exactly, the things which he saw himself. Matthew of Westminster, another
English Monk, which was almost his contemporary, relates much the same things.
And most part of that which we have here related, is found in the Annals of
Baronius, in the Chronicle of Genebrard, and in many Authors of the Roman
Church.

CHAP. 12. In what sense the word Penitence is taken in Scripture, and in the
Fathers.
AS the word Poenitere in Latin, signifies to repent, so the word
Poenitentia, signifies repentance. But it is proper unto false Religions, to
change virtues into Ceremonies, and spiritual Ornaments into bodily exercise.
As flatterers use more cringes and more fair words, then true friends, so
superstition has more outward show then true Religion.

Hence comes the depravation of the words and language of the Holy Ghost. Thus
to obey Christ's commandment of bearing the Cross, that is, suffering
afflictions for his cause, they carry a Cross in procession, or hang a little
Cross upon their belly, although the belly be an enemy to the Cross of Christ:
Thus the Come ye unto me, of the Gospel, is changed into pilgrimages. And to be
made like little children, the Monachal beggin was invented. And because Christ
said, I am the light of the world, they light candles in the day time. They
that bear some words of the Gospel hanging at their neck, dare not read the
Gospel; and words of instruction, are changed into a kind of charm and
preservative. Little balls thredded together, are called Pater n^ster.
Our father: And the virtue of prayer, which ought to consist in faith,
directed by intelligence, consists now in a repetition, by a precise number,
of the same prayer. Popery, by increasing Ceremonies, has put out Piety: And
by amusing the eyes, and exercising the hands, has laid the conscience asleep.
As when shadows grow, the night draws near; when the shadows of Ceremonies
multiply, you may say, that for certain the night of dark ignorance is
advancing apace.

The doctrine of Penitence was corrupted in the same manner, for whereas doing
penitence according to the language of Scripture, and according to truth, is
nothing else but repenting of ones sins; the Roman Church by penitence, (which
the English Romanists corruptly call penances) understands scourging, fasting,
pilgrimages, and pecuniary pains, which the penitent undergoeth to satisfy
Gods justice, after the sin is pardoned. Wherefore Bellarmine says Bellar.
lib. 1. de Poenitentia cap. 17. sect. Add.
that penitence is not necessary to all men, but only to sinners: As if all men
were not sinners, or, as if any could be saved without repentance. Holy
Scripture speaks not so. When Scripture says that the Ninivites did penitence,
the Holy Ghost means that they (...). Mat. 12.41.
amended their lives; for the Greek word that Christ uses, signifies that
they corrected themselves, and altered their mind, and changed their spirit and
will. Fasting, sackcloth, and ashes, which they added to their inward sorrow,
were not penitence or repentance, but only outward signs and helps of
repentance. Thus when Christ says, that the people Matthew. 11.21. (...).
of Tire and Sidon would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes, he
understands not that sackcloth and ashes were penitence it self, but that the
Tyrians would have testified their repentance by these exterior signs, usual
with them and other Nations of the East. And the word (...) 1 King. 8.47. 2 Chronicles. 6.24.7.24. Jer. 18.8. Joel 2.11. Ezech. 18.21.30.
which we translate penitence or repentance, signifies a return, or a
conversion, not a bodily punishment, and pecuniary fines. The Apostle Peter
does clearly express this, Acts 3.19. Repent and be converted. Where he shows
that penitence or repentance consists in conversion. And the Spirit of God,
Rev. 2.4. complains that the Ephesians had left their first Charity, then he
tells them, (...).
Age poenitentiam and prima opera fac. (...).
Repent and do the first works; showing evidently, that agere poenitentiam,
doing penitence, or repenting, is doing the first works that we had neglected
before.

Thus 2 Chronicles. 6.24. these words according to the vulgar version, Si conversi
egerint poenitentiam, if converting themselves they do penitence, show that
true penitence consists in conversion. And 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Si populus egerit
poenitentiam a viis pessimis; If the people do penitence from their wicked
ways; So then doing penitence, is turning away from evil, to follow good
works. And when Christ said Matthew. 9.13.
that he came to call sinners to repentance, or penitence, he means not that he
came to call men to bear satisfactory pains, but to amend their lives. And,
Rev. 9.20. Non egerunt poenitentiam, they repented not of the works of their
hands, that they should not worship Devils and Idols, etc. For then an idolater
does the works of penitence, when he forsakes idols, to adhere to the true God.
But the Pope has changed amendment of life, into torment, and corporal, and
pecuniary pains, because such a penitence is lucrative unto the Clergy, and
raises their authority. And with such a penitence the Pope may dispense, but
cannot dispense with amendment of life, and conversion to God.

Wherefore Pope Leo the X. and the Fathers of the last Council of Lateran,
declare open war against God, when (in the Bull Exurge, which is in the end of
the Council) they put among the blasphemies and heresies of Luther, that he had
said that Optima poenitentia nova vita.
the best penitence was a new life; that is, that the most acceptable penitence
unto God, is to amend ones life, leaving wicked ways, and embracing virtue and
the fear of God. By pronouncing an anathema against Luther for speaking so,
they excommunicate Christ, and the Apostles and Prophets, who have spoken the
same language, as we have seen. These Prelates then should have told us, what
penitence is better then a better life. Did they believe that self-whipping, or
abstaining from flesh, or pilgrimage, or giving to the Church (that is, to the
Friars) are better things then to live holily, and depart from evil? Who knows
not that these outward exercises may be done with hypocrisy, and that the
Pagans and Mahumetans exceed the Christians in these austerities? But the true
amendment of life alone, and without these outward penances, 1 Timothy 4.8.
is profitable and acceptable unto God, but the outward penances without a new
heart, and without amendment, are a masked profaneness, whereby a man plays
a pageant before God, and pays him in cringes, putting on the outside of
devotion before God, not to please God but men. Bodily exercise profits
little, (says the Apostle) but godliness is profitable unto all things, having
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Contrition of heart never makes a man proud, since it consists in
humiliation, but outward penances puff up many men with pride, and some will
boast of their humility, even so far as to believe that God is in their debt,
and that they have satisfactions to spare. It is the instruction of Hierom to
Eustochium, Hier. ad Eustoch. de cust. virg. Nec velis videri plus humilis quam
necesse est, nec gloriam fugiendo quaeras hoc ipso cupiens placere quod placere
contemnis, etc. Nec hoc ipsum tibi jactantiam generet, quod saeculi jactantiam
contempsisti.
Seek not to appear more humble then thou need, neither seek glory by flying
glory, desiring to please, even in that thou despisest to please, etc. Let not
that breed boasting in thee, that thou have despised the boasting of this
world. And upon the death of Blesilla, De obitu Blesillae, Humilitas vestium in
plerisque tumentes animos arguit.
In many persons humility in clothes, is a sign of a proud mind. There is an
arrogant humility. Many stoop that they may rise. Some being lean with fasting,
yet are puffed up with pride. Vices will nestle themselves even among sackcloth
and ashes. Some that scourge their sides as if they were angry with themselves,
flatter themselves in their heart with an imagination, that they have attained
a great perfection. Such are those especially, that whip themselves for others;
for they believe that they have merits to spare for their neighbors. But this
is true penitence, when a man hiding his penitence before men, discovers it
before God, whereby a man makes God the only witness of his tears, and seeks to
please him by amendment of life. Such a penitence is a sacrifice of sweet
savor before God. And it is the true receipt to mortify sin, and quell the
heat of lust. God by his wisdom having so disposed it, that as sin has brought
sorrow into the world, so sorrow should kill sin, tearing by an holy parricide,
the womb that bore her. This (by Pope Leo's leave) is better then whipping ones
self in public, either for himself or for another. The true way to please God,
is not that a man torment his body, but that he change his heart. God forgiveth
him that condemns himself. By a mortal war against our vices, we keep peace
with God.

CHAP. 13. In what sense the words Penitence and Satisfaction, are taken in the
writings of the Fathers, and that the Penitence of the ancient Church, is much
different from the penitences of the Roman Church.
THis word Penitence is taken two ways, in the writings of the Fathers;
Sometimes in a proper, sometimes in a figurative sense.

Penitence in the proper sense, is a change of the sinner, consisting in sorrow
for sins past, and in amendment for the time to come.

The Roman Decree, in the third Distinction of Penitence, and Lombard in in the
fourth Book, in the fourteenth Distinction, bring many texts of the Ancients,
which give the definition of Penitence. They allege this sentence of Ambrose,
Did. 3. de Poenitentia Can. Poenitentia. Poenitentia est mala praeterita
plangere, and plangenda iterum non committere.
Penitence is to weep for sins past, and to do no more, things that we should
weep for. And this of Austin, Did. 3. Can. Satisfactio. Satisfactio
poenitentiae est peccatorum causas excindere, nec earum suggestionibus aditum
indulgere.
The satisfaction of penitence, is to cut off the causes of sins, and to give
no more access to their suggestions. And of Eadem Did. Can. Poenitentiam.
Poenitentiam agere est and perpetrata plangere and plangenda non perpetrare.
Gregory the I. To do penitence, is to lament the faults committed, and to
commit no more, things that need to be lamented. And of Smaragdus, Ead. Did.
Can. Ille. Ille poenitentiam digne agit, qui sic praeterita mala deplorat, ut
futura iterum non committat.
That man does penitence worthily, that so lamenteth the evils committed, that
he commits no more for the future. They allege also Austin in the Book of
Soliloquies, Eadem Did. Can. Inanis. Inanis poenitentia, quam sequens culpa
coinquinat.
That Penitence is vain, that is defiled with following sins.

Ambrose in the second Book of Penitence, chap. 10. says that we do penitence,
cum dolemus admissa, admittenda excludimus, when we are sorry for sins
committed, and exclude those which we might commit in the time to come. This
language is consonant to that of Scripture, and to the nature of true
penitence, and agrees with the etymology of the word. For the word penitence,
signifies repentance: Now that man is not truly repenting, who continues to
do evil. And when all is said, true penitence consists in amendment of life.

But the Fathers often will take the word Penitence in a figurative sense,
using that common and familiar Metonymie, whereby the name of the thing
signified is given unto the sign. As when we say, that a man is mourning, when
he wears clothes that are signs of mourning.

Thus words that show joy, are called joy, and faith is taken often for the
profession and confession of Faith. In the same manner we say, that a man does
penitence in the Church, when in the presence of the Church he gives signs of
penitence. It is so, that the Fathers call penitence the outward signs, and
public professions of repentance; and call those Penitents that make public
profession in the Church, that they are Penitents, although very often their
heart be not touched with any repentance. For the same reason the Fathers call
Penitence, the exemplary pain which a sinner cut off from the Communion, bore
in public for a time prefixed by the Ecclesiastical Canons, before he could be
reconciled with the Church.

That public penance is also called Tertul. de poenit. cap. 12. Si de
exomologesi retractas.
exomologesis, that is, confession, because the penitent sinner did publicly
confess his sin. Wherein the Novatians were different from the Orthodox: For
they received not those that were fallen, to public penitence, and kept them for
ever out of the Communion.

Tertul. de poenit. cap. 4. Poenitentiam ita invade, ut nanfragus tabulam. Et
cap. 12. Esse in exomologesi secunda subsidia.
Tertullian has writ a Book of Penitence, and Ambrose two, where they call
Penitence a second remedy after Baptism, and as it were a second plank after
the shipwreck. Hieron. ad Demetriadem. Quasi secunda post naufragium miseris
tabula.
Hierom says the same. Tertul. de Poenit. cap. 7. Ambros. l. 2. de Poenit.
cap. 10. Sicut unum Baptisma, ita una poenitentia quae public agitur.
Tertullian and Ambrose hold, that public penance cannot be done but once, and
that a man who after he has fulfilled his penitence, falls into sin again, can
no more be received to do penitence: Wherein they use too much rigor.

But that Penitence of the Ancients, had nothing common with the penitences of
the Roman Church of this time. For the penitence which the Fathers speak of,
was public, and was done according to the public Constitutions and
Ecclesiastical Canons, but the penitences of the Roman Church are enjoined in
private, and according to the Confessors discretion. 1. For although the
Council of Trent approve public penitences, yet they are no more practiced in
the Roman Church, as all they that have written of that matter freely
acknowledge. 2. The ancient penitence was accomplished before the absolution,
or reconciliation to the Church. But the penitences and satisfactions of the
Roman Church, commonly are fulfilled after absolution. 3. In old time, while a
sinner was accomplishing the time of his penitence, he was not received to the
Communion. But in the Roman Church, a penitent is admitted to the Sacrament,
while he is performing his penitence. 4. All the penitence of the Ancients,
consisted only in the public shame, and in the suspension and removing from
the communion for a certain time, not in whipping, or pilgrimages, or fasts
enjoined by a Confessor, or pecuniary pains, or rehearsing of the seven Psalms,
or saying a limited number of Pater's, interlaced with Ave's, in an unknown
tongue. What was the countenance, and what the humiliation of the old
penitents, Tertullian teaches us, in chap. 13. of the Book of Pudicity, and in
the Book of Penitence, in the ninth chapter. 5. In those days penitence was
not done by Attorney, and a man whipped not himself, and fasted not for another.
6. Neither were corporal pains changed into pecuniary. 7. And one Confessor did
not change the penance enjoined by another. 8. It is to be noted, that in the
writings of the Fathers, the word Penitence is found in the singular only,
because Penitence in their time was simple, and consisted only in public
humiliation. They did not yet know those pye-bald penances, consisting in so
many Articles, as those which we have seen before, when a penitent is enjoined
to fast so many days, to ride neither in a coach nor on horseback, to eat the
leavings of Greyhounds, and to receive so many lashes singing melodiously. 9.
If any penitent to the public penitence added private fasts, and more frequent
prayers, it was done by a voluntary humiliation, not by the injunction of a
Confessor. 10. In the writings of the Ancients, no mention is found of a
Sacrament of Penitence, composed with four pieces, Contrition, Confession,
Satisfaction and Absolution, whereof the three first are the matter, and the
fourth the form. This came out of the forge of Schoolmen, who going about to
polish Popery, and to give it a form, have beset it with thorns, and have
smothered the truth. And that this doctrine was unknown among the Ancients, it
appears by the Books which Tertullian and Ambrose writ of penitence, where
for examples of penitence, they bring the Ninivites and the Israelites, whom
God has so often summoned and invited to repentance, and the Jews, whom John
the Baptist exhorted to penitence, and Saint Peter who lamented for his sin;
whereas our Adversaries hold, that in those days the Sacrament of Penitence
was not yet instituted. 11. I pass by a multitude of errors about Contrition,
as that which the Doctors commonly teach, that Contrition is the meritorious
cause of Justification, and deserves it, at least by congruity. 12. That
Attrition is an imperfect Contrition, proceeding not out of the love of God,
but out of fear to be punished: That such an Attrition is good, and that by the
Absolution, the Attrition goes for Contrition, as the Council of Trent
teaches, in Session 14. chap. 4. and Bellarmine in the second Book of
Penitence, chap. 17, 18. 13. That it is not necessary to have contrition for
venial sins, and that one may be absolved from them, though he be not contrite
and sorry in his heart for them, as Tolet teaches in the third Book of the
Instruction of Priests, chap. 5. sect. 2. And many the like doctrines, of which
there is no trace, neither in the Word of God, nor in the Fathers.

It remains to say something of the sense, in which the Fathers have taken this
word Satisfaction. The holy Scripture speaks not of satisfaction toward God.
But the Latin Fathers use that language many times, according to the style of
the Jurisconsults, who speak of satisfying for debts by paying, and for
injuries, by craving forgiveness.

The satisfactions of which the Fathers speak, are either toward God, or
toward the Church. Public penitences were satisfactory toward the Church,
and reparations of the scandal. So did Austin understand it, in chap. 65. of
his Manual to Laurentius, Recte constituuntur ab iis qui Ecclesiae praesunt
tempora poenitentiae, ut fiat etiam satis Ecclesiae, in qua sola peccata
remittuntur.
The times of penitence are with good reason constituted by those that govern
the Church, to satisfy the Church also, in which only sins are remitted. This
must be carefully observed, because our Adversaries allege indifferently the
testimonies of the Fathers, in which it is spoken of satisfaction, not
discerning whether they speak of satisfaction to God, or to the Church.

The same Fathers speak often of satisfying God, but they speak after the style
of the Jurisconsults, which is also usual among the people, for by
Satisfaction, they understand acknowledging a fault in words, and asking
pardon. Did. 1. de Poenit. Can. Petrus.
Ambrose who had been the Emperors Lieutenant in Lombardy, and Judge of his
Courts, understood the terms of Judicature, when he said, Lachrymas Petri lego,
satisfactionem non lego; that is, I read of Peter's tears, but I read not of his
satisfaction. He says that, because the Gospel relates that Peter wept, but
says not that he craved pardon, or that he confessed his sins. For taking the
word satisfaction, for humbling ones soul after the sin committed, in that
sense tears are a satisfaction. And the same Father in the second Book of
Penitence, chap. 10. speaking of the satisfaction which is done for offenses
unto men, says, that to make satisfaction, a man will humble himself, kiss the
offended persons feet, and send his innocent children to ask pardon.

Cyprian has many such passages: As in the twelfth Epistle, Ep. 12. Sect. 1.
In satisfactione Dei and deprecatione vigilare.
Watching for the satisfaction which is made unto God, and for prayer. And in
the 52. Epistle, Ep. 52. Sect. 6. Redeunte ad Ecclesiam Trophimo and
satisfaciente and poenitentia deprecationis errorem primum confitente.
Trophimus returning to the Church and satisfying, and by the penitence of
prayer confessing his sin. And in the 55. Epistle, Epist. 55. Sect. 13.
Intercedunt, ne exoretur precibus and satisfactionibus Christus.
They hinder that pardon be obtained of Christ by prayers and satisfactions.
And in the book of the unity of the Church, Lib de unit. Eccles. cap. 17. Deum
plenis satisfactionibus deprecantur.
They pray to God by full satisfactions. In all these places and many more, it
is evident that satisfactions are prayers, whereby the sinner confesses his
sin, and craveth pardon. And the same Father, toward the end of the book to
Demetrian a Pagan. Ad Demetrianum. Hortamur dum facultas adest, dum aduc de
saeculo superest, Deo satiisfacere.
We exhort you to satisfy God. There these words satisfy God, cannot signify
paying a recompense to God for the temporal pain. For according to the doctrine
of the Roman Church, that exhortation cannot be made to a Pagan, who is bound
to eternal pain.

Tertullian in the book of Penitence, Satisfactio confessione disponitur,
Satisfaction is prepared by Confession. This Doctor was learned in the Roman
Laws, and knew that satisfaction is made for offenses, by confessing the
offense, and asking pardon.

Sometimes the Fathers say, that by amendment of life, and by good works,
satisfaction is made unto God, meaning that it is a course acceptable unto God,
as Lactantius says. The man may be brought back and delivered, Lact. lib. 6.
de vero cultu, cap. 24. Si eum poeniteat actorum, and ad meliora conversus
satisfaciat Deo.
if he repent of his acts, and being turned to better things, make satisfaction
unto God.

If any places of the Fathers be found, where they will have us to redeem and
expiate our sins our own selves; Ambr. de Helia and Jejunio c. 20. Pecuniam
habes? redime peccatum tuum, etc. redemptio viri divitiae ejus.
as when Ambrose says, Have thou money? redeem thy sin, etc. A man's wealth is
his redemption. We reverence the ancients so much, as to bear with these
improper expressions, not believing that ever they believed that a man's money
can be the redemption of his sin. And when the same Ambrose says to
Valentinian, Tu me redemptorem sperabas, Thou did hope that I should be thy
redeemer; and praises that Emperor because he called him his Redeemer; that
expression and the like, must be corrected by other expressions of his, in
which he acknowledges no other price of our redemption, but the death of
Christ. By redeeming our own sins, he understood only correcting or bringing
our selves to a better course. Of which signification, we have brought many
examples out of Scripture. Ambrose, who is the most licentious of all the
Fathers in those expressions, shows evidently, that by redemption from sin, he
understands a deliverance by amendment, and inward regeneration. For these are
his words, in chap. 15. of the first book of Penitence, Orationibus and
fletibus plebis redimitur a peccato, and in homine mundatur interiore.
By the tears of the people and by prayers, they are redeemed from sin, and
cleansed in the inward man. This Father is so far from understanding by
satisfactions, the torments of Purgatory, that in the same book Ambros. lib. 1.
de poenit. c. 17. Cum manifestum sit neque animam sine carne neque carnem sine
anima, cum sibi sint gestorum operum consortiis copulatae, sine consortio vel
poenae esse vel praemii.
he maintains that the souls separate from the bodies, cannot be tormented. But
our Adversaries gather up the faults of the Fathers, and leave out their
virtues; Like flies, that will choose scabs, rather then the sound parts of a
body to sit upon. They make use of these improper terms, to persuade men that
they are their own redeemers, and that sins are redeemed with money. May we not
obtain so much of these Gentlemen's kindness, that this honor be deferred unto
the eternal Son of God, to have the title of Redeemer attributed unto him
alone? Is not this a truth worth dying for? Is it not better to suffer all
things, then to impart that praise to any creature, or to believe that all the
money of the world is sufficient to be the redemption for one sin?

Ninth Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. Of the NECESSITY OF BAPTISM.
CHAP. 1. Cardinal du Perron 's reason for the absolute necessity of Baptism.
Examination of the doctrine of the Church of Rome upon that point. How they
abuse this text, John 3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
THE dispute about the necessity of Baptism with water, might easily be
composed, if we had to do with equitable persons. For while the Romanists
accuse us to have taken away the necessity of Baptism, themselves say such
things as make it unnecessary. And setting forth our doctrine in odious terms,
they fight against Chimera's of their own making. Yea, it will be found, that
instead of impugning, our cause, they defend it.

Page 672.
Cardinal du Perron treats this question in the sixth Chapter of his third
Observation. It is made plain enough (says he) by the precedent reply, that we
tie not the power of Gods grace to that means, (that is, to Baptism with water)
since God might have saved us, if it had been his pleasure, without any of
those means which he instituted. These means are the death of Christ, the
preaching of the Gospel, the Sacraments, Faith in Christ, repentance, and study
of good works. The Cardinal says, that God might have saved us without any of
these means, if it had been his pleasure, and thereby he pretends to show that
the Roman Church holds not the Baptism with water to be of simple and absolute
necessity, since God could save us without that, as well as without all the
other means. Upon this then he grounds the necessity of the Baptism of Infants.
We tie (says he) the effect of Gods grace to his own protestations, that is,
to the means without which he protested that he would not give it; namely,
before all things to faith in Christ, and to Baptism; of which he said, He that
believes not in the only Son of God, is judged already; And except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

In these words there is either much ignorance or much foul dealing. For he
conceives amiss of the necessity of the means of our salvation, that puts
Baptism with water in equal degree of necessity with the other means without
which none can be saved. Without the merit of Christ's death none can come to
salvation; and of all them to whom the Gospel is announced, none are saved but
such as believe in the Goespl; but an infinite number of persons are saved
without the Baptism of water, as the Cardinal acknowledges in the following
lines, in which he says, Thomas in Joh. 6. Lect. 7. Oportet quod Sacramentum
baptismatis habeatur in re, vel in voto. Eadem habet part 3. Sum. q. 68. Art.
2. Et in Joh. 3. ait. Baptismum esse necessarium vel in re, vel in voto, vel in
figura.
that Baptism may be supplied by faith, and by the vow of Baptism. This cannot
be said of faith in Christ, which cannot be supplied by Baptism nor by the vow
of believing or being baptized. These very texts which he alleges show how
the necessity of those two things is unequal. For Scripture says that
whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved, but says not that whosoever is
baptized shall be saved. And our Adversaries confess that many adult persons
shall be saved without Baptism with water, if they have but the vow, that is
the desire and the will to be baptized.

The Page 672.
Cardinal asks his Majesty of great Britain, With what conscience the Church
of England can communicate with the Protestants of France which differ from her
in a point so important to salvation? The difference he finds between the
English and us consists in two points; The one, that the Protestants of
France (if he must be believed) deny the necessity of Baptism; The other that
they deny that Baptism conferreth grace, but affirm only that it signifies
grace, and say that it is not unto them a means of salvation but only a sign.
Whereupon he charge us in odious terms, that we frustrate children in case of
danger of the only way which God has instituted unto them to attain salvation.

This man speaks according to his custom, that is, against his conscience,
attributing such things to us which he knows that we believe not. For we hold
that it is necessary in the Christian Church to baptize. It is necessary to
obey Christ's command, Go Baptize all nations, etc. Also we believe Baptism to
be of such necessity, that one that should despise Baptism, and not care to be
baptized, could not be saved. Circumcision was of the like necessity, for
whosoever despised it, God declares that he should be cut off from his people.
The question is only whether in case of impossibility of being baptized, a man
is therefore excluded from the Kingdom of heaven. We agree with our Adversaries
about adult persons, that in case of impossibility they may be saved without
Baptism. And it is well that so much is granted already. The difference then is
only about infants that dye without Baptism, our Adversaries send them into a
Limbus, of which the word of God says nothing, and Cateches. Trid. cap. de
Baptismo dicit. Omnes homines nisi per Baptismi gratiam renascantur, in
sempiternam miseriam and interitum a parentibus procreari.
exclude them for ever from the Kingdom of heaven. To prove the necessity of
Baptism of water unto little children they bring but one text which speaks of
adult persons. For when Christ said, Except a man be born again of water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, he spoke to Nicodemus,
who, because he was old, asked How can a man be born when he is old? Can he
enter the second time into his mothers womb? And it is certain that Christ in
that place speaks of a second birth without which Nicodemuus could not be
saved; To whom nevertheless Baptism was not necessary because he was
circumcised. Our Adversaries themselves say that he might be saved without
Baptism, if he had dyed before he could be baptized; and that before Christ's
resurrection, Baptism was not necessary to salvation.

In the second place Monsieur du Perron attributes unto us a doctrine remote
from our belief, making us say that we deny, that Baptism conferreth grace to
little children, and that we say only that it signifies grace. It is not so.
For although it be hard for us to define how, and how far Baptism works with
efficacy in little children, yet we doubt not of the virtue thereof, nor of the
remission of original sin which is applied and ratified in the same. Neither do
we reduce it to a bare and ineffectual signification. God in his own time makes
the godly sensible of the fruit of their Baptism, and of the effects of that
Covenant of which they have received the seal.

That which the Cardinal adds [that Baptism is the only means which God has
given to Infants to attain salvation] cannot subsist. For the death of Christ,
and Gods promise, that he will be our God, and of our seed, are also means
which serve for the salvation of our children, and are far above Baptism, both
in excellency and necessity.

Our adversaries to prove the necessity of the Baptism of water, bring the
example of Circumcision of which it is said, Genesis 17.14. that every
uncircumcised mal shall be cut off from his people, but they fraudently omit
the following words, for he has broken my Covenant; Words which cannot belong
but to adult persons, and teach us that God punished the contempt of
Circumcision, not the privation in case of impossibilty.

Also they dispute thus, Every means which God uses to sanctify and save us,
is necessary to salvation. But the Baptism of water is a means which God uses
to sanctify and save us, as St. Paul teaches us, Ephesians. 5.25, and 26. Christ
gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word. And Tit. 3.5. He saved us by the washing of
regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost. Then the washing of water is
necessary to salvation.

Of this argument the first proposition is false, for God uses many means to
sanctify and save us, as the holy Communion, and miracles and afflictions and
persecutions for the Gospel, without which things nevertheless many are saved.
As for the second proposition we have great reason to make a question, whether
by the washing of regeneration, whereby the Apostle says that God has
sanctified and saved his Church, the Baptism of water must be understood? For
within that Church the Church of the Old Testament is also comprehended, which
was not baptized with water: And our Adversaries confess that many are saved,
which are not baptized with water: Very often in Scripture remission of sins,
and regeneration is compared to washing with water, Isa. 1.16. Zech. 1.13.
Ezekiel. 36.25.

As for the text of John 3.5. Except a man be born again, and Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God,
whereby they will establish the necessity of Baptism, I will not oppose the
opinion of many Ancients who hold that in this text the Baptism of water is
understood; But I wonder how our Adversaries forgetting themselves make this
Baptism of water unnecessary, saying that there is a Baptism of Blood, and a
Baptism of the Spirit, which may be instead of the Baptism of water. I wonder
noless that they consider not that Christ speaks to Nicodemus in this text, and
declares to him, that though he be old, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God unless he be born again, and yet themselves hold that Nicodemus might be
saved without the Baptism of water, because he was circumcised, and that
Baptism was not yet necessary at that time, Hinckmar in the book of the fifty
five chapters, chapter 47. expounds thus this text. Page 243. Nisi quis renatus
fuerit, etc. Scilicet aut invisibili gratia cum visibili Sacramento, aut
invisibili gratia sine visibili Sacramento.
Except a man be born again of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, that is, Except he be born again by the invisible grace
with the visible Sacrament, or by the invisible grace without the visible
Sacrament.

It were easy to come out of this difficulty, if they would use here the same
discretion as in expounding John 6.53. Except you eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, a text speaking as they think
of the necessity of the Eucharist. There they restrain Christ's words to the
persons that have age, capacity, and opportunity to receive the holy Sacrament.
Why shall we not say the same here, that Christ speaks to persons come to an
age capable of instruction, and that have the opportunity to be baptized, who
cannot be saved if they despise Baptism? Lomb. lib. 4. Sent. Did. 4. litera E.
So much Lombard acknowledges saying, that this must be understood of those
who having the opportunity to be baptized despise Baptism. But to exclude
infants from the Kingdom of Heaven, if they dye when they are carried to
Baptism, or if their Parents take no care that they be baptized, it is a tenet
ill sorting with the wisdom and goodness of God: For God tyeth not his grace
unto the element, as if he could not or would not save without washing with
water. Neither is it suitable with his wisdom to make the salvation of children
to depend upon the will of another; For according to the Cardinals doctrine, he
that has a child dying in his power, may save or damn that soul; For if it
pleases him to baptize that child, he shall be saved, but if he will not
baptize him, he shuts the gate of Paradise against him, and excludes him for
ever from the Kingdom of heaven. By this means eternal election shall depend
upon the provision of Baptism, and it shall be in men's power to make it void.

This also is repugnant to the goodness and justice of God, to exclude an
infants soul from salvation for the fault of another; The son shall not bear
the iniquity of the Father, Ezekiel. 18.20.

In the fourth chapter of Exodus God offers to punish Moses for neglecting his
sons circumcision, but he offers not to punish the child. If Circumcision,
which under the old Covenant held the place of Baptism, had been absolutely
necessary to salvation, God would not have deferred it till the eighth day,
before which so many children dye. If it was of that absolute necessity, we
must say, that all the women of Israel, and so many men born and dead in the
wilderness in the space of forty years without circumcision, and the converted
Ninivites were excluded from eternal salvation. It is not credible that God
made the condition of his Church worse under the New Testament; Which should
be, if before the coming of Christ the godly might be saved without any
Sacrament. But now their salvation is made to depend upon the Baptism of water,
of which many are deprived for want of possibility, and from the Priests
intention which must be presumed by conjecture, and a soul may be damned by the
negligence of another.

God said to Abraham, I will be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee,
Genesis 17.7. How many persons of his seed are dead without circumcision, of whom
nevertheless God declares himself to be the God and the Savior.

The Prophet Jeremy was sanctified from the womb and before he was born, as God
himself told him, Jer. 1.5. The same is said of John the Baptist. Cornelius and
his family received the Holy Ghost before they were baptized, Act. 10.47, and
48. All these were sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and by consequent capable of
salvation before they received any Sacrament. Whence it follows that neither
Circumcision nor Baptism were unto them necessary for Salvation.

Act. 2.39. St. Peter says to the Jews, The promise is unto you and to your
children; Now the children not yet baptized, were no less their children then
after Baptism.

1 Cor. 7.14. St. Paul speaking of a husband and wife, one of which is a
Christian, the other an Infidel, says that their children are holy, Else
(says he) your children were unclean but now they are holy. If when one party
only is believing, the children are holy, that is, consecrated to God, how much
more when the child has two believing persons for his Parents?

Upon that text the Cardinal labors very much to find what the word Holy Page
675.
imports, and according to his custom he clogs his own way with troublesome
distinctions saying that there is a legal and an Evangelical pollution, one
absolute, another relative, one in it self, another in relation to another, one
in the being, another in the use. He takes a long way beset with thorns,
having a plain and easy way at hand. For what he says, comes to the same
thing that we say, but he is ashamed to borrow it from us, namely, that the
children of believers are dedicated and consecrated unto God, and esteemed to
be of his people; in the same manner as all the people of Israel was holy, and
the Temple, and the Sabbath, and the victims; Which holiness neither in
infants, nor in adult persons does necessarily import salvation.

Page 674.
By the way I comprehend not why the Cardinal corrupts this text, and instead of
saying with St. Paul, now your children are holy, says your children are clean.

And whereas our Adversaries hold, that the Baptism of blood serves instead of
the Baptism with water, let them tell us whether that Baptism of blood be a
Sacrament or no, if it be a Sacrament, hangmen have conferred it, who yet had
no intention to confer it. And if in a person not baptized with water,
martyrdom is a Sacrament, shall the same matyrdome in a baptized person be
also a Sacrament? For if it be so, that person has twice received the
Sacrament of Baptism; or if it be not so, it will follow, that in one,
martyrdom is a Sacrament, in another, it is not.

And since the satisfactions, fasts, and self-whippings of Dominick and Francis
may be imputed to others, and in the Roman Church one whips himself for
another; if the father makes a vow to cause himself to be baptized, why may not
that vow be imputed to the child? especially seeing that in Baptism the
Godfathers answer for the child, and the Priest asking the child whether he
believes and renounceth the world and the Devil, the Godfather answers for
the child, Credo and Abrenuntio. If the child in Baptism believe by Attorney,
why may he not also vow by Attorney? Whereas also the Roman Church holds that
for want of Baptism the vow is sufficient, let them tell us whether by that vow
original sin be blotted out, for if it be not blotted out by that vow, it
follows that the person not baptized cannot be saved by that vow; But if the
vow of Baptism blots out original sin, it will follow that the Baptism received
after the vow, does not blot out original sin, and by consequent becomes
useless. For one cannot blot out that which is blotted out already, nor take
away a spot which is no more.

What may be the reason why the Roman Church will have God to be more rigid to
little children, then to adult persons, of whom they hold that they may be
saved without Baptism? Why may not God save infants without Baptism, by the
efficacy of his Spirit working in them? especially seeing that the Roman Church
holds, that by the Baptism of infants, their original sin is not only remitted
but also wholly blotted out, and that they are made altogether pure and without
sin; by which doctrine they acknowledge that infants are capable of a perfect
regeneration.

And seeing that to children dead without Baptism the Romanists appoint an
underground dungeon which they call Limbus; we desire to know of them what
quarters the Roman Church assigns for them after the day of Judgment when the
earth shall be no more? and whether they shall rise again with others? what
sentence the Judge shall give about them? and whether they shall be placed at
the Lords right hand or at the left? For of all that no more then of Limbus
Scripture speaks never a word, and it belongs to them that have forged that
Limbus to instruct us about these difficulties.

Besides since many children not baptized have suffered martyrdom, as the new
born infants which Herod caused to be slain at Bethlehem whom the Roman Church
puts indifferently among Saints and Martyrs, how does that agree with their
doctrine, that the Baptism of water is absolutely necessary to infants, and (as
the Cardinal says) that it is the only way that God has given them to be
saved? Do they not say themselves, that the want of Baptism with water is
supplied in infant with martyrdom? So that it will be found, that the Roman
Church holds not the Baptism of water necessary to infants, no more then to
adult persons. Page 245. Et sicut parvulis naturali i. e. alieno peccato
obnoxiis aliorum id est patronorum fides pro eis respondentium in baptismate
sit ad salutem, ita parvulis quibus baptismum degenari jussisti, parentum vel
patronorum cord credentium, and pro parvulis suis fideli verbo baptisma
expetentium, sed non impetrantium, fides and fidelis postulatio prodesse
potuerunt; Dono ejus cujus Spiritus, quo regeneratio fit, ubi vult spirat.
Hinckmar Archbishop of Rhemes, a man of great name in his time, in his book
of the fifty five chapters chapter 48. taxes Hinkmar Bishop of Laon his nephew,
that to many other crimes he had added this, that he had hindered the Baptism of
infants in his Diocese, whereby many children were dead without Baptism. Whom
Hinckmar of Rhemes affirms to have been saved by the faith of their parents
or their Godfathers, who had presented themselves to answer for them, and had
required that these children might be baptized. For (says he) the Spirit of
God by whom regeneration is made, blows where he lists. This Prelat who
writ about the year of the Lord 865. believed not, that it was just and
agreeing with Gods goodness to exclude infants from salvation for the fault of
another.

The Roman Church shuts up these children in a dark perpetual and burning
prison, where though they be in a vehement fire, Bell. l. 6. de amissione
gratiae and statu peccati. c. 3. and 5.
they feel no pain. For (say the Doctors) original sin deserves only privation
of happiness, which they call poena damni, not a pain of sense and dolor. Yet
it is certain that Christ has suffered dolors and felt torments to expiate
original sin. A certain proof, that original sin deserves the pain of sense,
and that infants both before and after baptism suffer dolors and torments,
which cannot be pains of any sin but original, since they have committed no
actual sin. But what may that pain be which is not felt, seeing that every
punishment is imposed that it may be felt? If these children in the Limbus are
without any knowledge, they are no reasonable creatures, and have nothing of
Gods image in them. But if they know and feel that they are deprived of the
presence of God, they are very wicked and destitute of all love of God, if they
feel not an extreme dolor for that privation.

Truth is so strong in all this, that it comes from our Adversaries mouth
against their will. Gerson Tom. 3. de nativitate Virginis Conf. 2. Constat Deum
etc. misericordiam salvationis suae non ita Sacramentis alligasse quin absque
praejudicio legis possit pueros nondum natos extra uterum intus sanctificare
gratia suae Baptismo vel virtuti Spiritus sancti.
Gerson Chancellor of the University of Paris. It is certain (says he) that
God has not so tied the grace of salvation unto the Sacraments, but that
without pejudice of that law he may sanctify within, by the baptism of his
grace, the children not yet come out of the womb. Lomb. l. 4. Did. 4. lic. E.
Illud intelligendum est de illis qui possunt and contemnunt Baptizari. Vide
Extrav. de Baptismo and ejus effectu Tit. 42. and Tit. 43. de Presbytero non
baptizato, and Did. 4. de Consecr. Can. Non ratione. and Can. Duo tempora. and
Can. Si quis and Aug. lib. 4. contra Donatistas cap. 22, 23, 24. and 25.
And Lombard says, that this sentence, Except a man be born again of water and
of the Holy Ghost, etc. must be understood of them that can be baptized and
despise it. And he proves his saying by Austin, Gabriel Biel says the same
upon that Distinction of Lombard. And Caietan in his Comment upon the third
part of the sum of Thomas, qu. 68. Art. 2.

That place of Austin which Lombard mentions in the fourth book of Baptism
chapter 22. is this, that Baptism which was hindered, not by the contempt of
religion but by the term of necessity is invisibly administered. And it is
alleged in the 43. of the Decretals. Decretal. tit. 43. De Presbytero non
baptizato cap. Apostolicam. Fides tua salvum te fecit, and remittuntur tibi
peccata, credenti utique nec tamen tincto.


The same Father in the second Book against Cresconius chapter 33. moves this
difficulty against Cyprian, who maintained, that the Baptism conferred by
Heretics was null. He asks what will become of those, who before were
converted unto the faith, and were received into the Church without Baptism? He
answers that in the very words of Cyprian, Potest Dominus misericordia sua
indulgentiam dare and eos qui ad Ecclesiam simpliciter admissi in Ecclesia
obdormierunt ab Ecclesiae suae muneribus non separare.
The Lord by his mercy may grant them pardon, and not exclude from the gifts of
his Church those that being received with simplicity into the Church, are dead
in the Church.

Tertullian in the book of Baptism, chapter 12. Thy faith has saved thee (said
Christ) and thy sins are forgiven thee, namely to him that believed, although
he was not baptized.

Had Gregory Nazianzen believed, that infants cannot be saved without Baptism,
he had not advised the Parents Greg. Orat. de Bapt. Edit. Paris. p. 658.
to defer their Baptism, till they were come to age of instruction.

Had the ancient Church believed, that Baptism was absolutely necessary to
salvation, Christians would not have put off Baptism to the last part of their
life, as it was then the custom of many.

The ancient Councils are full of Constitutions that forbid to baptize at any
other time but Easter and Whitsuntide, so that no baptising was seen in the
Church for ten months together every year. How many infants dyed in those ten
months? and how many adult unbaptised persons were overtaken with sudden
death? It is true that in many Canons this clause was added, saving only in
case of necessity. But every one knows that man's life is subject to such
sudden accidents, that many times one has no leisure to think of any thing,
much less to take an order for Baptism.

It is very observable, that the Emperor Valentinian, who in his life had
opportunity enough to be baptized, dyed without Baptism, and yet Ambrose in his
Oration upon his death holds that he enjoys eternal felicity.

Against the absolute necessity of Baptism of water, I could bring many
testimonies, not only of the Ancients, but also of the chief Doctors of the
Roman Church. The authentical definition of Pope Innocent the III. will be one
for all. It is in the third book of the Decretals, Tit. 43. de Presbytero non
Baptisato, where he declares that a Priest unbaptised yet was saved.
Presbyterum quem sine unda Baptismatis extremum diem clausisse significasti,
quia in sanctae Matris Ecclesiae fide and Christi nominis confessione
perseveraverit, ab originali peccato solutum, and coelestis patriae gaudium
esse adeptum asserimus incunctanter.
We affirm (says he) without demurring, that the Priest of whom thou have sent
us word, that he died without the water of Baptism, is delivered from original
sin, and has got the joy of the heavenly country, because he persevered in
the faith of the Church our holy Mother, and in the confession of the name of
Christ. And a little after, Qui Christum habet per fidem, etiamsi baptismum non
habeat, habet utique fundamentum, praeter quod aliud poni non potest, Jesum
Christum.
He that has Christ by faith, although he has not Baptism, yet has the
foundation, out of which there is none, even Jesus Christ. It is very like that
this unbaptised Priest had baptized many children.

The Council of Trent in the seventh Session, and fourth Canon pronounces
anathema to all that say that the Sacraments of the New Testament are not
necessary, or the vow for want of the Sacrament.

As for Austin, by the like error whereby he believed the perception of the
holy Communion to be necessary to infants, he believed also that every infant
that dyed unbaptised was eternally damned in Hell fire, and was with the Devil,
For in those days the Limbus of infants was unknown. Wherein M. du Perron
excuses him, saying that herein he was a pious Father, charitable, and
compassionate, because he took care that these poor little creatures should be
succored by the diligence of their parents. Upon which we desire not to
dispute, being inclined to cover the defects of such an excellent man. Yet
since in this point he agrees not with the Roman Church, the Romanists should
not use his authority in this question.

Pope Leo the I. in the first Epistle to the Bishops of Sicily in the third chapter
holds, that Baptism was not effectual and necessary but after Christ's
resurrection, and Christum regenerationis gratiam ex sua resurrectione coepisse.
that Christ by his resurrection began the gift of regeneration. According to
which doctrine Bellarmine in chapter 5. of the first book of Baptism says, that
Baptismus Christi non fuit necessarius necessitate medii aut praecepti ante
mortem Christi.
The Baptism of Christ, that is, the Baptism conferred by Christ, and his
Apostles before the Lords death, was neither a necessary means, nor a necessary
command. De Consecratione, Did. 4. Can. A quodam. A quodam Judaeo nescitis an
Christiano an Pagano multos in patria vestra baptisatos asseritis, and quid sit
inde agendum consulitis.


To this join the doctrine of Pope Nicolas the I. (q) who judged and pronounced
that Baptism conferred by a Jew, or by a Pagan is good and valid, if the man
did but baptize in the name of the Trinity, or only in the name of Christ. And
the custom of the Roman Church, in which women confer the Sacrament of Baptism,
without which they hold that these children could not be saved. For hence it
follows that the Sacrament conferred by a Jew or a Mahumetan who are Christ's
enemies, has more efficacy then that which Christ's and his Apostles have
conferred, and that a Pagan or a woman do more good to a child, which but for
them had dyed unbaptised, then all the Apostles together could have done.

If one receives Baptism out of hypocrisy, as the Marranes do in Spain to
avoid the Inquisition, Shall that Baptism blot out his sin? Shall his crime be
profitable to him? Shall the grace of God be so tied to the water that it turn
into a bondage unto God himself, so that God be obliged to do good unto
hypocrites, and to give his grace for a reward of the profanation of his holy
Sacrament?

Besides, all this efficacy of Baptism upon which they pin salvation, depends
upon the intention of the person that baptiseth, which must be ghest at, and
presumed by conjecture. For if we believe the Roman Church, he that baptiseth,
may by taking off his intention take away the efficacy of the Sacrament; And
the grace of God to the child is subjected to another man's intention.

CHAP. 2. Sense of the forealleadged text, John 3.5. How unworthily and
unjustly Cardinal du Perron deals with Calvin. A notable ignorance of the
Cardinal.
John Calvin, whom, because he is so odious unto men, we presume to be
especially beloved of God, in his Comment upon John 3. expounding these words
of our Savior, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of heaven, is of opinion that in that text it is not
spoken of Baptism, but of spiritual regeneration, and expounds these words to
be born of water and of the Spirit, to be regenerated by the Spirit, washing
the heart, or, by a spiritual washing; in the same manner as John the Baptist,
Matthew. 3.11. exhorting the Pharisees and Sadduces to repent, tells them that
one was coming after him who should baptize them with the Holy Ghost and with
fire, that is, with a fervent spirit, heating and purifying their hearts. Which
is a familiar and frequent figure, called by the Grammarians (...), as when
Virgil says molem and montes, instead of moles montosas, and pateris libamus
and auro, instead of pateris aureis. Thus Luke says, Act. 14.13. That the
Priest of Jupiter brought (...), bulls and crowns, instead of crowned bulls.
Thus Rev. 14.10. Fire and brimstone, instead of burning brimstone. And 2 Timothy
1.10. Life and Immortality, for immortal life. And Joh. 14.6. Christ calls
himself the way and the truth, that is, the true way.

This exposition of Calvin is grounded upon these reasons,

1. Because Christ having said, Except a man be born of water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, adds a little after, so is
every man that is born of the Spirit, taking to be born of the Spirit, and to
be born of water and of the Spirit, for the same thing, and declaring that the
Spirit alone is sufficient for that regeneration.

2. Because it is the style and ordinary language of Christ, to understand by
water the grace of the Spirit, as John 4, 14. he promises to give water which
whosoever drinks shall never thirst, and the water that he shall give him,
shall be made in him a well springing into everlasting life. And Job. 7.37. If
any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. He that believes in me, as the
Scripture has said, he shall flow with rivers of living water. Upon which St.
John adds, This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive.

3. This sentence of Christ according to Calvin's exposition is absolutely true,
and admits no exception; for no man is saved unless he be regenerated by the
Spirit of God. But if one will understand it of the Baptism of water, he is
forced to bring multitude of exceptions which turn that rule into smoke, and
bring it to nothing. For our Adversaries except adult persons, who have made a
vow to be baptized; And those that are regenerated by Gods Spirit; And Martyrs
unbaptised, And those that have believed in Christ before his resurrection; And
the infants slain for Christ's cause, who are dead without Baptism, as those
that were put to death by Herod's command. Thus then our Adversaries expound
these words of Christ, Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, that is, None can be saved, except he be
baptized with water, or except he be regenerated by the Holy Ghost, or except
he has vowed to be baptized, or except he has suffered Martyrdom, whether he
be adult or an unbaptised infant. Which are terrible Glosses, and an
interpretation which says openly, that the Baptism of water is not necessary.

4. Christ saying, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he shall
not enter into the Kingdom of God, spoke to Nicodemus, and for Nicodemus, to
whom our Adversaries themselves hold that the Baptism of water was not
necessary. This Pharisee that had the dye of Pharisaism, which was a discipline
of pride and of opinion of self-righteousness, and a doctrine which made the
service of God to consist in petty outward observations, is brought back by
Christ to the elements of true piety consisting in changing a man's nature, and
in regeneration by the Holy Ghost. It may be also that Nicodemus being imbrued
with the opinion of the Joseph. Origin. lib. c. 2.
Metempsychosis held by the Pharisees (which made the souls to pass into other
bodies by a new birth) Christ would speak to him of another birth which he had
not yet comprehended.

5. That which Christ adds is considerable. The wind blows where it lists
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and
whither it goes; So is every one that is born of the Spirit. For this
comparison of the wind is fit to represent the secret virtue of the Holy Ghost,
not the efficacy of washing with material water. And truly in the tongue which
Christ spoke, (...)
the same word signifies both wind and Spirit.

6. With these reasons Tolet Com. in Joh. 3. Abusi sunt hoc Servatoris loco
Haeretici dicentes, Neminem posse servari qui non sit ex aqua and Spiritu
regeneratus, quantumvis cum contritione and desiderio Baptismi morte praeventus
decedat.
Cardinal Tolet found himself so convinced, that he calls them heretics,
that out of this text of Joh. 3.5. will infer the absolute necessity of Baptism.

Against this the Cardinal is storming and raging with great impetuosity. He
says that giving this interpretation to the text, is playing with Scripture
with childish and ridiculous elusions, and destroying the faith of the
fundamental Sacrament of the Church. He wonders at Calvin's ignorance, saying
that God has blinded Calvin by his just judgment; That by his ignorance he
has killed all little chilren dead without Baptism; That he has given a
mortal wound unto his Church, etc.

To that clattering hail of words, he adds a specious reason; That according
to Calvin's exposition there should be a battologie (that is, a vain repetition)
in Christ's words. And that if water signifies here Spirit, then these words,
Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, will signify, Except a man be
born of the Spirit and of the Spirit. This Prelat should have been put to his
Grammar again, where he might have learned that in this figure where two
substantives are joined together, one of them must be interpreted as an
adjective, Pateris and auro for pateris aureis; The Spirit and the fire for the
fervent Spirit; the water of the Spirit for the spiritual water, or the
spiritual washing, or the washing and cleansing Spirit; for these come all to
one.

To answer the example of Matthew. 3.11. where John the Baptist speaking of
Christ says, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, the
Cardinal speaks as sitting down to take breath after a long race. Here (says
he) I will take a little breath to give me time to contemplate and admire the
prodigious ignorance or inadvertence of Calvin, whose passion has so
blindfolded him that he is now by his passion put in the rank of those of whom
God speaks by his Prophet, I will blind the eyes of this people that they
seeing see not. These high swollen words promise to make us see some gross
ignorance of Calvin. Let us see it. For (says the Cardinal) the Lord in this
place has not added the word Fire This is an odd and dark expression of the
Cardinal, which the Translator leaves as he finds it.
to repeat the intelligence of the word Spirit. This Prelat believed that it
was Christ that spoke these words, whereas they are the words of John the
Baptist speaking to the Sadduces and Pharisees. Truly this Cardinal should not
have pranced so high to stumble so foully at the very first step. But this is
worse, The Lord (says he) in that place has not added the word Fire to repeat
the intelligence of the word Spirit, but to express the external and visible
kind of the fire, which goes along with the Baptism of the Spirit, wherewith
our Lord baptized his Apostles and his other Disciples upon the day of
Pentecost. A woeful ignorance. This man thinks that these words of John the
Baptist, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, are spoken to
the Apostles, and that it is a promise made to them that the Spirit should
descend upon them in the shape of fiery tongues. For when John the Baptist
said, He shall baptize you, the Apostles were not present, and were not yet
Christ's Disciples. Who so will read the text may see, that this you, is not
spoken to the Disciples of Christ but to Sadduces and Pharisees, to whom John
the Baptist promises that if they would be converted, Christ would baptize
them with a better Baptism then that of water which John administered, yea that
Christ would baptize or cleanse them with the fervent and purifying virtue of
his Spirit. Had the Cardinal been versed in the style of the Prophets, he might
have known that this expression of John the Baptist is taken from Isa. 4.4.
where God promises to purge the blood of Jerusalem, that is the grievous and
bloody sins of that people, by the Spirit of judgment and by the Spirit of
burning.

Out of all this it is evident, that the more violently the Cardinal is
storming, the more is his ignorance to be laughed at, or pitied.

CHAP. 3. How contemptible Baptism is in the Roman Church, and miserably
disgraced.
THe doctrine of the necessity of Baptism must be attended with the doctrine of
the virtue of the same, for it is for the fruit that we hope from Baptism, that
we preach the necessity thereof. The Cardinal says that we have taken all the
efficacy from Baptism, and that we make it only a bare sign without any virtue.

We on the contrary accuse our Adversaries, that they have clipped the efficacy
and signification of Baptism, restraining the virtue thereof only to sins
committed before Baptism. For as for the sins committed since baptism, they
have reserved the remission thereof to the Sacrament of Penitence, because that
Sacrament is far more lucrative and beneficial unto them then Baptism. For
baptising will afford but little gain. But by the Sacrament of Penitence they
give the absolution of sins, pardon in quality of Judges, the offenses
committed against God, and make themselves Judges in Gods cause. By Confessions
they search the consciences and the secrets of families. And by Penitences and
Satisfactions they impose corporal and pecuniary pains upon sinners, even upon
Princes and Kings. This is one of the main pillars of the Papal Empire, and the
principal revenue of the Roman Clergy. Wherefore we must not wonder, that they
have clipped off the greatest part of the efficacy of Baptism instituted by
Christ, to bestow it upon the Sacrament of Penitence invented by men.

With the like disgrace of Baptism our Adversaries prefer the Sacrament of
Confirmation which is an humane tradition before Baptism. For in the fifth
Distinction of Consecration Can. de his, they make Pope Melchiades to say that
Sicut unum majoribus, id est, summis Pontificibus est accommodatum, quod nisi a
majoribus p^rfici non potest, and majori veneratione venerandum est. Et Can.
Omnes. Omnes fideles per manus impositionem Episcoporum Spiritum Sanctum
accipere debent, ut plane Christiani inveniantur. Et Can. Ut Jejuni. Nunquam
erit Christianus, nisi in Constrmatione Episcopali fuerit Chrismatus. Be^l.
lib. de Confirm. cap. 1. Tam ratione Min^stri q^am ratione subjecti praestat
Confirmatio Baptismo, ut recte docet Magister. Et. cap. 11. Confert gratiam
gratum facientem and quidem majorem quam ipse Baptismus in ordine ad roborandam
animam adversus diaboli impetus.
Confirmation ought to be more honored then Baptism.

And Lombard Father of the School, and after him Bellarmin in the first book of
Confirmation, maintain, that Confirmation is more excellent then Baptism, both
because of the subject which is the forehead, and because of the dignity of the
Minister which is the Bishop. And in chapter 11. Confirmation confers a grace which
makes us acceptable, and that grace greater then that which is conferred in
Baptism, as for strengthening the soul against the assaults of the Devil.

The same distinction in the Canon Omnes, says that by Confirmation men are
made fully and perfectly Christians, as though men were made but half
Christians by Baptism. And the Canon Vt Jejuni declares the same, that none can
be a Christian unless he has received the Chrism in the Episcopal Confirmation.

For these causes in the Roman Church a porter, a woman, an hermaphrodite, a
Jew, a Pagan, yea a Pagan-whore, may baptize; and this holy Sacrament is
prostituted to the most infamous unbaptised persons. But Confirmation, as more
hohonorable, is administered by the Bishop only, who conferreth it with great
apparat and solemnity. See the Definition of Pope Nicolas the I. Can. A quodam
Judice, in the fourth Distinction of the Consecration, where he pronounces
that Baptism conferred by an Impostor, though a Jew and a Pagan, is good and
valid. Neither is it enough for them to have so disgraced Baptism, but they
make that small virtue which they leave to it to depend upon the intention of
the Priest that batiseth, which intention must be ghest at by a pious
conjecture; For when all is said, no person in the Roman Church is certain that
he is baptized. For who knows the intention of a man's heart? especially in an
age swarming with Atheists? And if the Priest that baptiseth was baptized by
another Priest, baptized by another that had no intention to confer the
Sacrament, his Priesthood is null, and his Baptism null, and so by remounting
the uncertainty grows still, and is multiplied to infinity.

To these you may add the spittle, the salt, the oil, the exorcisms, whereby
the Roman Church has defiled the simplicity and purity of Baptism, as it was
instituted by Christ and practiced by his Apostles.

CHAP. 4. The doctrine of our Churches about the virtue and efficacy of Baptism.
THat man honors the Sacraments as he ought, who yields unto them that
degree of honor which God has conferred upon them; and receiving them with
faith and reverence, yet bewareth of attributing that to the signs and the
Ministry of man which is proper only to the virtue of Gods Spirit. This we do
in our Churches. For we say that in Baptism the washing of all our sins by the
blood of Christ, is not only represented and figured unto us, but also
presented and applied: the Sacraments being not only figurative but also
exhibitive of the grace of God. By the washing of our sins we understand the
remission of our sins, and together regeneration or spiritual renewing,
according to the style of Scripture, Act. 22.16. Isa. 1.16. Zech. 1.6. Hebr.
10.22.

The adult that receive Baptism feel the effects of the same; God working in
them, not by the water, but with the water of Baptism. As for infants that are
baptized, it is a hard matter for us to say, how far Baptism is effectual in
them as for regeneration, since Scripture gives us no instruction upon that
point. If one would judge by the apparent signs, as by their cry, and by their
stirring and shrinking when they feel the cold water of Baptism, one might
judge rather that they are displeased with that action. Yea it is but too
ordinary, that when they have got some years and strength, they show by the
perversity of their nature that Baptism had done them but little good. Only we
say that when we baptize little children according to Christ's ordinance, God
thereby declares that he receives them into his Church, and marketh them with
the outward sign of his Covenant. And that if they belong to Gods Election,
they shall one time show really how effectual Baptism was with them, and that
the grace of God in Christ was not in vain offered unto them, for the
Sacraments have not the same effect with all persons.

CHAP. 5. How the Romanists after they have depress Baptism, exalt it with
improper praises.
FAlse praises are a kind of reviling. The abuse is much alike, whether we take
away from Baptism the honor due to it, or attribute unto it that honor which
God gives not to it in Scripture; For both the ways the nature of the
Sacrament is corrupted, and with the Sacrament the doctrine of the Gospel. Our
Adversaries sin in both the extremes; on the one side debasing Baptism with
great contempt, and on the other side exalting it with absurd praises, so that
the preaching of the Gospel shows but small in comparison.

The first error of the Roman Church in this matter, is this tenet, That by
Baptism both original sin, and all the actual sins committed before Baptism,
are not only pardoned but also removed; so that in baptized persons there is no
more original sin, nor any spot, nor any thing displeasing to God, or that may
properly be called sin. They are the very words of the Council of Trent in the
5. Session, and of the Catechism of Trent in the Chapter of Baptism.

Thus these Gentlemen stuffed with righteousness and holiness boast themselves
to be without sin, because Baptism has taken away all stain from them, and
whatsoever is displeasing to God. Yet they confess that all men sin venially,
thereby unsaying what they have said, and undoing what they have done. And
because they cannot deny that they have lusts, and are tempted with evil
desires, they say that lust is no sin. Hanc concupiscentiam quam aliquando
Apostolus appellat peccatum, sancta Synodus declarat Ecclesiam Catholicam
nunquam intellexisse peccatum appellari, quod vere and proprie in renatis
peccatum sit, sed quia ex peccato est, and ad peccatum inclinat.
The Council of Trent in the V. Session acknowledges that the Law says, Thou
shall not covet, and that St. Paul calls lust sin, Romans 7. and yet the same
Council maintains that this lust in baptized persons is no sin. Only they call
that lust which leads to evil Andradius Denfens. fidei Trid. lib. 5. part. 2.
fol. 327. and 328. Catech Trid. cap. de Baptism^.
a match, a vice, an iniquity, and furies of lust, but not sin.

This doctrine of pride is contrary to Gods word, to experience, to reason, to
common sense, and contradicts it self.

1. For by this doctrine baptized persons are said to be altogether without
sin, which is repugnant to Gods word, where we learn, that if we say that we
have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. And
that in many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. Wherefore also the Apostles said
in their ordinary prayer, Forgive us our trespasses.

2. The Apostle St. Paul was baptized; Yet Romans 7.17. speaking of his natural
corruption, he says that sin dwells in him; And two verses after he
acknowledges, that he did the evil which he would not. Of that sin abiding in
him he says, v. 23. that it is a warring against the law of his mind, that is,
against the law of God printed in his mind, and bringing him into captivity to
the law of sin which is in his members.

3. We are more obliged to believe the Apostle who says, that lust is sin,
Romans 7.7. And the Law of God, saying, Thou shall not covet, (whence it
follows, that coveting is sin, since it is a transgression of the law) then
the Council of Trent, whose impious boldness is come so far as to charge the
Apostle, that he spoke neither truly nor properly when he called lust sin.

4. The same Apostle says, Romans 6.23. that the wages of sin is death. Since
then infants baptized are subject to dye, and many dye soon after Baptism, it
follows that they are not without sin, and that original sin abides in them
still after Baptism.

5. And whereas none can give what he has not, the children of baptized
persons, should be born without original sin, if the parents were without
original sin.

6. If baptized infants should be without original sin, they should be also
without actual sin all their days; For actual sin proceeds from original sin,
and from our natural corruption.

7. Take two children, the one baptized, the other unbaptised, it may happen
that the baptized child shall become more wicked then the unbaptised, according
to the instructions and examples which shall be given him. If both be wicked
alike, murderers, blasphemers, adulterers, is it like that whereas the sins of
the unbaptised proceed from original sin, the sins of the baptized must be
assigned to some other cause which brings forth such wicked effects, and yet be
no sin?

8. As for adult persons that receive Baptism, as when a Jew or a Pagan turns
Christian, may it be affirmed that Baptism takes original sin from them, seeing
that many receive Baptism out of hypocrisy? Shall that imposture and
profanation of Baptism be profitable unto them? Shall that actual sin serve to
abolish original sin in them?

9. It is certain that adult persons cannot receive Baptism worthily, and to
salvation, unless they have faith and repentance. They had then faith and
repentance before they were baptized. Whence it follows that faith and
repentance are things compatible with original sin. Such was Cornelius, a man
full of faith and virtue, who received the Holy Ghost before he was baptized.
If faith and repentance has blotted out original sin in them before they were
baptized, then there are some persons in whom original sin has not been put
out by Baptism.

10. If any desiring to receive Baptism is prevented by death, our Adversaries
hold that such a man is saved nevertheless, and that the vow supplyeth the want
of Baptism. I ask the Romanists, whether such a man dies having original sin?
They answer, No, because no man can be saved unless he be purged before death
from original sin. Let them tell us then by what means he was purged from
original sin, since he was not baptized? If they give us another means, they
shall make Baptism unnecessary.

11. If by the Baptism of water original sin is altogether taken away, it was a
great error in the ancient Christians to put off their Baptism to man's age, yea
to the last part of their life. No doubt but that their Bishops and Pastors of
the Church would have severely rebuked them, because when they could put off
original sin by Baptism, yet they would purposely keep and retain it. Yet we
see no such reprehension in the books of the Fathers.

Andrad. Ibid. Concupiscere neque scelus est, neque praecepto illo, Non
concupisces, tanquam, praestandum sed tanquam optandum prohibetur.
12. Our Adversaries themselves, being convinced in their consciences,
contradict themselves. For while they maintain that there is no sin properly so
called in baptized persons, yet they say in other terms, that lust remaining
after Baptism is sin, yea a very great sin. For they call it vice and iniquity,
and most grieveous furies. And the Catechism of the Council of Trent says,
that Acerrimam esse pug^am cupiditatis adversus Spiritum, Andrad. Defens. Fidei
Trid. l. 5. p. 327. Augustinus hanc concupiscentiam non modo malam sed vitium,
sed languorem, sed divinae legi contrariam, sed iniquitatem saepius appellat.
Et paulo post vocat gravissimas farias.
this lust fights most fiercely against the Spirit of God. What are vices and
iniquities but sins? Is it not a sin to transgress Gods law, Thou shall not
covet? St. John affirms so much, 1 John 3.4. Sin is the transgression of the
Law. And according to the version of the Roman Church, Peccatum est iniquitas.
But these men conceive an iniquity without sin, and a transgression of the law
which is no sin. So far that Andradius who was one of the Council of Trent
maintains, that we are not obliged to obey that commandment, Thou shall not
covet. He says that it is well done to wish, that we may fulfill that
commandment, but that we are not bound to it: Thus that commandment shall be a
commandment no more, and must be razed out of the Tables of Gods Law. It shall
be a matter for good wishes, not a rule for a good life. If a Turk or a Jew
covets the wife or house of his neigbour, it will be a sin. But a Christian by
coveting his neighbors wife shall not sin. For, according to the doctrine of
the Roman Church, in baptized persons lust is no more sin. A thing so far from
truth, that it is certain that a Christian coveting his neighbors wife sins
more then a Pagan, because having more knowledge he has less excuse, and
having received more graces, he is more obliged to love God, and obey his law.

13. Let our adversaries tell us, whether, when they ask of God pardon of their
sins, they ask together that he forgive them that lust, that vice, that
iniquity, that fury resisting Gods Spirit, which they acknowledge to be within
them? For if they ask pardon for it, they confess it to be a sin. But if they
ask not pardon for it, is it material whether they be damned for their vices,
iniquities, and perverse lusts; or for their sins? What ease is it to them that
they are not damned for their sins, but must go to hell upon another score? Why
do we seek for new names while the thing remains?

14. As for the assertion of the Council of Trent, That God sees nothing in
baptized persons which he hates or dislikes; Doctor Andradius, who was present,
and actor in that definition, yet asserteth the contrary, and says, That
Andrad. Def. Trid. lib. 5. fol. 327. 6. Concupiscentia non potest non Deo
justitiae amatori esse magnopere invisa.
this lust in baptized persons is most odious unto God. For who will believe
that God hates not iniquity and disliketh not the transgression of his law?

15. In vain they say that Baptism is dishonored and debased, if we believe
not that it makes man perfect, and altogether without sin, and if we teach that
it leaves man in the sink of his natural corruption. For by the same reason,
one may say that Baptism is disgraced if we believe not that it makes a man
immortal. And our Adversaries acknowledge that after Baptism vice remains,
and iniquity, and lust contrary to Gods law. Sacraments shall be honored as
they should be, when they are put in the rank which the word of God assigns
them. Now the word of God ascribes not to them that virtue, to make a man
perfect and without sin. Our Adversaries ascribe not that effect to the
Eucharist, which they make a thousand times more miraculous then Baptism. The
grace of Christ is offered to us in Baptism, as also in the preaching of the
Gospel, and in the holy Communion, to bring us to perfection and immortality.
But God works that by degrees; not in an instant. Neither are the Sacraments
disgraced, because they make not a man perfectly just and immortal, presently,
and in a moment.

16. If our Adversaries say that lust remains in man after Baptism to be to
him an exercise, the same I may say of original sin, and of the relics of sin.
Those souls remain not mired in corruption, in whom sin reigns not, but is
decreasing daily.

17. Indeed the Apostle Romans 6.4. says, that we are buried with Christ by
Baptism. But in these words the Apostle speaks not of the efficacy of Baptism
as the Doctors of the Council of Trent esteem, but of the signification of the
same; in the same manner as the Apostle says to the Galatians, Gal. 3.1.
that Christ was crucified among them, because his death had been represented
to them by the preaching of the Gospel and by the Sacraments. For dipping in
water represents to us, that we dye to sin with a conformity to the death and
burial of Christ. Our Adversaries themselves acknowledge that after Baptism,
vice and iniquity is living within us, a thing ill suiting with that burial
which they imagine.

With the like abuse they say, that the water of Baptism washes sins, and that
Baptism regenerateth him that is baptized, pouring into him the habits of hope
and charity, and that (as they say) ex opere operato, by the work wrought, that
is, by the bare and single action of Baptism, the disposition of the baptized
person being not requisite for it. So that if one baptized a Jew sleeping or
thinking on other things, and having neither faith nor charity, that Baptism
will nevertheless confer justifying grace upon him, with regeneration and the
habits of faith and charity, one condition only being requisite in him, that he
make no resistance against it. They say that the water of Baptism has that
virtue because it has touched the body of Christ in his Baptism, as the
Catechism of the Council of Trent says, Conc. Trid. cap. de Bapt. Christus cum
a Johanne baptizatus est, sanctificandi virtiuem aquae tribuit.
Christ when he was baptized by John, gave to water the virtue of sanctifying.
For it is their Doctrine that when Christ was baptized in Jordan, by immersing
his body into the water, he thereby sanctified the water of Tyber, and of the
Lake of Geneva, and the whole water of the Sea. To this end also serves the
consecration of the baptismal water by the Bishop, when he blesses the font.
For to a thousand ceremonies, as signs of the Cross, aspersions with salt and
oil, and exorcismes, the Bishop adds a prayer whereby he asks of God, that
the Godhead be mingled with that water, that it may become a new creature, a
fountain of life, and a regenerated water. All these mystical inventions go
beyond the antic borders of hangings in extravagancy. These subtle Doctors
have stretched their wit to forge an infinity of Chimera's, and obtrude them for
mysteries, without the word of God, and against common sense.

It is a great abuse to ascribe unto water the virtue proper to the Holy Ghost,
and to teach that Baptism forms the habit of faith in children, seeing that
they are without knowledge, and the habit of charity, seeing that they have no
use of their will. How could they have charity, seeing that they are incapable
of loving? For one must know before he can love. How could Baptism power the
habit of faith into adult persons, seeing that they must have faith before they
receive Baptism? How could infants receive the habit of faith, seeing that they
cannot believe? And what becomes of those habits of faith and charity, when
they come to age? seeing that they show themselves prone to evil, and for the
most part rejecting the doctrine of faith and rules of charity?

But who will believe that water can act upon souls, and that a corporal and
inaminate thing can have a spiritual virtue? If the water of all the world
received the virtue of regenerating the soul, because the water of Jordan
touched Christ's body in his Baptism, we must also attribute the same virtue to
all the bread, and to all the wine of the world; For Christ has handled and
eaten bread, and drunk wine in the Eucharist, and has consecrated them with a
consecration far more express then the sanctification of the water of Jordan.

1. That opus operatum, work wrought, is a Chimera forged in the School, full
of absurdity, whereby they will have the Sacraments of the New Testament to
regenerate and sanctify the souls by the single action, that is, by the mere
aspersion of water poured upon the head of the infant, or of an adult person,
and by the single fraction or manducation of bread, the devotion or attention
of the communicant being not required for it. It is as if one said, that the
preaching of the Gospel regenerates souls by the only sound of words and
syllables, and that there is no need of the peoples faith and attention. If
that be absurd in the preaching of the word, how much more in the
administration of Sacraments, seeing that Scripture exalts the efficacy of
the word incomparably more then that of the Sacraments.

2. They make the error more evident, by putting this among the prerogatives of
the Sacraments of the New Testament above those of the Old, which (if we must
believe these Doctors) profited only opere operantis, that is, by the piety or
devotion of those that administered the Sacraments, or of those that received
them, in the same manner as prayers profit. Whence it follows that
circumcision profited nothing, when it was conferred by a man destitute of the
fear of God, and that the child's salvation depended on the disposition and
devotion of another.

3. Thence also it follows, that if Baptism be conferred by a Pagan or an
impostor Jew, it profits and sanctifies by the bare action; But the
Sacraments of the Old Testament though conferred by a Prophet had not the same
virtue.

4. Observe also the goodly prerogative, which they attribute to the Sacraments
of the New Testament, whereby devotion or attention is become unnecessary, so
that there is no danger in receiving them without devotion. This is then the
advantage of the Roman Church above the Patriarchs and Prophets, that one may
want devotion without peril, and be baptized in his sleep, and that there is no
danger for one to think of the wars of Piemont, or his private businesses,
whilst he is receiving the Lords supper. These Doctors will corrupt men that
they may honor the Sacraments, and by exalting their virtue, they diminish the
virtue and piety of those that receive them. This tends to raise the dignity of
Clergymen, who boast that they administer the Sacraments, with so much
efficacy, that their single action supplyeth the want of piety, and that by
pouring water upon the body they pour together virtues into the soul, although
the man that conferreth that Sacrament be many times without any virtue. All
that taken from the unwritten word, for Scripture says nothing of that, and
the Apostles were ignorant of all that doctrine.

To these two doctrines, whereby they exalt the efficacy of Baptism, they add a
third; holding that Baptism prints an indelible character upon the soul, which
the Pope himself cannot take away, and which remains even after this life,
insomuch that damned souls carry it into Hell. May it not be thought that the
souls marked with that character are respected by other souls in Hell, and that
the Devils make low congies to them? But who can boast that ever he saw that
character, or that ever he felt the impression of the same? In what place are
those souls marked? What is the form or the color of that mark? The Apostle
says indeed that God marketh us with the seal of his Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. and
4.30. and 2 Cor. 1.22. But in those texts he speaks not of the Sacraments which
are administered to the wicked promiscuously with the good. But he speaks of the
testimony of Gods Spirit, which is the Spirit of adoption bearing witness to
our hearts, that we are Gods children. That testimony is proper to none but the
right godly, and Infants are not yet capable of it.

Tenth Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. Of the SACRIFICE Of the EUCHARIST.
CHAP. 1. State of the Question. How M. du Perron does not touch it, but
wanders about useles discourses.
CArdinal du Perron employeth five Chapters of his fourth Book to treat of the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist, and to prove that the Fathers have understood that
it is truly and properly a Safice. That whole dispute is useless, both because
he alleges not one syllable of Gods Word, without whose Authority that
sacrifice cannot subsist; and because he touches not the question, and
expatiates about things of no use. For the question is not, Whether the Lords
Supper be called a Sacrifice, properly or improperly? but, Whether the body of
Christ be really sacrificed in it? Also, Whether it be a propitiatory
sacrifice? and, Whether by it our souls be redeemed, and God reconciled with
us? What is it to us, if the Communion is called a sacrifice properly or
improperly, while this truth remains firm, that Christ is not really sacrificed
in it? and that there is no other propitiatory and redemptory sacrifice, but
the death of Christ?

He committs another fault. For the dispute about the proper or improper
signification of the word Sacrifice, cannot be decided but by setting down a
definition of sacrifice. It being certain that the Eucharist cannot be a true
sacrifice, if the definition of a sacrifice be not proper to it.

But he has purposely omitted that definition, finding no way how to make it
square with the nature of the Eucharist. Is not that an abusing the Reader, to
make long discourses, to prove that the Eucharist is a true sacrifice, and yet
never say what a thing a sacrifice is? Now every lawful sacrifice is a
religious action, instituted by God, whereby a visible offering is consecrated
and offered unto God by a lawful Priest, and destroyed for the propitiation of
sins, or for thanksgiving. For the definition and essence of a sacrifice,
properly so called, includes these six things. 1. That it be a religious
action instituted by God. 2. That there be a visible offering. 3. That the
thing offered be consecrated to God by him that sacrifices. 4. That it be
destroyed by the person that celebrates the sacrifice. 5. That it be offered by
a lawful Priest instituted by God. 6. That if it be a sacrifice truly and
really propitiatory, the price of our redemption must be really offered and
sacrificed in it. Hence it appears, that it is utterly impossible that the Mass
in which they pretend to sacrifice Christ, can be truly and properly a
sacrifice. 1. Seeing, that Christ did not command us to sacrifice Christ. 2.
That the offering pretended to be offered in the Mass, which is Christ, is not
visible there, and is not perceived. 3. That it is not consecrated to God by
him that sacrifices, seeing that Christ cannot be consecrated by men. 4. That
in the Mass Christ is not destroyed, and suffers nothing in it, neither in
effect nor in show. 5. That God has not instituted in his Church, sacrificers
of his Sons body. 6. And that the Mass cannot be in effect a propitiatory
sacrifice, since it is not the death of Christ which is the only price of our
redemption. All this, which is the principal point of the difference, the
Cardinal touches not at all, and labors only to show in what sense the
Fathers have called the Eucharist a sacrifice; Which is an unseless dispute.
For although all the Fathers with one consent should say, that the Eucharist is
truly and properly a sacrifice, it would not follow that Christ was really
sacrificed in it as a propitiatory sacrifice. Besides, we must always begin
with the divine institution, without which all authority falls, and all our
discourses come to nothing. But of that divine institution, the Cardinal speaks
not one word. Wherefore it is necessary for us to begin there.

CHAP. 2. That the Sacrifice of the Mass was not instituted by Christ. And of
the fruit and efficacy of the sacrifice of the Mass.
THe Council of Trent in the XXII. Session, in the II. Canon, to prove that the
Eucharist is the true sacrifice of Christ's body, alleges for all the proof
these words of Christ, Do this in remembrance of me; and denounces an anathema
to all that will deny, that by these words Christ has conferred the Order of
Priesthood, and commanded to sacrifice really the body of Christ. There cannot
be a more certain proof of an ill cause, then to be reduced to such proofs. Can
there be any interpretation of Gods Word more constrained or more extravagant
then this? Do this in remembrance of me; that is, I institute you to be Priests
to sacrifice my body, to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the
dead. But 1 Cor. 11.26.
the Apostle Paul expounds these words otherwise; For after these words, Do
this in remembrance of me, he adds, As often as ye eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye do show the Lords death. So then, Doing this in remembrance of
Christ, is eating the bread and drinking the cup of the Lords Supper, to
announce and celebrate the memory of his death.

It is very considerable, that Saint Matthew and Saint Mark Matthew. 26.26. Mark
14.22.
relating the words of the institution of this Sacrament, have left out these
words, Do this, which they had not done, had they believed that they are the
formal words whereby this pretended Sacrifice is institued.

Wherefore also, in the whole institution and action of Christ, no mention is
made of sacrificing the Lords body, no elevation of the Host, no offering unto
God, no prayer to God that he accept the offering.

Neither does the Christian Faith acknowledge any other sacrifice of
redemption, but the death of the Redeemer, nor any other price for the
redemption of souls. Now in the Mass Christ dies not. And our very Adversaries
Bellar. lib. 2. de Missa, c. 4. sect. Secundo. Christus nunc nec mereri, nec
satisfacere potest.
acknowledge that Christ is no more in the condition of meriting, or
satisfying, but only of impetrating. It is not then a sacrifice pro redemptione
animarum, for the redemption of souls, as it is said in the Canon of the Mass.
It is not convenient that a Sacrifice where Christ suffers nothing, be the
price of our redemption. For since his sufferings are the payment for our sins,
an action where he suffers nothing cannot be that payment.

If they say that the Mass is the sacrifice of Christ, and that he is really
sacrificed in it for our redemption, because the sacrifice of his death is
thereby applied to us, and the memory of his death announced: By the same
reason Baptism and the preaching of the Gospel, are sacrifices properly so
called, and propitiatory sacrifices, because in them Christ's death is applied
to us, and brought to our remembrance. To apply the sacrifice of Christ to us,
must we sacrifice him again? By the same reason he should be put to death
again, to apply his death to us.

The Apostle to the Hebrews is very express upon this question. He spends most
part of his Epistle about the Priesthood, and the Sacrifice of the Christian
Church. Yet in the whole Epistle, he speaks not one word of the Eucharist or
the Lords Supper, in which only they will have the sacrifice of the Christian
Church to consist. Must we say then, that the Apostle has done as he that
would write a Book of the Art of Navigation, without speaking of Ships; or of
the Art of Reigning, without speaking of King or Prince? Certainly the Apostle
brings us straight to the death of Christ, and acknowledges no other, but that
only Sacrifice. In chap. 10. v. 14. he says, that Christ by one offering has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. And v. 10. We are sanctified
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Here is then one
only oblation, and that for ever. And in chap. 9. v. 26. having said that
Christ has not often suffered from the foundation of the world; he adds, v.
27, 28. As it is appointed unto men once to dye, but after this the judgment.
So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look
for him, shall he appear the second time, etc. Thereby he excludes all
reiteration. For a man's death is not at all reiterated.

Neither indeed does Scripture speak of any unbloody sacrifice of Christ; and
that very text which our Adversaries bring for the unbloody sacrifice, speaks
of shedding of blood. For they make use of these words, Mat. 26.28. This is my
blood of the New Testament which is shed for many. Hardly can a text speaking
of bloodshed, serve to establish a sacrifice where no blood is shed.

And since the Apostle, Heb. 9.22. says that without shedding of blood there
is no remission; how can the Mass, where the blood of Christ is not shed,
really be a sacrifice for the remission of sins? Or how shall we say that the
blood of Christ is really shed in the Sacrament, seeing it does not come out of
his veins? Or how can shedding of blood be without any motion?

The same Apostle, Heb. 10.17, 18. having said, that God has promised to
remember our sins no more; adds, Now where the remission of these is, there
is no more offering for sin. Since then by the death of Christ, and by faith in
him, we have remission of our sins, what need we more to make oblations and
sacrifices for sins?

In chap. 7. v. 27. he compares the Priests of the Law with Christ, in that
they offered every day sacrifices for sins: But this (says he) he did once,
(...), once only, when he offered up himself. This word (...), cannot be
otherwise translated, but by semel, or once only, both because it is the
signification of the word, and because by this word the Apostle opposes Christ
to the Priests of the Law, who offered sacrifices often. Thus Heb. 9.27. he
says, that it is appointed unto men (...), semel mori, once to dye. That man
should want common sense, that should find fault with translating that text in
this manner, It is appointed unto men to die once only: No more should any find
fault with us for translating the following verse, (...), Christus semel
oblatus, Christ being offered once only. And so Heb. 10.10. Through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all; for there also the word
(...) is found. And that sacrifice once made, he opposes to the reiteration of
the sacrifices of the Law, which were done every day.

In every sacrifice, properly so called, there must be an offering consecrated.
How then can the Mass be properly called a sacrifice, seeing that there is
nothing consecrated in it? Not the bread, not the wine, for it is pretended
that they are no more bread and wine after the consecration. Not the accidents,
for colors and lines are not an offering; Not the body of Christ, for it
cannot be consecrated by men. Here is then a sacrifice, where nothing is
consecrated.

As for the virtue of that sacrifice of propitiation, or redemption, when our
Adversaries go about to declare it, they bring it to nothing. In the Canon of
the Mass, the Priest says, that he offers Sacrificium laudis pro redemptione
animarum.
a sacrifice of praises for the redemption of souls. Truly praises are no
payments. A debtor by exalting his creditors, with praises to the third Heaven,
shall never pay his debts.

Bellar. lib 2. de Missa, cap. 4. sect. Secundo. Christus nunc nec mereri, nec
satisfacere potest, sed tantum impetrare. Igitur impetratio propria est hujus
sacrificii vis and obedientia. Et paulo post. Sacrificium ad impetrationem
tendit, and simile est orationi.
Here Bellarmine is for us, for he insisteth much to prove, that the sacrifice
of the Mass is only impetratory, such as are prayers, but cannot be
satisfactory nor expiatory; because Christ is no more in a condition to
satisfy or merit. It was never heard that an impetration by prayers without
satisfaction, or without payment, was taken for redemption.

There was no need to sacrifice Christ again, to apply to us the sacrifice of
his death, since the Eucharist, as it is a Sacrament applies his death. The
bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ, 1 Cor.
10.16.

Wherefore the Roman Church diminishes to her power, the efficacy of that
Sacrament, teaching that the sacrifice of the Mass Vide Bellarm. lib. 4. de
Sacram. Euchar. cap. 17, 18.
serves only to remit the temporal pain of sins already pardoned. Which
appears, in that no man receives the Easter Communion in the Roman Church,
but after the absolution by the Priest. Also in that Masses are sung for the
souls in Purgatory, of whom the sins are pardoned, and the fault wholly blotted
out, and which are liable only to the temporal pain. Cap. de Sacram. altaris.
Eucharistia tantum abstergit minora peccata.
The Catechism of the Council of Trent says, that the Sacrament of the
Eucharist blotteth out small sins only; it has then no virtue against great
sins.

Yet it would be some comfort, if a Mass did impetrate the remission of the
whole temporal pain: But it has not that virtue. For ten thousand Masses are
sung to fetch one soul out of Purgatory. Especially if it be the soul of one
that has founded Obits and Anniversaries, which are not said for those that
have given nothing.

It is not without reason, that a doubt is made of the virtue and efficacy of
Masses. For many pay Masses for their cure, or for the cure of their sick
friends, who die nothing the less. Whereas many are cured, for whom no Masses
were sung. Which makes it doubtful, whether Masses sung for the dead, bring
them any ease.

Our Adversaries increase that doubt, by saying that in the Cross, Christ's
natural being was destroyed; but in the Mass his Sacramental being only is
destroyed, that is, his significative or representative being, as if one gave
the picture of money only, which is a payment somewhat light; for indeed that
Sacramental being is not the price of our redemption.

They that are contemptuously called Heretics, are so unfortunate, that
whereas Masses are said for Pagans and Infidels, and for sick horses and sheep,
none are said for them. For beasts, Masses are said for money: For Infidels,
some are sung upon civil considerations: But for Heretics none are said. And
there is reason for it; for not only they will spend no money for Masses, but
they would give money that no more Masses were sung.

CHAP. 3. Examination of the Cardinals reasons, to prove that the Fathers call
the Eucharist a Sacrifice in a proper, not in a Metaphorical sense.
THis question, which the Cardinal is so busy about, is altogether useless.
For though we had granted that all the Fathers hold the Eucharist to be a true
sacrifice, it would not follow that Christ is really sacrificed in it. Besides,
all the old and late Doctors are not agreed about the definition of a
sacrifice, which M. du Perron should have set down in the beginning, to build
his proofs upon them, for without that, his proofs are to no end.

Austin, in the tenth Book of the City of God, chap. 5. calls Alms or Mercy a
true sacrifice. And in the sixth chapter he defines a sacrifice, saying that
Verum sacrisicium est omne opus, quod agitur, ut sancta societate inhaereamus
Deo.
every action which is done to adhere unto God, is a true sacrifice. According
to that definition, we must not wonder that the Eucharist is called a true
sacrifice. Yet let us see what reasons the Cardinal brings.

He affirms that the Fathers say, and that his Majesty of Great Britain
acknowledges, that the Eucharist is the only sacrifice of Christians, and the
only one that has succeeded all the sacrifices of the ancient Law. Had he
brought testimonies of the Fathers that speak so, the Reader might have seen
that the Fathers speak of the sacrifice of Christ's death, which indeed has
succeeded the sacrifices of Aaron; and to this most part of the Epistle to the
Hebrews is employed. For the end of the Apostle, is to show that Christ's
Priesthood has succeeded Aarons Priesthood: Which Priesthood of Christ, he
makes to consist in his death only. For in the whole Epistle, he speaks not at
all of the Eucharist. Or if any Father says, that the Lords Supper succeeds
alone the sacrifices of the Law, he says that with respect to Christ's death,
which is represented in the holy Communion, in which we offer unto God the
death of his Son, beseeching him to accept it for our Redemption. As if he
said, that the only thing that we can offer unto God, is Christ's death, which
is celebrated in the Lords Supper.

Thus the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.7. says, that Christ our Passover is sacrificed
for us, giving to Christ's death the name of the Sacrament that represents it,
by reason of the resemblance, and the relation that is betwixt both, and
together showing that Christ's death is the true sacrifice, which has succeeded
the Passover of the Law.

Austin in the Book of the 83. Questions, in the 61. Question speaks thus, Se
ipsum obtulit in holocaustum pro peccatis nostris, and ejus sacrificii
similitudinem celebrandam in suae passionis memoriam commendavit.
Christ has offered himself a burnt-offering for our sins, and has instituted
that the representation of that sacrifice be celebrated in memory of his
passion. And in the same place, Holocausti ejus imaginem ad memoriam suae
passionis in Ecclesia celebrandam decrevit.
He has instituted that the image of this sacrifice be celebrated in the
Church, in memory of his passion.

The Cardinal adds, Besides, that which the same Fathers teach us, that it
cannot be offered, but by those that have the character of Priesthood, shows
manifestly that they speak of the sacrifice taken in the proper and precise
signification. The absurdity of that reason appears, by bringing it into a
Syllogisticall form. This is his argument, That which cannot be done but by
them that have the character of Priesthood, is a true and proper sacrifice. Now
the Eucharist, etc. That proposition is false. For the preaching of the Gospel
likewise, cannot be done but by those that have that character. By the same
reason, the Sacrament of Penitence of the Roman Church, and Confirmation, shall
be sacrifices properly so called, since they cannot be conferred but by Priests
and Bishops. The Cardinal should have remembered also, that in the Roman Church
the immolation of the Paschal Lamb by the several families of Israel, is held
to have been a true sacrifice, which yet was done by the heads of Families,
before the tribe of Levi was chosen by God to exercise the Priesthood. And
since that choice, hardly was there a Levite for every Family where the Paschal
Lamb was eaten. When Christ celebrated the Passover with his Disciples, there
was none. The great defect of that argument is, that it was made to prove that
the Eucharist is a true sacrifice, not to prove that Christ is really
sacrificed in it, which is the point in question.

He goes about to prove the same thing, because the Fathers use the word
Altar, presupposing that no other sacrifices can be done upon an Altar, but
such as are properly so called. Indeed, that which the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. calls
the Table of the Lord, is sometimes called an Altar by the ancient Fathers,
although more frequently they call it a Table. But the Fathers to draw the Jews
and the Pagans, make use of terms usual among them, calling the Table of the
Lord an Altar, in the same manner that the Deacons are called Levites, and the
offerings which the people set upon the table victims and sacrifices. In
effect, the Cardinals maxim is false, that all that is done upon an Altar, is
truly and properly a sacrifice. For as the immolation of the Paschal Lamb was
not done upon an Altar, so on the other side, offerings of fruits and perfumes,
which the holy Scripture calls not sacrifices, were laid upon the Altar.

To the same end he adds, Since the Fathers held that the prophecies of the
abolition of Judaical sacrifices, and of the substitution of a new sacrifice
were accomplished in the oblation of the Eucharist; when they spoke of a
sacrifice, they meant the proper, not the Metaphorical sacrifice.

I answer, that Christ saying in his death, All is fulfilled, taught us that in
his death was the fulfilling of prophesies and figures. And the Apostle to the
Hebrews finds in the death of Christ the fulfilling of the sacrifices of the
Law, not in the Lords Supper, of which he makes not any mention. Saint John
agrees to this, chap. 19. ver. 36. where he gives a reason why the bones of
Christ were left unbroken on the Cross, namely, because it was forbidden to
break the bones of the Paschal Lamb. He will have us then to find in the death
of Christ, the fulfilling of the Paschal Lamb. Besides, the Cardinals maxim is
false, that the thing in which the fulfilling of the sacrifices is found, is a
true and proper sacrifice. By that reason, the fulfilling of prophesies should
be also a prophecy, and the fulfilling of legal washings and purifications,
should be also a real washing: Now every one knows that remission of sins
figured by these washings, cannot be called washing, but Metaphorically, and in
an Allegorical sense. If then some Fathers have said, that in the Eucharist we
have the fulfilling of Judaical figures, they say it because in the Eucharist
the death of Christ is represented, and offered unto God for our sins. It is
especially to be noted, that this argument tends to prove that the Eucharist is
a true sacrifice, not that Christ is sacrificed in it.

The reason which he adds is of no greater strength, Page 911.
That the Fathers expounding Daniels prophecy about the cessation of the
sacrifice of the Eucharist, show sufficiently, that by the sacrifice of the
Eucharist, they understand a true and proper sacrifice. But nothing hinders but
that Daniel speaks of the sacred actions of the Christian Church in figurative
terms, usual in the Old Testament. It is the style of the Prophets and
Apostles, to call our prayers perfumes, and our bodies temples, and our
thanksgivings the calves of our lips and sacrifices. But to look to Daniels
true meaning, he is prophesying of the cessation of the continual sacrifice
which was to happen under the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes. And if some of the
Ancients take Antiochus for a figure of Antichrist, they do not restrain the
abolition of the continual sacrifice, to the only abolition of the Eucharist,
but they understand thereby the cessation of the divine Service, of which the
Eucharist makes a great part: For it is ordinary to take a part for the whole.
He that says that Antichrist must abolish the Lords Supper, thereby
understands that he will abolish the whole outward exercise of Christian
Religion, which never was without this holy Sacrament.

Of the same stuff is the reason which he adds, that the Fathers distinguish
the inward sacrifices, that is, the mental commemoration, from the outward
sacrifice of the Church. He presupposes that all that is distinct or different
from the mental sacrifice, and every outward sacrifice, is a true and proper
sacrifice. By this reason, the oral prayer and alms which Scripture calls a
sacrifice, must be a true and proper sacrifice. For they are external, and
different from the internal sacrifices, consisting in the thought. After all,
What strength has this to prove that Christ is sacrificed in the Eucharist?

He goes on, and says that the Fathers distinguish the sacrifice of
Melchisedeck from that of Aaron, by the institution of the Eucharist; and
thence he infers, that the Fathers believed that the Eucharist is truly and
properly a sacrifice. This is a reason without reason. For two Priests may
differ in actions, which are improperly called sacrifices. But the Fathers make
not the difference between Melchisedeck and Aaron to consist in that only,
seeing that the Apostle to the Hebrews gives us so many other differences
between them, in the seventh chapter, without speaking one word of the
Eucharist. As in that Melchisedeck is represented as a Priest for ever, having
neither beginning of days nor end of life, being both King and Priest, taking
tithes from Abraham as greater then he, and by consequent then Levi, and giving
to Abraham his blessing.

He adds that the Fathers by these words, We offer unto thee, meant real
offerings. That Is true. But all real offerings are not sacrifices properly so
called, nor propitiatory sacrifices, less yet sacrifices of Christ's body. The
offerings which the Christian people used to offer upon the holy Table were
real oblations, but our Adversaries hold them not to have been properly
sacrifices, nor effectual for propitiation. Thus the Apostle says, Heb. 13.15.
Let us offer unto God sacrifices of praises* Where he speaks of real offerings
which are improperly called sacrifices.

The reason that follows is such another: He proves that the Fathers
acknowledge the Eucharist for a true and proper sacrifice, because they ascribe
to it the service of latria. Never was a man more unfortunate in argumenting,
then this Prelate. He presupposes, that all wherein the service of latria
consists, is a true and proper sacrifice. By that reckoning, the Lords Prayer
is a true and proper sacrifice: For it is part of the Sovereign service which
we present unto God. Can one build a more absurd reasoning then this? The Lords
Supper belongs to the Sovereign service which we yield unto God, Ergo, it is a
true Sacrifice? To prop that impertinent argument, Chap. 1.
he employeth the rest of his chapter. Thus all the Cardinals reasons fall with
blowing upon: And all the texts of the Fathers, which he alleges are found
useless, since he draws false consequences from them, grounded upon false
maxims.

CHAP. 4. That the Fathers call the Lords Supper a Sacrifice, because it is the
commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ's death.
THe Fathers following the style of Scripture, use to give unto signs the name
of the thing signified.

The Lords Supper then being a sign and a Sacrament of Christ's sacrifice
offered to God on the Cross, may with good reason be called Christ's sacrifice,
and the sacrifice of our price and redemption, and the sacrifice of his death
and passion: This is fully represented by Austin, in the 23. Epistle to
Bonifacius, Many times we speak thus, when Easter draws near, To morrow or
the next day is the Lords passion, although it happened so many years ago, and
though that passion happened but once. Thus we say upon the Lords day, This day
the Lord is risen again, although so many years are past since his
resurrection. Why is nobody so silly as to tax us of untruth when we speak so?
but because this day is called the same day, which is not the same, but is like
it by revolution of times? Was not Christ once sacrificed in himself? And yet
he is sacrificed before the people in a sacred sign, not only upon every
solemnity of Easter, but also every day; And yet that man lies not who being
asked answers that Christ is sacrificed. For had not the Sacraments some
resemblance with the things of which they are Sacraments, they should not be
Sacraments. But because of that resemblance many times they take the name of
the things themselves. In this remarkable place of Austin three things
especially are to be observed. 1. That Christ at Easter, and in the ordinary
celebration of the Eucharist did not sacrifice himself but in a sacrament or
sacred sign. 2. That Christians say that in the Eucharist, Christ is
Sacrificed, in the same manner as we say upon the Lords day, this day is
Christ's resurrection; Not that Christ in effect rises again upon every Lords
day, but because the memory of his resurrection is celebrated every Lords day.
3. That when we say that Christ is sacrificed in the Eucharist, we give unto
the sign the name of the thing signified. The same he says in the tenth book
of the City of God, chapter 5. Aug. de Civit. l. 10. c. 5. Sacrificium visibile
invisibilis sacrificii sacramentum, id est, sacrum signum est. Et paulo post,
Illud quod ab hominibus appellatur sacrificium, signum est very sacrificii.
The visible sacrifice is a Sacrament, that is, a sacred sign of the true
sacrifice; And a little after. That which men call sacrifice is a sign of the
true sacrifice. He could not say more expressly that the Eucharist is no true
sacrifice.

The other Fathers speak the same. Justin Martyr in his Dialogue against
Tryphon, (...).
The offering of meal for those whom they purged from the leprosy, was a
figure of the bread of the Eucharist, which our Lord Jesus Christ commanded us
to do in remembrance of his passion.

The sixth book of the Apostolic Constitutions of Clement, chapter 3, speaks thus,
Pro sacrificio cruento rationale and incruentum ac mysticum sacrificium
instituit, quod in mortem Domini per symbola corporis and sanguinis sui
celebratur.
The Lord instead of a bloody sacrifice has instituted a reasonable, unbloody,
and mystical sacrifice, which is celebrated in consideration of the Lords
death, by the signs of his body and blood.

The ancient service of the Church of Milan had these words, Fac nobis hanc
oblationem ascriptam rationabilem acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis and
sanguinis Domini. As Ambrose says in the fourth book of Sacraments chapter 5. Let
this offering be put to our account reasonable and acceptable, which is the
figure of the body and blood of the Lord.

Gregory Nazianzen in the Oration upon his return from the country complaining
of the hard dealing, which he had from those of whom he expected support,
(...), etc. (...).
Shall they bar me (says he) from the altars? [so he calls the table of the
Lords supper] But I know an altar of which the things that are now seen are
figures, etc. the whole is the work of the understanding, and the ascent to it
is by contemplation. To this altar I will approach, upon this I will sacrifice
an acceptable sacrifice and offering, and whole burnt offerings, so much better
then those that are now offered, as the truth is better then the shadow. Had
this Father believed that the body of Christ was really sacrificed upon the
Altar, he would never have said that his prayers and meditations are better
then that which is offered upon the Altar in the Church. He would never have
called the Eucharist a shadow. He had not been so bold as to deny that we have
the truth in that holy Sacrament.

Procopius Gazaeus upon Genesis 49. says, that Christ has given to his Disciples
the image or figure, and type of his body receiving no more the bloody
sacrifies of the law.

Ambrose in the first book of Offices, chapter 48. compares the ceremonies of the
Law, and the Sacrments of the New Testament, with the truth which is in Christ
Jesus. Hic umbra, hic imago est, illic veritas: Umbra in Lege, imago in
Evangelio, veritas in coelestibus, etc. Quarum recipiens passionem, and offert
se ipse quasi sacerdos ut peccata nostra dimittat; hic in imagine, ibi in
veritate, ibi apud Patrem pro nobis intervenit.
Here (says he) is the shadow and image, there the truth is in heavenly
places. And a little after, Here Christ is offered in image, but there in truth.

Eusebius in chapter 3. of the first book of Evangelical Demonstration. (...).
We celebrate with just reason every day the memory of his body and blood. And
a little after, (...).
The Lord having offered a sacrifice, and an excellent victim to his Father for
the salvation of us all, has commanded us to offer continually the
commemoration thereof instead of a sacrifice. (...).
And in the same place, We have received the memorial of that sacrifice to
celebrate it in his table by the signs of his body and of his saving blood,
according to the institution of the new Testament.

In the chapter before, we brought testimonies of Austin in the book of the
eighty three Questions saying twice in the seventy ninth Question, That the
holy Communion is the image and resemblance of the sacrifice of Christ's death.
And in chapter 5. of the tenth book of the City of God, Illud quod ab hominibus
appellatur sacrificium, signum est very sacrificii, That which men call a
sacrifice, is the sign of a true sacrifice. He could not speak more plainly.
Note that he says that men call it a sacrifice, not that God calls it so.

It must not be found strange, that the Fathers call the Lords Supper the
sacrifice of Christ, seeing that they say also that the sacrifice of the
Eucharist is Christ's death.

Cyprian in the sixty third Epistle, Because in all sacrifices we make mention
of his passion (for the Lords passion is the sacrifice which we offer) we must
not do any other thing but what he did himself. Upon which place Pamelius in
his Notes freely acknowledges, that Simile est, quod Chrysostomus,
Theoplylactus and Oecumenius verba illa, quod pro vobis frangitur, ita
interpretantur, ut in sacrificio Missae Christum pati and frangi and immutari
dicant.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius interpret so these words, which is
broken for you, that they say that in the sacrifice of the Mass Christ
suffers, and is broken and changed. Wherein he says true, but that this word
Mass is not found in these Fathers.

The Lords Supper then is in the same manner the sacrifice of Christ, as it is
the death of Christ. Now the Lords Supper is not really the death of Christ;
Then it is not really the sacrifice of Christ, Quia passionis ejus mentionem in
sacrificiis omnibus facimus (passio est enim Domini sacrificium quod offerimus)
nihil aliud quam quod ille fecit facere debemus.
but by commemoration. So Chrysostom speaks, (...).
While that death is a doing, that dread sacrifice, those unspeakable
mysteries. This Father is he that speaks in the most lofty terms of this
sacrifice among all the ancient writers, and says often, that Christ is
sacrificed in the mysteries. In his twenty fourth Sermon upon 1 Cor. 10. he
speaks thus, (...).
When this sacrifice is brought forth, Christ sacrificed, the Lordly sheep;
When thou hear these words, Let us pray all in common; When thou see the
double curtains drawn, think that heaven is opening from above, and Angels are
descending. But there is no better interpreter of Chrysostom then Chrysostom.
So be speaks in the seventeenth Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews. (...),
etc.
What then? Do we not not offer every day? We offer indeed, but making a
memorial of his death. And that sacrifice is one, not many. How is that
sacrifice one and not many? because that sacrifice was offered once. He was
carried into the holiest of holies (that is, into heaven) This is a figure of
that sacrifice. And in the same place, (...).
This is done in memory of that which was done then; For he says, Do this in
remembrance of me. We do not another sacrifice, as the High Priest [of the Law]
but we do always the same; Yea rather we celebrate the remembrance of the same
sacrifice. These words Yea rather are very express, and grieve our adversaries
very much.

Austin calls also very often the Lords supper a sacrifice. But he expounds
himself in the twentieth book against Faustus the Manichean, chapter 21. in these
words, Hujus sacrificii caro and sanguis ante adventum Christi per victimarum
similitudinem promittebatur; In passione Christi per ipsam veritatem
reddebatur; Post ascensum Christi per Sacramentum memoriae celebratur.
Of this sacrifice the flesh and blood before Christ's coming was promised by
the resemblance of sacrifices. In Christ's passion it was exhibited in truth.
After Christ's Ascension it is celebrated by the Sacrament of commemoration.
Could he say more plainly that the body of Christ is not exhibited, not
sacrificed in truth in the Sacrament, then by saying that in his death it was
exhibited in truth, but in the Sacrament it is exhibited by commemoration? This
so express testimony is depraved and abused by Cardinal du Perron with an
incredible licentiousness; for he sows up a tail to it by way of
interpretation. Austin says. The flesh and blood of this sacrifice is promised
before the coming of Christ by the victims, that is, Page 916.
(if we must believe the Cardinal) this flesh and blood is promised in a
distinst and separate being. But Austin speaks not there at all of that
separation, but of the figure and resemblance opposed to the truth. Of this
Sacrifice (says he) the flesh and blood was promised before Christ's coming by
the resemblance of sacrifices, but in the passion it is exhibited in truth. But
to what end is this shift, since Austin teaches us in this place, that in the
Sacrament the body of the Lord is not exhibited in truth but by commemoration?
To that the Cardinal gives no answer.

The same Austin in chapter 17. of the seventeenth book against Faustus Manichean,
Manducare pan^m in Novo Testamento est sacrificium Christianorum.
To eat bread, in the New Testament is the sacrifice of Christians. So much
indeed is not sacrificing Christ really. And in another place, Lib. 83. q. 61.
Se ipsum obtulit in holocaustum pro peccatis nostris, and ejus sacrificii
similitudinem celebrandam in suae passionis memoriam commendavit.
Christ offered up himself in sacrifice for our sins, and has instituted that
the resemblance of that sacrifice be celebrated in memory of his passion.

The book of Faith to Petrus Diaconus, which is rather of Fulgentius then
Austin, speaks thus in chapter 19. Sacrificium panis and vini in fide and charitate
Sancta Ecclesia Catholica per universum orbem terrae offerre non cessat. In
illis enim carnalibus victimis figuratio fu^t carnis Christi quam pro peccatis
nostris ipse sine peccato fuerat oblaturus and sanguinis quem effusurus erat in
remissionem peccatorum. In isto autem Sacrificio gratiarum actio atque
commemoratio est carnis Christi quam pro nobis obtulit, etc.
The universal Church over all the world cease not to offer a Sacrifice of
bread and wine, in faith and charity. For in these carnal victims [of the old
Testament] there was a representation of the flesh of Christ, which himself
being free from sin was to offer for our sins, and of the blood which he was to
shed for the remission of sins. But in this sacrifice [of the Eucharist] there
is a thanksgiving and a commemoration of the flesh of Christ which be offered
for us, and of the blood which the same God has shed for us. It is observable
that he says that in the Eucharist there is a sacrifice of bread and wine, and
that, in commemoration of the flesh of Christ. Then he did not believe that the
flesh of Christ was really sacrificed in it.

In the tenth book against Faustus chapter 18. Christiani peracti ejusdem
sacrificii memoriam celebrant, etc.
Christians celebrate the memory of this same Sacrifice already done, by the
holy oblation and participation of the body and blood of Christ.

The words of the Canon Hoc est, are most express in the second Distinction of
the Consecration, which Canon is ascribed to Prosper by Alger and Gratian,
Vocatur ipsa immolatio carnis quae sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio,
mors, crucifixio, non rei veritare sed significante mysterio.
The immolation of the flesh which is done by the hands of the Priest is called
the passion, death and crucifying, not in truth but by a significant mystery.
In the same manner as the Sacrament of faith by which we understand Baptism, is
faith. Can we find it strange that the Lords Supper is called by the Ancients
the Sacrifice of Christ, seeing that they call it also the death and Passion of
Christ? The Grammarian Suidas, upon the word Ecclesia speaks thus, (...).
The Church offers up the signs of the body of Christ, sanctifying the whole
lump by the first fruits. And the Mass calls that which the Priest offers,
gifts and presents which God blesses and sanctifies and creates every day.
Which are not terms convenient to the body of Christ. Hence these expressions
which are found in some Councils and Penitential Canons alleged by Burchard
in the fifth book, Ex paenitentiali Theodori and Romano.
If any vomit the sacrifice, and it be eaten by the dogs, let him do a years
penance, Council. Aurelian. c. 5.
Again, Let every sacrifice grown moldy with age be burnt. Again, If one has
not well kept the sacrifice, and a mouse or some other creature has eaten it,
let him do forty days penance. Which words should be impious, if by the word
sacrifice the body of Christ were understood.

See Lombard the Father of the School of the Roman Church in the fourth of the
Sentences Did. 12. lit. G. where he shows by testimonies of Ambrose and
Austin, that the Eucharist is called the sacrifice of Christ, because it is the
commemoration of the sacrifice of the Cross, and brings no other reason for it.
The place of Ambrose which he alleges is this, In Christo semel oblato est
hostia ad salutem sempiternam potens. Quid ergo nos? nonne singulos dies
offerimus? sed ad recordationem mortis ejus, etc. Quod nos facimus, in
commemorationem fit ejus, quod factum est. 2. De Consecrat. Can. in Christo ex
Ambros. in Ep. ad Hebraeos.
We offer every day; and that is done in memory of his death. He is the same
victim, not many. How is it one, and not many? Because Christ was sacrificed
once only; But this sacrifice is done after the example of that, etc. That
which we do, is done in commemoration of that which was done.

Thom. 3. Part Summae q. 83. Art. 1. Dicendum, quod duplici ratione celebratio
hujus Sacramenti dicitur immolatio Christi. Primo quia sicut dicit Augustinus
ad Simplicium q. 3. Solent imagines earum rerum nominibus appellari, quarum
imagines sunt, sicut cum intuentes tabulam aut parietem pictum dicimus, ille
Cicero est, ille Salustius. Celebratio autem hujus sacramenti imago quaedam est
reprasentativa passionis Christi, quae vere est ejus immolatio, etc. Alio modo
quantum ad effectum passionis Christi, quia scilicet per hoc sacramentum
participes efficimur fructus Dominica passionis.
Thomas speaks the same language. The celebration of the Sacrament is called
the sacrifice or immolation of Christ for two reasons; First because, as Austin
says to Simplicius, Images are called by the name of the things of which they
are images, etc. Secondly, because by the Sacraments, we are made partakers of
the death of Christ. He brings no other reason for it. Himself in the
exposition of St. John. chapter 6. Lesson 6. Nihil est hoc sacramentum quam
applicatio Dominicae passionis ad nos.
This Sacrament is nothing else but the application which is made unto us of
the Lords passion.

What more? Cardinal du Perron himself in an Assembly which was held in the
Convent of the Dominicans of Paris made no difficulty to say, that the
Eucharist was a sacrifice of religion instituted to apply and commemorate the
sacrifice of the death of Christ, as himself acknowledges in chapter 6. Page 926.
At which many were offended, expecting that he would have said rather, that
the Eucharist was a sacrifice of redemption where Christ was really sacrifice
for our redemption; and they said that he kept that tenet still from his father
who was Minister of Gods word.

CHAP. 5. Examination of the Cardinals shifts.
THe Cardinal in chapter 2. acknowledges, that the Fathers call the holy Eucharist
a sacrifice of commemoration. But (says he) it was not as for the essence but
as for the end; Meaning that the Fathers understood not that commemoration was
of the essence of that sacrifice, but that they spoke so to express the end
thereof. This Prelat knew not that the end many times is of the essence of
things. Thus seeing is the end of the eye, and yet it is of the essence of it,
for it enters into the definition of the eye. And cutting is the end of a
knife, and yet that fitness to cut is of the essence of the knife, for it is
that which makes it to be a knife. This especially is found in the Sacraments.
For the end of Baptism is the washing of our sins, and yet that end is of the
essence of Baptism.

Yet let us receive that distinction, as absurd as it is. For if the end of an
action is not of the essence of the action, at least that end must be agreeable
with the essence and nature of the action. Now they give us here an end which
is imcompatible with the essence and nature of Christ's sacrifice. For to
sacrifice Christ, and to make a commemoration of his sacrifice, are things ill
agreeing together. Must we sacrifice Christ that we may celebrate the memory of
the sacrifice of his death? By the same reason to remember Christ's death, we
must put him to death again.

The same I say of the application. For to apply Christ's sacrifice to our
selves we need not sacrifice him, as to apply a payment to us, we need not to
pay the second time, and to apply a plaster to us, we need not have another
plaster, much less do we need another plaster of a contrary or different
nature. For that the sacrifice of the Mass and the sacrifice of the death of
Christ are different, yea disagreeing sacrifices, it appears, because the Mass
is not the death of Christ, and Christ suffers nothing in it, and pays
nothing in it for us. The death of Christ happened but once, for it is
sufficient to redeem us. But the Mass is celebrated every day, and Masses
without number are sung. Many of them go to the redeeming of a soul from
Purgatory. Then in the cross God visibly offered up himself; But in the Mass
they say, that he offers himself invisibly by the hands of the Priest under
the species of bread. M. du Perron acknowledges that difference in chapter 6. of
which the title is this, Of the difference of the Sacrifice of Redemption made
in the Cross, and of the Sacrifice of Religion made in the Eucharist. The one
then is a sacrifice of redemption, the other is not. But because herein he
contradicts the Mass, and the Council of Trent, which affirm that the Mass is
a sacrifice of redemption, he goes about to heal that wound by making two
sorts of redemption, the one original, the other applicative, and fancying a
sacrifice of original redemption which is the death of Christ, and a sacrifice
of applicative redemption which is the Mass, which he says to be a perpetual
salve of redemption, not original, but applicative, there was need of new words
for a new Divinity. I pass by the main fault, that he says this without the
word of God, which acknowledges but one redemption; for among these Prelates,
Scripture has lost her authority. But I think not that this doctrine can be
tolerated in the Roman Church, which holds that the Mass of it self, and of its
nature, not by application only, is a sacrifice of redemption. By the same
reason then both the Gospel and Baptism should be an applicative redemption,
since by them Christ's redemption is applied unto us. Besides who so will
attentively consider this expression of applicative redemption, shall find that
it is a Chimera, and a piece of gibbrish without common sense. For redemption
signifies buying again, or a ransom and payment to redeem a person. How
ridiculous then should that man be that would say, that to redeem a man, there
is need of two payments, the one original, the other applicative, as if the
application of payment were another payment? When the Prelat spoke thus, I
suppose he was not in earnest, or that the strength of truth had set him on the
rack, and extorted from him these dark and ridiculous words to hide himself in
obscurity. For these words necessarily imply that the Eucharist is not at all a
sacrifice of redemption, since by it redemption is applied to us. Neither
indeed is there any other redemption, but that which he calls original, even
the death of Christ, unless we will forge another Gospel. And when we have
turned these words every way, no other sense can be drawn out of them, but that
which he impugneth, the doctrine our Churches, that the Lords supper is a
sacrifice of thanksgiving, in which a commemoration is made of our redemption
by the sacrifice of Christ's death, and whereby the benefit of the same is
applied unto us. Which he makes evident by saying, Page 929.
that Christ in the Eucharist is not in a condition of passion and merit. This
is clearly to say, that the Eucharist is not a sacrifice of redemption. It was
not then without cause, that many that heard him speak so in the Assembly in
the Convent of the Dominicans, murmured, saying that this doctrine had still a
relish of the old leaven, and of the stock whence he was descended.

I pass by diverse faults into which the Cardinal falls by the way, as his
saying in page 929. that the sacrifices of the Law did not confer any grace ex
opere operato, from the work wrought, but only ex opere operantis, from the
work of the worker; that is, (as he adds) that of themselves they were of no
value, and of no price or virtue, but that their whole virtue depended upon the
disposition of the persons that were partakers of them. Certainly, since God
had instituted these sacrifices, we make no doubt but that God gave them a
salutary virtue, which proceeded not from the virtue of those that were
partakers of the sacrifices, but from Gods blessing. If that doctrine of the
Cardinal be true, we must say that the Sacraments of the Old Testament,
instituted by God, were of no value by their nature, but that they became good
and salutary by the virtue of men, not by Gods Institution.

But I cannot pass by a notorious falsification, which he commits in the
fifth chapter of the Treatise of the Sacrifice, page 925. where he alleges
the 29. Canon of the third Council of Carthage, in these words, If any
recommendation of the dead must be made in the afternoon, whether they be
Bishops or Clarks, or others, let it be done by prayers only; if it be found
that they that make it, be no more fasting, reserving to the morning only the
recommendations made by oblation. This last clause, reserving to the morning
only the recommendations made by oblation, is of the Cardinals addition, and is
not found in that 29. Canon.

CHAP. 6. Other reasons for which the Fathers called the Lords Supper a
Sacrifice.
BEsides the foresaid reason, Why the Lords Supper is called a Sacrifice,
namely, Because it is a sign and a commemoration of Christ's sacrifice; and
besides the reasons for which the prayers, the alms, the repentance, the
sufferings for Christ, and generally every good work is called in Scripture a
Sacrifice, and for which prayer is called Orig. contra Celsum, lib. 8. (...).
an unbloody sacrifice by the Fathers: there are particular reasons why the
Eucharist was so called by the Ancient. First because in the holy Communion we
offer unto God the sacrifice of Christ, beseeching him to accept the merit of
his death for our sins.

Also the holy Communion is a sacrifice of thanksgiving, which the Fathers have
showed enough, by calling it the Eucharist, and by consequent an Eucharistical
sacrifice, that is, a sacrifice of thanksgiving. The same is confirmed by the
Canon of the Mass, which calls the sacrifice, that the Priest offers,
sacrificium laudis, a sacrifice of praises.

Then the offerings Cypr. Ep. 9. lib. 1. and Sermon. de Eleemosyna. Theodoret.
Hist. lib. 3. cap. 12. and lib. 4. c. 19.
which Gods people brought in the very action of the Communion upon the holy
Table, to be employed for the Lords Supper, and for the Agapes, and to feed the
poor and the Clarks, being called sacrifices by the Ancients, that name past to
the whole action of the Communion. That expression remains in the Mass, in
which the bread and wine not consecrated, are called a sacrifice, and an
immaculate victim. For these are the words of the offertory, Suscipe hanc
immaculatam hostiam, quam ego indignus famulus tuus offero tibi Deo meo vivo
pro innumerabilibus peccatis, etc.
Receive this immaculate victim, which I thine unworthy servant offer unto thee
my living God for my numberless sins, etc. This is said before the
Consecration. Thus bread not consecrated, is offered for sins in the Mass.
Which Bellarmine acknowledges in the first Book of the Mass, chap. 27. saying,
It must not be denied, that the bread and the wine are in some manner offered
in the Mass. This appears first by the Liturgy. For when we say before the
Consecration, Receive Holy Father this immaculate victim: Certainly the Pronown
this, sensibly shows that which we hold at that time in our hands. And he
shows that Ireneus and other Fathers spoke so, and called the bread not
consecrated a sacrifice.

Also the desire of drawing the Aristoph. Acharnanensib loquens de impiis.
(...).
Pagans (who esteemed that no Religion could be without a sacrifice; and
upbraided the Christians that they had neither Altars nor sacrifices) made many
of the Ancients the more willing to call the holy Communion a sacrifice. This
reproach, put upon the Christians by the Pagans, is seen in the eighth Book of
Origin. in Cells. li. 8. (...).
Origin against Celsus, and in the Dialogue of Minut. Felix in Octavio. Cur
nullas aras habent Christiani, templa nulla, nota nulla simulachra?
Minutius Felix, and in Arnob. lib. 6. Consuestis nobis impietatis maximum
crimen affingere quod non altaria fabricamus, non aras. Et lib. 7. Quid ergo
sacrificia censetis nulla omnino facienda? Resp. Nulla.
Arnobius, as we showed in another place.

Had the Fathers believed, that they really sacrificed Christ, they would have
adored the Sacrament, which they never did: No more then the Apostles, who
remained sitting or leaning at the Table. They did indeed venerate the signs
and symbols, as Theodoret says in the second Dialogue. (...).
And they worshipped Christ in the Eucharist, but they worshipped not the
Eucharist. Wherefore they said, Sursum corda; Lift up your hearts on high; that
the people might lift up their hearts to Christ residing in heaven, and not
stay upon the Sacrament present to them, as if Christ had been enclosed within
it. They would have made an elevation of the host, whereas only they drew
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 10. (...). Et Hom. 3. in Epist. ad Ephesians.
curtains that were spread before the Table, when they would show to the people
the Sacrament set upon the Table. They would not have given to women the
Sacrament in their hand, and would not have suffered them to carry it to their
homes. They would not have burnt or given to children returning from the School
the remnant of the bread of the Eucharist; which were the ancient customs, as
we proved in another place, and will say more of it in the following
controversy.

But still the safest course, is to stick close to the Word of God, and to
follow the style of the Apostle, who calls this Sacrament the Lords Supper. For
from an impropriety in the language, the Church will pass insensibly to an
error in the Faith.

Eleventh Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. Of the Real Presence of CHRIST'S
Body IN THE SACRAMENT, AND Of Transubstantiation.
CHAP. 1. Of the first Institution of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
IN the Question of the real presence of the Sacrament, M. du Perron leaving
the holy Scripture, which can alone decide this difference, betakes himself
altogether to the Fathers, who call that which we receive in the holy Communion
the body of Christ. But since the Word of God is the only rule of our Faith, he
should at least have done that honor to the Word of God, to let it speak first.

We shall begin then with the Institution of this holy Sacrament, such as
Christ made it among his Apostles; To which if all would keep themselves,
speaking as Christ spoke, and doing as he did, this controversy would be soon
ended; And a quarrel about which so much blood was spilt, would be changed into
concord and a kind reconciliation.

In that institution we find, that Christ sitting at Supper with his face
toward his Disciples, speaking to them in a known tongue, took bread, and
having blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying that it was
his body broken for them, commanding them to do this in remembrance of him. In
all that we see, that Christ offered nothing unto God, that he spoke not of
sacrifice, that he made no elevation, that there was no adoration of the Host,
that all did communicate in the two kinds, Christ saying, Take eat, drink ye
all of this; that there was no bone of any Saint or relick hidden under the
Table.

With that institution compare the Mass, in which the Priest standing before an
Altar, with his back turned to the people, speaking in an unknown tongue, takes
a round wafer, and speaks to it with a low voice, and by a whisper pretends
to transubstantiate it into flesh, and to offer the body of Christ as a
propitiatory sacrifice for the redemption of souls, and makes an elevation of
that Host, and sets it forth to be worshipped, and depriveth the people of the
cup, and very often eats alone, and asks salvation of God by the merits of
the Saints, whose bones are hidden under the Altar, and sings Masses for the
honor of the Saints, as the Mass of Saint Rock, or Saint Marcel, and makes a
sacrifice of propitiation, not only for living men, but for the dead, and to
make the corn thrive, and to heal beasts. In a word, the change from the
institution is prodigious; Nothing of the Lords Supper can be known in it, and
the whole action seems to be made purposely to correct Christ, and overthrow
his institution.

Then, that we may keep the right order, before we go further, we will set down
the whole institution of that holy Sacrament made by Christ, for from it the
fundamental maxims must be drawn, which give light to this matter. It is labor
in vain, to set out with great noise what men have said, if we be ignorant of
that Christ has commanded.

Our Adversaries continually allege these words of the institution of this
Sacrament, This is my body. Which words thus clipped and taken alone, might
trouble weak consciences. But the whole text gives a great light to the matter.

The Gospel relates, Luke 22.19. (...).
that Christ took bread, and gave thanks and brake it, and gave unto his
Disciples, saying, This is my body which is given for you, this do in
remembrance of me. Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the
New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you, Matthew. 26.27.
Saint Matthew adds, that Christ giving the cup, said, Drink ye all of it; and
that having given the cup to his Disciples, he told them, I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new with
you in my Fathers Kingdom. Saint Paul relates the same institution, in the
eleventh chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. His words are in ver.
24. This is my body which is broken for you; and in verse. 25, 26. This cup is
the New Testament in my blood, this do ye as often as you drink it in remembrance
of me. Then he adds, For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup,
ye do show the Lords death till he come.

To this institution we must always return: And all that men have invented
without or against this institution, cannot have the force of Law. Wherefore it
is necessary before all things, to examine the Doctrine of the Roman Church by
that rule. But before we go further, we must observe that the Roman Bible has
falsified the words of this institution: And that whereas Saint Paul says,
This is my body (...).
which is broken for you; there is in the Vulgar version, This is my body which
shall be delivered for you; putting tradetur for frangitur. And whereas Saint
Luke says, (...).
which is shed for you; the same version says, which shall be shed for you;
fundetur for funditur. Which depravations hinder the understanding to discern,
that Christ speaks of a Sacramental effusion and fraction, and of a body which
is broken in the Eucharist; thereby stopping a window, whence we fetch much
light, as we shall see hereafter.

CHAP. 2. That the Doctrine of the Real presence, and of Transubstantiation, is
repugnant to Christ's Institution. The Cardinals reasons are examined.
THe institution of this Sacrament affords us two sorts of proofs, both clear
and strong: Some of them drawn from Christ's words, some from the circumstances
of the action.

In the words of the Institution we find, 1. That Christ took and broke bread.
2. That he gave bread to his Disciples. 3. That this bread which he gave to his
Disciples, was his body. 4. That this bread is broken in the Eucharist. 5. That
his blood was shed in the same. 6. That Christ gave and broke bread, to be a
remembrance or commemoration of himself. 7. That the thing which is in the cup,
is the Testament or Covenant of Christ. 8. That the said Covenant is in the
blood of Christ. 9. That in the cup of the Sacrament, there was the fruit of
the Vine. 10. That Saint Paul adds, that it is bread which we eat in the
Lords Supper, and that bread distinct from the cup. As many words, so many
thunderbolts to overthrow Transubstantiation.

First proof.
First then, the Evangelists witness that Christ brake bread; But the Roman
Church says, That the Priest breaks no bread. For he breaks the Host, after
the words which they call consecrating words, after which they hold that the
Host is no more bread. And to persuade the people that it is the body of Christ
which the Priest breaks, and not bread; the Roman Church has put the fraction
of the Host after the pronouncing of the words, Hoc est corpus meum, etc.
Whereas Christ broke the bread before he said, This is my body. It was then
bread when Christ broke; According to that which Saint Luke says, Acts 20.7.
The Disciples came together to break bread. And Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 10.16. The
bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? Wherefore
when we ask our Adversaries what it is that the Priest breaks, when he breaks
the consecrated Host? they find themselves shrewdly puzzled, and driven into
brakes whence they cannot get out; neither do they understand themselves. For
what is it that the Priest breaks? Is it bread? But they say that it is no more
bread, when the Priest breaks the Host. Or does he break the body of Christ?
But themselves say that it cannot be broken, and that it remains whole in every
piece of the Host. Are then the accidents broken? But it is going against
common sense, to go about to break colors and savours, and a length of bread
without bread. And it is giving the lie to Scripture, which says expressly,
that it is bread which we break and eat in the Lords Supper. Besides the Roman
Church pretends to offer and sacrifice unto God, that which is broken in the
Mass, now one cannot sacrifice unto God, savours, and colors, and lines. And
these words, breaking the Host, cannot signify the breaking of those
accidents: For those accidents are not the Host or Victim for our sins.
Wherefore finding no way to get out, they never answer to the purpose, and
being asked what it is that is broken in the Mass? they answer that the body of
Christ is broken under the species or accidents. But we did not ask under what
the body of Christ is broken in the Mass, but only whether it be broken? And
truly these words, the body of Christ is broken under the accidents, signify
nothing else, but that the body of Christ is not broken in effect, but that the
accidents are broken.

Second proof.
The second proof drawn from the words of the Institution, is in these words,
that Christ took bread and gave it. So it was bread which he gave. Now he gave
it not but after the consecration, then it was bread after the consecration.
This seems to me a strong and a clear proof, which to elude, our Adversaries
either never allege these words, or being constrained to allege them, they
allege together the following words, This is my body, which only they will
stand upon. But the words of this Institution are true, whether they be read
with one breath, or that every clause be read apart. It is true then that
Christ gave bread; it is true also that this bread is his body; and we must not
make use of that coherence to overthrow the truth of either of these clauses.
That which is most to be noted, is, that these words which say that Christ gave
bread, are not the words of Christ, as the following words, but they are the
words of the Apostles, who long after that Institution, declare to us that
Christ, when he said, This is my body, gave bread.

Then the Gospel declares, that Christ giving bread to his Disciples told
them, Third proof.
This is my body. Which words say plainly, that the bread which he gave was his
body, not that this bread was changed into his body by these words. These
words, This is my body, are declarative of that which is, not effective of that
which is not; and they presuppose that the bread was the body of Christ, before
Christ said, This is my body. As also all the Ancients with one consent hold,
that the consecration was done, not by these words, This is my body, but by the
prayer. And reason it self requires, that the bread be rather consecrated by
asking Gods blessing upon it, then by speaking to the bread. Besides, the word
this, can signify nothing but what Christ held in his hand. Now our
Adversaries say, that when Christ pronounced the word this, he had yet the
bread in his hand. Then the sense of these words, This is my body, is, This
bread is my body. Bellarmine here joins with us, saying, Bellar. lib. 3. de
Eucharist. cap. 19. sect. Primum. Panem accepit, panem benedixit, panem dedit,
and de pane dixit, Hoc est corpus meum
The Lord took bread, he blessed bread, he gave bread, he said of bread, This
is my body. Since then Christ said, that this bread was his body, and that
bread cannot be the body of Christ indeed, but only in figure and
signification, it follows that the sense of these words, This bread is my
body, is, This bread is my body in figure or Sacrament. As the same Bellarmine
acknowledges, Idem lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. Nonus. Haec sententia, Hic panis est
corpus meum, accipi debet tropice, ut panis sit corpus Christi significative,
aut est plane absurda and impossibilit.
These words, (says he) This bread is my body, must be taken figuratively, so
that the bread be the body of Christ in signification, else the proposition is
altogether absurd and impossible.

I add that when Christ said, This is my body, by the word this, he understood
that which he gave. Now the Gospel testifies that he gave bread. Truly if we
will believe the Gospel, we must believe these two things: The one that Christ
gave bread, the other that this bread was his body. And next we must consider,
how and in what sense the bread can be called the body of Christ. Which himself
teaches us soon after, saying that it is his commemoration.

Fourthly Saint Paul teaches us, that Christ giving the bread to his
Disciples, Fourth proof.
said, This is my body which is broken for you: Since he speaks in the present
Tense, he speaks of a fraction which he did while he gave the bread. And
whereas that fraction could not be real (for Christ's body cannot be really
broken by the Priest) he must of necessity speak of a Sacramental and
figurative fraction, representing the fraction of Christ's body on the Cross.
Whence it follows, that as Christ's body is broken but Sacramentally, not
really in the Lords Supper, likewise Christ's body is but Sacramentally, not
really in the Sacrament. For the body of Christ is in the same manner present
in the Eucharist, as it is broken in the Eucharist. Now it is not really broken
in the Eucharist, but in Sacrament* then it is really present there but in
Sacrament, and (as it is said a little after) in commemoration. The corrupt
Version of the Roman Church, which translates shall be broken, instead of is
broken, would robb us of this proof, and keep us from knowing the sense of
Christ's words. Not that this is a late depravation. Neither will I tax our
Adversaries to be the Authors of this falsification. Only we give them warning
that they ought to correct their Version, since that depravation troubles the
sense, and obscureth the truth. And if after good warning, they continue to use
a forged text to disguise the truth, they are guilty of forgery.

Fifthly, Christ says that this blood is shed. He says not that it shall be
shed, Fifth proof.
but that it is shed: in the present, not in the future, as the Version of our
Adversaries falsely translates it, fundetur instead of funditur. He speaks then
of a bloodshedding which was done, while Christ was speaking. I confess
indeed, that Christ speaks of the shedding of his blood, which was to be done
on the Cross the next day; But he speaks in the present, to give to understand
to his Disciples, that the effusion which he was doing in the Sacrament, was a
figure of that which was to be done on the Cross. The true blood of Christ was
Sacramentally shed in the Eucharist.

Here our Adversaries are sore put to it, and never answer directly, or to the
purpose. We ask them, Whether the blood of Christ be shed really and truly in
the holy Communion? Their belief is, that it is not shed, and that it comes not
out of the Lords body, nor out of his veins, and that Christ's body is
impassible, and that no local motion is made of the Lords blood. Yet not daring
to contradict openly these words, which say in the present Tense, that Christ's
blood is shed when the cup is presented; they say that it is shed under the
species, that is, Under the accidents, under the color and the taste of Wine.
But we did not ask, under what Christ's blood is shed? but, Whether it be shed
at all in the Eucharist? And these words to be shed under the accidents or
species, if they signify any thing, they signify this, to be shed in show,
not in effect. Yet they continue to say, that the blood of Christ is really
shed under the species, that is, that the said blood is shed really in show,
but not in effect, which is a manifest contradiction, and forging an effusion
without motion, a real effusion of blood that stirs not, and comes not out
of the veins, a blood flowing without flowing, and without stirring. It is not
then a natural effusion. But it is the natural effusion of the blood of Christ,
which is the price of our redemption. And when the Apostle Heb. 9. says, that
without shedding of blood there is no remission, he speaks of the real and
natural shedding, not of that which is done in show, not in effect. And
themselves call the Eucharist an unbloody sacrifice, acknowledging that no
blood is shed in it. Then the shedding of Christ's blood in the Eucharist, is a
Sacramental shedding, signifying the shedding of the Lords blood on the Cross,
and a commemoration, as Christ adds. There is nothing more convenient, then
to use Sacramental expressions in the Institution of a Sacrament, and in an
action which is a figure, to use figures conformable to the nature of the
action.

Sixth proof.
Sixthly, Christ having given bread, saying, This is my body, adds, Do this in
remembrance of me. If this bread be given in remembrance of Christ, it is not
Christ in effect, but in remembrance, as signs take the name of the things
signified. Memorials are never the very things of which they renew the memory.
Neican any thing be more absurdly spoken, then that which our Adversaries say,
That Christ in the Eucharist is both the sign and the signified thing; and that
Bellar. lib. 2. de Eucharist. cap. 24. Idem Christus fuit figura sui ipsius. Et
sect. Tertia. Est vere corpus Domini and signum ejusdem corporis.
he is the figure and commemoration of himself; as if one said, that Alexander
is the image of himself, and that the King and the Kings picture are the same
thing. And (to make absurdity superlative) that the body of Christ which is
invisible in the Mass, is the figure or image of the visible body of Christ.
Some visible images of invisible things may be found. But as for images, or
signs, or invisible and imperceptible figures of visible things, there is none
to be found; for signs and images that are invisible and insensible, signify
nothing, and by consequent are neither signs nor images.

To this add, that Aristot. lib. de memoria and reminisc. c. 1. (...).
memory is of things past or absent. One may commemorate the actions past of a
person in his presence, but that is not a commemoration of the person present,
but of his actions past. The tombs of Martyrs were called memories, not to
remember their bones lying there, but their past sufferings, and their absent
souls. Since then this Sacrament is given in remembrance of Christ's body, it
cannot be Christ's body.

Indeed the fraction and manducation of the Sacramental bread, and the effusion
of the cup, are a commemoration of the death of Christ suffering for us, and of
the shedding of his blood on the Cross. But as for the Sacrament it self,
Christ says that it is the remembrance of himself, saying, Do this in
remembrance of me.

Seventh proof.
Seventhly, Christ (according to Saint Paul's and Saint Lukes relation) giving
the cup, called that which was in that cup the new Covenant, or the New
Testament, (for the (...).
Greek word signifies both) saying, This cup is the New Testament. These words
give a great light to the intelligence of these words, This is my body. For, 1.
The bread which the Lord gave, must be the Lords body in the same manner, as
that which is within the cup is the New Testament. Now that which is within the
cup, is not really a Testament, but in Sacrament and commemoration, as signs
will take the names of the things signified. 2. Then reason it self requires
that Christ should use the same language for one kind, as for another. 3. And
that to institute a Sacrament, he should speak in a Sacramental way, that his
words might be conformable to the nature of the action. Then the sense of these
words is, This cup is the sign or the commemoration of the New Testament. 4. Or
else we must say that wine or blood is a Covenant, that a substance is an
accident, that wine is a contract. 5. That Christ whom they put in the cup is a
Testament, and so that the Testator and the Testament are the same thing. 6.
That the wine is transubstantiated into a Testament. 7. That the blood of
Christ is composed with Clauses and Articles, for this is proper to every
Testament. 8. And that by this transubstantiation Gods Covenant was made, as if
it had not been before.

They that (to avoid so many inconveniences) will say that the blood which is
in the cup is called a New Covenant, because it is a seal and a confirmation of
the New Covenant, plead our cause. For by the same reason I will say, that the
Sacrament of bread is called the body of Christ, because it is a seal and a
confirmation to us, that the body of Christ is ours.

But the eighth observation seems to me the most evident of all, Eighth proof.
That the Lord Jesus did not only say, This cup is the New Testament, but
added, In my blood, saying, This cup is the New Testament in my blood. Since
that which is in the cup is the Covenant in the blood of Christ, it is clear
that it is not the blood of Christ. Si calix est in sanguine, calix non est
sanguis. Or if by this word cup, the blood of Christ must be understood, these
words, This cup is the Covenant in my blood, will signify, This blood is the
Covenant in my blood. Thus the blood of Christ shall be in the blood of Christ;
an absurd expression, contradicting it self: Unless they will make us here two
real bloods of Christ, and two Christ's, which is a prodigious impiety.

The ninth proof Ninth proof.
is drawn from these words of Christ, related by Saint Matthew, that after the
Lord had given the cup, he said, I shall drink no more of this fruit of the
Vine, till I drink it new in the Kingdom of heaven. By these words the Lord
says expressly, that what he drunk in the Sacrament with his Disciples was of
the fruit of the Vine, that is, wine not blood, as the Council of Worms says,
in the fourth Chapter, Apud Juonem part. 2. fol. 68. Vinum fuit in redemptionis
nostrae mysterio cum dixit, Non bibam de genimine vitis, etc.
It was wine in the mystery of our redemption, when the Lord said, I will
drink no more of the fruit of the Vine. Innocent the III. in the fourth Book of
the mysteries of the Mass, chap. 27. says the same. Quod autem vinum in Calice
consecraverit, patet ex eo quod ipse subjunxit, Non bibam a modo, etc.
Now that it was wine which Christ consecrated in the cup, it appears by that
which he added, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine. It is true, that
Saint Luke speaks of two cups, the one of the Passover, the other of the holy
Communion, and says that the Lord called also the cup of the Passover, the
fruit of the Vine. But Saint Matthew and Saint Mark speak not of the cup of the
Passover, but only of the cup of the Sacrament. By consequent then, they call
the cup of the Sacrament, the fruit of the Vine. They testify also, that the
Lord said these words after he had given the cup of the Sacrament. Then the
Lord spoke of that last cup which he had given them with, or immediately before
these words: Unless we will accuse these two Evangelists, that they have
unfaithfully related these words of Christ, taxing them to have inverted his
words, and to have said of the cup of the Sacrament, that which the Lord said
only of the cup of the Passover. Why do we not rather believe Matthew and Luke
alike, believing that Christ called each of these cups the fruit of the Vine?
But that Matthew speaks only of the cup of the Lords Supper, because his
principal end was to relate Christ's words in the institution of the Sacrament?

Some not bold enough to accuse Matthew and Mark, that they inverted the Lords
words, have recourse to other shifts, and say that the blood of Christ is
called the fruit of the Vine, because it was wine before the consecration, and
because it seems still to be wine, after the consecration. These men find
figures where they list, and rejecting an usual and familiar figure,
conformable to the nature of the action, whereby signs take the name of the
things signified, they forge other figures which are hard, violent, and false.
For it is false that ever the blood of Christ was wine. It is true, that the
rod of Moses is still called a rod, even when it was turned into a Serpent,
because it had been a rod before. But the blood of Christ cannot be called wine
because it was wine, for it was never wine. The same I say of the water
converted into wine, John 2.9.

With the like absurdity they tell us, that the blood of Christ is called wine,
because it seems to be so. For that also is false. The blood of Christ never
seemed to be wine. That figure should be contrary to the nature of the
Sacrament, which requires that the signs be called by the names of the things
signified; but by this exposition, they make signified things, to be named by
the names of the signs. Examples may be found in Scripture, of attributing the
name of the signs to the things signified, but never in the institution of
Sacraments.

Tenth proof.
Finally, The Apostle immediately after the words of the institution of the
Sacrament, adds these words, As often as you eat this bread, and drink this
cup, you shall announce the Lords death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall
eat this bread or drink this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup. This Apostle who writ the last of this matter,
and more largely then others, says three times together, that it is bread
which we eat in the Lords Supper. Now the Lords Supper is not eaten, but after
the consecration. It is then bread after the consecration. The same he says in
ver. 16. of the tenth chapter. The bread which we break, etc. And Act. 20.7.
The Disciples came together to break bread. The text says not, that the
Disciples were come together to sing Mass, for it was not the language of the
Apostles, but to break bread; Which language in our days would be ridiculous.
He that going to Mass, would say, We are going to break bread; or, We are going
to eat the Lords Supper; (as Saint Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 11.20.) should be held
either an Heretic, or a distracted man.

The ordinary answer is, that the Lords body is called bread, because it looks
like bread, that is, that Saint Paul speaks according to the appearance, not
according to the truth. So they fill all with figures. They should have brought
then some express of the Apostle, where he expounds himself, that we might not
be deceived: But that they do not. Besides they affirm a false thing: For the
Lords body never looked like bread. They say also, that the Lords body is called
bread, because it was bread before the consecration. That likewise is false,
for the Lords body was never bread. They insist also upon the Pronoun this, and
say that Saint Paul did not say the bread, but this bread, that is, this bread
of life, this bread descended from heaven, which is Christ's body. But Saint
Paul never spoke of bread of life, nor of bread descended from heaven. These
terms are found in Saint John, who writ after Saint Paul. Wherefore it is
impossible that Saint Paul should have had respect to those texts of Saint
John. He could not send back the Corinthians to a book not yet written, to have
the intelligence of that he writ to them. And that bread of life mentioned in
Saint John's Gospel, is never opposed to the cup, nor distinguished from the
cup. That is proper to the bread of the Sacrament. Besides, Saint Paul saying
this bread, uses a demonstrative Pronoun, which can have no reference to any
thing, but to the bread mentioned in the precedent lines, saying, Jesus took
bread and brake it. If Saint Paul said this bread, not the bread, in another
place he says the bread, 1 Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break. There their
mystical interpretation fails them. To interpret those words of Saint Paul,
The bread which we break; and, As often as you eat this bread; by these of
Christ, This is my body, is to overthrow the nature of things, it is to take
for granted that Christ is the interpreter of the words of the Apostle, whereas
it was the Apostles charge to expound the words of Christ. To which add, that
the Apostle writ long after that Christ had spoken these things, and spoke of
them more copiously: Yet his words are wrested in our days with unusual
figures, contrary to the nature of the Sacrament.

Besides, it is an error to interpret Saint Paul's words, speaking of the
Sacrament, by the words of Christ, in the sixth Chapter of Saint John, where
Christ speaks not of this Sacrament. For at that time the Sacrament of the
Eucharist was not yet instituted. And when Christ said, I am the bread of life,
he was already the bread of life, and so is still, as well out of the
Sacrament, as with it.

Saint Paul's words, 1 Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? put our Adversaries upon the rack. Every word
of that Text is contradicted by the Roman Church. The Apostle says, that it is
bread that we break. The Roman Church says, that it is flesh which cannot be
broken, and that the whole body is under every crum. The Apostle says, that
the bread which we eat, is the Communion with the body of Christ. But the
Roman Church says, that it is not the Communion with the body of Christ, but
the very body of Christ. Observe also, that the Apostle in the same place, to
show how this bread is the Communion with the body of Christ, opposes the
Communion of the Table of the Lord, to the Communion of the Table of Devils.
And with that Table Communion might be had, although the meats consecrated unto
Devils, were not transubstantiated into Devils.

By all these proofs, it appears in what sense bread is called the body of
Christ, even because it is the Sacrament of the remembrance of the same. For it
is the nature of Sacraments to name signs, with the name of things signified,
not to call things signified with the name of signs. Thus circumcision is
called Gods Covenant, Genesis 17.10. And the Paschal Lamb is called the Passover,
that is, the passage, Exodus 12.11. and in many other places, because it was the
commemoration of the passage of the Angel through Egypt. And the Ark is called
the Lord, 2 Samuel 6.2. And the stone which yielded water in the Wilderness, is
called Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. And the cup of the Sacrament, in this very text is
called the New Covenant. Thus then the bread is called the body of Christ,
because it is the commemoration of the same, as Christ declares, Do this in
remembrance of me. Neither could any thing be more convenient, then in an
action which is a figure, to use a figure suitable to the nature of the action,

There is more, for all that are skilled in the Hebrew tongue, know that it
has no proper word to say, This signifies my body, and that instead of
signifies, it says is always. Thus the three branches are three days, Genesis
40.12. And the seven kine are seven years, and the seven ears are seven years
of famine, Genesis 40. These bones are the whole house of Israel; Ezekiel. 37.11. The
tree that thou saw, it is thou O King, Dan. 4.20, 22. And the ten horns are
ten Kings, Dan. 7.24. The seven heads are seven hills. And the woman which thou
saw is the great City, Rev. 17.9. and 18. See Gal. 4.24.

This figure is so natural and usual, that he that would speak otherwise and
use proper words, should make himself ridiculous, as if instead of a sphere one
should say, the representation of the Celestial spheres.

Our Adversaries themselves make this evident, for while they will avoid this
figure, so natural and so convenient to the nature of the Sacraments, they are
forced to bring in a multitude of other unusual and violent figures. For by the
word this, they understand that which is under these species, and make it an
individuum vagum, and no certain thing. And by this bread, they will understand
this flesh, or this body. And when Saint Paul says, The bread which we break,
by the bread they understand the flesh, and by breaking, they understand not
breaking. For (say they) Christ's body remains whole in every piece. Thus when
the Lord says, This cup is the New Testament in my blood; they forge Bellar.
lib. 1. de Euchar. cap. 11. sect. ad quartum. Sanguis accipitur duobus modis in
his duobus locis.
two bloods of Christ, the one in the cup, the other shed on the Cross, the one
being in the other, making Christ to say, This blood is the New Testament in my
blood, as if the blood of Christ were in the blood of Christ.

Thus when Christ said, I leave the world, John 16.18. and, I am no more in the
world, John 17.11. And me you have not always, John 12.8. And when Peter said
of Christ, that the heaven must receive or contain him, until the times of the
restitution of all things. Acts 3.21. to make these texts to agree with the
doctrine of the Roman Church, which says that the body of Christ is always
present in earth in a million of places, in Altars, in boxes, in stomachs, etc.
so that he is far more present in earth, then he was before his Ascension, and
is not contained in heaven; they say that Christ in those texts spoke of his
visible presence, and that when he said, I leave the world, and am no more in
the world, we must supply visibly: This tail they sow up, and add this gloss of
their own, without the Word of God: And speak against common sense; For they
speak as if one swore that he has no money, reserving this secret meaning,
none that you can see.

Certainly, to have Christ invisibly, is to have Christ. That man should be a
liar, that would say, that he has no money because his money is hidden, or
that he has no soul, because his soul is invisible, or that he goes out of
the Town and leaves it, whereas he remains hidden in the Town. They make then
Christ to leave the world, and yet to stay in the world; to go out of it, and
yet not to stir out of it: And that the heaven contains the Lords body, as
Saint Peter says, and yet that body is out of heaven, and is not contained in
it.

No Painter with his anticks can come near their extravagancies and prodigious
license in wresting Scripture, and forging figures, for which neither Grammar
nor Rhetoric ever found any name.

Circumstances.
The circumstances of the action, time and persons give here a great light. 1.
When Christ instituted the Lords Supper, his body was not yet glorified, but
was infirm, passible and mortal. By consequent, to give unto Christ a body
without place, and yet in an hundred thousand places, having a length without
extent, in vain do they allege that the body of Christ is glorious. For it
was not glorious as yet, when he gave the bread, saying, This is my body. By
consequent, they give us two bodies of Christ at the same time, clad with
contrary qualities, the one glorious and impassible, the other infirm and
passible. The one having a place, the other having none. The one sitting at the
Table, speaking and stirring his hands, the other in the mouths and stomachs
of his Disciples, not speaking, and not able to change place, because he was
not in any place. The one having a certain extent of length, and the parts of
his body different in seat, the other having no extent, and having all his
parts under the same point of the Host. If they were two bodies of Christ,
which of the two was our Savior? If it was but the same body, how can the same
body be contrary to himself? The same man can in the same time be poor and
rich, great and small, but in diverse respects, that is, when he is compared
with diverse persons. He may be great, compared to a Dwarf, and small compared
to a Giant. But here they attribute contrary things unto Christ at the same
time, without comparing him to any other but himself.

It is most important to observe, that Christ's body is presented to us in the
Lords Supper, for the food of our souls; Not as he is now glorious and
impassible, but as dying for us, and suffering for our redemption. As often as
you eat this bread, (says the Apostle) you shall announce the Lords death.
Wherefore also the bread is broken, to signify his body suffering on the
Cross. Then is Christ, whether in the Sacrament, or out of the Sacrament, the
food of our souls, when we apprehend him dying for us, and delivering himself
to death, for the life and salvation of the world, John 6.51.

In vain then do they go about to cover all the absurdities arising out of the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, by saying that the body of Christ is glorious,
seeing that we apprehend him in the Sacrament as infirm, and dying, and in the
lowest point of his ignominy.

2. It is considerable also that as Christ made no elevation of the Sacrament,
so the Apostles made no adoration of that which Christ held in his hands, but
remained sitting at the table. Neither is it to any purpose to reply that they
did not adore Christ, because they had him continually with them; for they had
never eaten him, and never been present at such a sacrifice. Now every
sacrifice of necessity implies adoration.

3. It is also a notable circumstance that Christ in the holy Communion ate and
drank with his Disciples. According to the doctrine of the Roman Church, he ate
his own body. He had his head in his mouth; His whole body entered into his
stomach; This implies a thousand contradictions, which we have represented in
another place. And that work of eating himself being more miraculous then his
conception, resurrection, and Ascension, yet our Adversaries can produce no
benefit of the same, and cannot tell us how it conduces to our redemption,
that Christ ate himself, yea and drank his bones and flesh, since they teach
that the body was whole in every drop of the Chalice.

4. We must not omit that our adversaries hold with Austin and Hierome that
Judas took the Sacrament, and ate with the other Apostles. Now the Gospel
witnesses that the Devil entered into him when he sat at the table. If our
Adversaries must be believed, the body of Christ, and the Devil entered together
into Judas. These two guests should have been ill together. And we must believe
besides that the ill guest, the Devil prevailed.

5. To avoid so many absurdities there is no other way, but to say with the
Evangelists that Christ gave bread, and that the Disciples are bread, and drunk
the fruit of the vine; and that this bread is called the body of Christ,
because it is the commemoration and the sign of the same, according as the
Sacraments and signs are commonly named with the name of that they signify and
represent. As Austin says in the 23. Epistle to Bonifacius, The Sacraments, by
reason of the likeness, are commonly named with the name of that they signify
or represent. And against Adimantus, chapter 12. Non dubitavit dicere, Hoc est
corpus meum, cum daret signum corporis sui.
The Lord made no difficulty to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of
his body. And Theodoret in the first Dialogue (...).
The Lord gave unto the sign the name of his body. (...).
Again, Christ has honored the visible signs with the appellation of his body
and blood, having not changed their nature, but added grace unto nature. And
Tertullian in the fourth book against Marcion, chapter 40. Hoc est corpus meum, id
est, figura corporis mei.
This is my body, that is, the figure of my body. And Maximus who commented on
Dionysius, speaking of that which is received in the Sacrament, (...).
These things (says he) are signs and not the truth. Of which testimonies we
shall speak more exactly hereafter.

Out of all that we have said it appears, how ill grounded the reason of
Cardinal du Perron is, who alleging these words, This is my body, clipped and
curtailed, weighing neither what goes before nor what comes after, says that
this very thing that the Lord said, This is my body, and did not expound how it
was his body, shows that these words need no explication, and therefore must
be taken according to the outward literal sense, not according to a hidden
indirect and Allegorical sense. For we have showed how clearly these words, are
expounded in the Gospel, in that it is said that Christ gave bread, and that in
remembrance of him, and that the Lord has drunk the fruit of the vine with his
Disciples, and that it is bread which we eat in remembrance of his death, and
in that the Lord calls the cup his Covenant, although it be but the Sacrament
or the sign of his Covenant. And how express and excellent is St. Paul's
exposition whereby he expounde^h these words, This is my body, saying, The
bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

Yet suppose that in the Gospel these words, This is my body, are not
expounded, does it follow thence that there is no figure in them? When Christ
said, Joh. 15.1.
I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman, he added no exposition to
it, yet our Adversaries acknowledge a figure in that expression. And whereas
after he had said, This is my body, he said, This cup is the new Testament;
they are constrained to acknowledge a figure in it. Yet the Lord added no
exposition to it. I say more, that when figures are clear, familiar, and usual,
that man should be ridiculous that would trouble himself to expound them. He
that showing the picture of Julius Caesar says, This is Julius Caesar, says
enough to be understood; And he should show himself a shallow braind man if he
added, By Julius Caesar I understand, not his person, but his picture. And our
Adversaries feigning to avoid all figures in these words wrest them into a
figurative sense, since by the word this, they understand not that which Christ
held in his hand (for accoding to their belief he held bread yet at that time)
but an individuum vagum, and that which lies under the accidents. So that by
the word is, they understand shall be, or shall become. Page 867.
And the Cardinal himself says, that by the word this is understood that which
Christ held when he had made an end of pronouncing the words; Whereby he
interfereth himself with a contradiction. For when Christ said this, he had not
yet made an en end of pronouncing. The Cardinal then ought to have said, not
that which Christ held, but that which he was to hold after pronouncing. Truly
in that matter the Adversaries stumble at every step, and the contrary of that
they say must always be understood. They say that the host is round, yet they
know that Christ is not round, and that the accidents are not the Host, or
victim for our sins. They speak of making an elevation of God, yet they know
that God cannot be elevated. They speak of the Sacrament of the body of Christ,
whence it follows that the Sacrament is not the body of Christ. They say that
the Sacraments are sacred signs, and yet say that they worship the Sacrament.
It is the nature of those that defend an error, to say, and unsay, and desiring
to be believed, yet they believe not themselves.

That which the Cardinal adds, that the thing which our Lord held in his hand
before the pronouncing of these words, This is my body, was not the body of
Christ, That, I say, is false, and the spring of the whole error. For it was
not by these words that Christ consecrated the bread but by the prayer and
blessing which went before. And it is clear that these words, This is my body,
are not words which make bread to become the body of Christ, but words
declaring that the bread was his body already. All the Ancient Fathers agree in
that, and hold that the consecration is made by prayer and invocation. Justin
Martyr in the second Apology calls that which we receive in the Eucharist,
(...).
a food consecrated by the prayer of the Word proceeding from God. Austin in
book 3. chapter 4. of the Trinity, De fructibus terrae acceptam and prece mystica
consecratam
That which is taken from the fruits of the earth, and consecrated by the
mystical prayer. (...).
Theodoret in the second Dialogue brings in an heretic, and advocate of
Transubstatiation speaking thus, The signs of the body and blood are other
before the Priests invocation, but after the invocation they are changed. (...).
Origin in book. 8. against Celsus, We eat loaves by prayer made a body which
is a certain holy thing. Qui est a terra panis, percipiens invocationem Dei,
jam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistiae.
Ireneus book. 4. chapter 4. The bread receiving Gods invocation is no more common
bread but the Eucharist.

Basil in the book of the holy Ghost. chapter 27. calls the words of Consecration,
(...), the words of invocation when the bread is showed.

Corpus and sanguinem Christi dicimus illud, quod de fructibus terrae acceptum
and prece mystica sanctificatum recte sumimus, etc.
And the Canon Corpus in the second Distinction of the Consecration, We call the
body and blood of Christ that which being taken from the fruits of the earth,
and consecrated by the mystical prayer, is rightly taken by us for spiritual
salvation, in memory of the Lords passion. And which is more, that great
builder of Decrees and Canons, Innocent the III. Alii dixeruns, quod and
Sacramentum confecit, and formam instituit post benedictionem, cum dixit, Hoc
est corpus meum, etc. Quibus illud videtur obsistere, quod prius fregerit quam
dixerit, Hoc est corpus meum.
in the fourth book of the mysteries of the Mass chapter 6. holds that Christ did
not consecrate by these words, This is my body, but by his divine virtue before
he pronounced these words. Yet this day the Greek Church consecrateth by
prayer, as Bellarmin acknowledges in book 4. of the Euchrist, chapter 12.. Habemus.

The Cardinal goes on, A substantial attribute (says he) cannot be said
substantially of a subject, of which it was not said before, unless either the
subject be substantially changed, or the subject have taken some other
substance in an hypostatical union. By these words he presupposes the thing in
question, namely that this word body is substantially, attributed to that which
Christ held, that is, to the bread: But that we deny, and he brings no proof
for it.

Upon that false presupposition all the rest of the chapter is grounded, and by
consequent does not concern us. By the way this Prelat gives us an excellent
proof of his exquisite learning, in these words, When the water pots of the
Architriclin were filled up. He speaks of the Architriclin, as if he had been a
man of that name, and the owner of these water pots. Or if he takes not these
words for a proper name, it is evident howsoever that he knew not what the
office of the De Architriclino vide Graeco rum catenam; and Theophylactum in
cap. 6. Joh. Chrysostom. hom. 11. in Johan. ubi ait, Architriclinum nihil adhuc
gustavisse and curavisse, ut in convivio omnia recte disponerentur.
Architriclin was. For if he had known it, he had known also that those water
pots were none of his. The office of the Architriclin was to wait in a feast,
to give order to the kitchen and to the serving of the meat and to taste the
wine. He did not sit at the table but went up and down the house, doing the
same in mean houses as stewards do in great houses. See Chrysostom Hom. 21.
upon John. Every house of the Jews had such water pots for the legal washings
and purifications. As it is seen, Joh. 2.6. and they belonged not to the care
of the Architriclin, who had the ordering of the feast. By the same reason the
tablecloth dishes and plate might have been called the Architriclins goods.

CHAP. 3. Of the sense of John 6. and of the Spiritual manducation of the body
Of Christ, and how many absurdities and inconveniences follow the oral
manducation of Christ's flesh taught in the Roman Church.
OUr Adversaries being cast by the words of the institution, and convinced to
have altogether corrupted it, think to find a refuge in John. 6. where Christ
many times calls himself the bread of life, and says that his flesh is meat
indeed, of which whosoever eats shall live for ever.

I can hardly persuade my self, that when they use that text to prove
Transubstantiation they speak in good earnest 1. Whereas it is clear, and many
of our Adversaries acknowledge it, that Christ speaks not there of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which was not yet instituted when Christ said
these things, but of the spiritual manducation by faith in the death of Christ,
which is the true food of our souls. How could the Apostles have understood
that the Lord spoke to them of the Lords supper, which was not yet, and of
which he had never spoken one word to them? 2. Wherefore also in the whole
chapter there is no mention of table, or cup, or supper, or commemoration of
his death. 3. As many lines as treat of that matter in that chapter, so many
lies do they ascribe unto Christ, when they will have him to speak there of the
Lords supper. For Christ promises there to the Capernaits to give them his
flesh to eat; Now he never administered the Lords supper unto them. 4. Note also
that when Christ spoke these words he was already the bread of life, although
the Eucharist was not yet instituted, for he speaks in the present tense,
saying, I am the bread of life, and I am the bread which came down from heaven.
He was then the bread of life, as soon as he came down from heaven. 5. It is
evident that he speaks there of a manducation without which no man can be
saved, when he says in verse 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
you have no life in you; Now many are saved that never received the Lords
supper. 6. It is evident also that he speaks of a manducation without which
none can be saved, when he says in verse 54. Whosoever eats my flesh, has
eternal life. He speaks not then of the manducation of the Sacrament, which is
eaten by many wicked and reprobate. One may indeed eat the bread unworthily, as
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.
Whosoever eats this bread unworthily; But one cannot eat the flesh of
Christ unworthily, since that manducation is done by faith, and eating is
believing. For one cannot believe in Christ unworthily, seeing that in that
faith our worthiness consists. 7. For that by eating and drinking, we must
understand believing, Christ shows it in verse 35. I am the bread of life, he
that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never
thirst. There manifestly drinking is put for believing, since that he says
that by believing thirst is quenched. And verse 47. He that believes in me
has everlasting life, I am that bread of life. Where he shows that this
bread is taken by believing. For because he that believes on him has
everlasting life, he gathers thence that he is the bread of life. 8.
Wherefore also he gives warning that his words are spirit and life, that is,
they are spiritual and quickening, and that they quicken not unless they be
taken in a spiritual sense. 9. If these words of Christ, I am the bread of
life, are pressed literaly and taken as our Adversaries will have these words
taken, This is my body, it will follow that as, this is my body, signifies,
This is transubstantiated into my body, also I am the bread signifies, I am
transubstantiated into bread. 10. Also these words of verse 56. He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, are very
considerable. For many eat the Sacrament, yet Christ dwells not in them, nor
they in Christ. 11. And if to make Christ to dwell in us, we must swallow him
down with our mouth, and throat, by the same reason Christ must swallow us
down, that we may dwell in him. 12. And when Christ says, verse 63. The flesh
profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they
are life, if by the word flesh, he understands carnal sense and humane reason,
thereby he takes off our spirits from all carnal and gross sense, and will have
his words taken in a spiritual sense But if by the word flesh, the Lord
understands his own flesh, as Thom. Lect. 8. in Joh. 6. Caro non
prodestq^icquam, intelligitur de carne Christi.
Aquinas and many after him take it, he declares to us that his flesh eaten
with the mouth (as the Capernaites did imagine) would not conduce at all for
their salvation. As also our Adversaries acknowledge that many that take the
Sacrament, are damned nevertheless. But as for the manducation mentioned in
this chapter, Christ declares in verse 54. that whosoever eats his flesh
has eternal life. 13. If in these words of verse 53. Except you eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you, the Lord
speaks of communicating in the Sacrament, it is certain that the Roman Church
depriveth the people of life by denying them the cup. For he says, Except you
drink my blood, you have no life in you. To say that the people take the blood
in the host, is no answer, for taking the blood thus is not drinking; Now
Christ says Except you drink. If eating the host be drinking, then the Priest
drinks twice in the Mass. 14. The Lord adds in verse 56. He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood dwells in me, and I in him. Can they say that
the profane receiving the Sacrament dwell in Christ? 15. In vain do they press
these words of verse 56. My flesh is meat indeed, to exclude all figures, for
figurative words may be true. Christ says, I am the true vine, Joh. 15.1. And
God is the true spring of life, Psalm. 36. which yet are figurative expressions.
And when Austin in the third book of the Christian doctrine, chapter 16. says that
eating the flesh of Christ is a figurative expression, our Adversaries to elude
that testimony say, that in these words of Christ, besides the figure there is
truth also.

That Christ used that expression must not be found strange; For when the Jews
of Capernaum asked of him bread from heaven like unto manna, he takes thence
occasion to speak to them of another bread from Heaven, and of better meat. In
the same manner as two chapters before from the water of the well (where he met
the Samaritan woman) he takes occasion of speaking to her of another water
which he gave, and which whosoever drinks shall never thirst. To this join
that of the unbelieving Jews, he uses to speak in parables and simile's as St.
Matthew says chapter 13. v. 34. Without a parable spoke he not unto them.

This is so evident that many of our Adversaries as Gabriel Biel Sect. 84. in
Can. Missae. Cusan.. Epist. 7. ad Bohemos. Cajetan in part. 3. qu. 80. Art.
ult. Tapper. in explic. art. 15. Lovaniensium. Hesselius de Commun. sub utraque
specie. Jansen. cap. 59. Concordiae. Ferus in Joh. 6.
Gabriel Biel, Cusanus, Cajetan, Tapperus, Hesselius, Jansenius and Ferus, take
our part, and hold, that in this chapter it is not spoken of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, but of the spiritual manducation by faith. Pope Innocent the III. is
of the same opinion, for these are his words in book. 4. chapter 14. of the
Mysteries of the Mass. De spirituali comestitione Dominus ait, Nisi
manducaveritis carnem filii hominis etc. Hoc modo curpus Christi soli boni
comedunt.
The Lord speaks of the spiritual manducation saying, Except you eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. In this manner
the godly alone eat the body of Christ.

Thomas the Angelical Doctor in the seventh Lesson upon John 6. expounding
these words of the Lord, Except you eat my flesh, you have no life in you.
Notandum, quod haec sententia potest referri vel ad spiritualem manducationem:
vel ad Sacram^ntalem. Sed si refertur ad spiritualem, ^ull^m dubitationem habet
s^ntentia, etc. ^i vero ad sacramentalem dubium habet quod dicitur.
If (says he) this relates to the spiritual manducation, this sentence is
without any doubt. For that man spiritually eats the flesh of Christ and
drinks his blood, who is partaker of the unity of the Church, which is done
by Charity, etc. He that eats not, has not life, etc. But if that relates to
the Sacramental manducation, there is a doubt in that which is said, Except you
eat my flesh, you have no life in you. He finds the first exposition clear and
true; In the second he finds doubt and difficulty.

Wherefore Austin upon Psalm. 98. personates Christ speaking to his Disciples,
lest they should mistake his words, Non hoc corpus quod videtis, manducaturi
estis, and bibituri sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt, qui me crucifigunt.
Sacramentum quod vobis commendavi, spiritualiter intellectum vivificabit vos.
You shall not eat this body which you see, and shall not drink that blood
which they that shall crucify me will spill. I have recommended a Sacrament
unto you, which being taken spiritually shall quicken you.

The same in the book of sentences collected by Prosper in the 341. sentence.
Qui discordat a Christo, nec carnem ejus manducat, nec bibit ejus sanguinem,
etiamsi tantae rei Sacramentum ad judicium suae praesumptionis quotidie
indifferenter accipiat.
He that is in discord with Christ, eats not his flesh, and drinks not blood,
though he take the sacred sign of so great a thing indifferently every day for
the judgment [or condemnation] of his presumption.

This good Doctor in the 25. and 26. Treatise upon John, expounds this sixth
chapter of that Gospel, in which exposition not only he speaks never a word of
the Transubstantiation, nor of the oral eating of Christ's body, but also keeps
off the reader from that thought as much as he can, as I will show in chapter 11.
of this controversy, where also we shall see that all the Fathers understood
it so.

So it is understood in the Canon Vt quid in the second Distinction of the
Consecration. Ut quid paras dentem and ventrem? Creed and manducasti. Credere
enim in eum, hoc est panem and vinum mancare. Qui credit in eum, manducat eum.
Why do thou prepare thy teeth and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten,
for believing on him is eating the bread* etc. He that believes on him eats
him. We shall see hereafter that the Fathers hold that the wicked eat not the
body of Christ, De doctrina Christ. l. 3. cap. 16.
Austin says that these words, Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, you
have no life in you, are a figure that commands us to communicate unto the
passion of our Lord, and to lay sweetly and profitably in our memory that his
flesh was crucified and wounded for us. He says not only that in these words
of Christ there is a figure, but he expounds also how that figure ought to be
understood, namely that eating Christ's flesh is meditating his death and
delighting to remember that Christ is dead for us, an exposition which Cardinal
du Perron approves not. Yet Cardinal Bellarmin in the first book of the
Eucharist, chapter 7. Verba quae citantur, non pertinent ad Sacramentum proprie,
sed ad fidem Incarnationis.
expounding these words of Joh. 6. He that comes to me shall never hunger, and
he that believes on me shall never thirst, says, that these words belong not
properly to the Sacrament, but to the faith of the Incarnation. Cardinal Tolet
upon John 6. goes so far as to say, that Infantes in baptismo aliquo modo
participant corpus Christi, nempe quantum ad rem significatam, and dici possunt
carnem Christi manducare and bibere sanguinem ejus.
Infants in their Baptism are in some sort partakers of Christ's body, that is,
as for the thing signified, and may be said to eat the flesh of Christ, and to
drink his blood.

Truly I never saw nor read any of the Romanist Doctors, but acknowledges that
there is a spiritual manducation, which is done, not with the mouth of the
body, but with faith. For Christ is the food, not of bodies, but of souls; and
is received by believing, not by chewing; nor with the mouth, but with faith.
To feed a body with words and songs, and to feed a soul with meats taken by the
mouth, are things equal in absurdity. Christ is the bread of children in which
dogs have no part. Not as the bread of the Sacrament of which profane men and
hypocrites participate. Christ is not eaten by his enemies. Christ is that
bread which whosoever eats has eternal life. That bread not only feeds the
living but also gives life unto the dead.

If we compare these two sorts of manducation, you shall find that the
spiritual manducation by faith, of which our Adversaries speak with contempt,
is beyond all comparison more excellent then that which is done with the mouth.
For without the oral manducation a great number of persons are saved, but
without manducation by faith none can be saved. And with the oral manducation,
a great number of persons are damned, but whosoever has eaten the flesh of
Christ is saved. He that believes on him has eternal life.

And if after you have compared them you join them together, you shall find
that the manducation by the mouth is good and profitable only by reason of the
spiritual. But if it be without the spiritual it is hurtful, and whosoever
takes the bread of the Sacrament unworthily takes his condemnation. If there be
two things, whereof the one is hurtful without the other, it is easy to judge
which of the two is the more excellent.

Wherefore Austin acknowledges no other manducation of the flesh of Christ but
the spiritual, for opposing it to the oral manducation of the Sacrament, he
calls it the true manducation. As in book 21. of the City of God, chapter 25.
Ostendit quid sit non sacramento tenus sed re vera corpus Christi manducare.
The Lord shows what it is to eat the body of Christ, not in Sacrament only,
but in truth. And in the same place, Non solo Sacramento sed re ipsa
manducaverunt corpus Christi, They have eaten the body of Christ, not only in
Sacrament, but also in truth. And Thomas in the seventh Lesson upon John 6.
speaking of him that spiritually eats the body of Christ says, Hic ille est,
qui non sacramentaliter tantum sed re vera corpus Christi manducat.
This is he that eats the body of Christ, not only sacramentally, but also in
truth. Speaking so, is saying that eating Christ in the Sacrament is not eating
him in truth nor in effect, and that hypocrites and profane men receiving the
Sacrament eat not the body of Christ truly or in truth.

Yea, the very Council of Trent in Session 13. chapter 8. acknowledges that
spiritual manducation which is done even without the Sacrament, by faith.
Quidam manducant hunc panem spiritualiter tantum and viva fide.
Some (says the Council) eat this bread spriritually only, and by a lively
faith. So let no Romanists hereafter laugh at this spiritual manducation as an
imaginary thing.

Rather let them consider, how their real and oral manducation of Christ gives
them occasion to say many things of him which are unworthy of the Majesty of
the Son of God. Innocent. III. Papa lib. 4. de Mysteriis Missae. c. 11.
They dispute what becomes of the body of Christ when the consecracted host is
eaten by rats or other beasts, or when the Priest or a sick person casts it up
again. They are in great care what becomes of Christ carried away by mice, and
why he did not hinder them to come near him. If they say that when the mouse
draws near the host, the substance of bread returns, then the mouse has
made a second transubstantiation.

Idem cap. 16. Quod si secessus aut vomitus post solam Eucharistiae
perceptionem eveniat, etc.
Pope Innocent the III. in the first book of the mysteries of the Mass moves
this question, If a man happens to have nothing in his belly but consecrated
hosts, that is, nothing but the body and blood of Christ, and upon that a laske
take him, what his excrements shall be, and what matter they shall be made of?
And Durandus Durand. Rationali lib. 4. cap. 41. Quid si forte secessus aut
vomitus per solam Eucharistiae perceptionem advenerit, ex accidentibus and
humoribus generatur.
If one having taken nothing but the Eucharist, is taken with a laske or vomit,
that is bred by the accidents and humors.

To which add this doctrine Tolet. de instruc. Sacerd. lib. 2. cap. 25. Posset
consecrare Sscerdos multos cophinos panis, and vini dolium, si praesentia ista
haberet.
that a Priest by the words of Consecration can transubstantiate many
basketfulls of, bread, and so undo a baker; And that he may turn whole buts of
wine into blood.

Cons. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 11.
And the doctrine of the Council of Trent, that the consecration is not done if
the Priest has no intention to consecrate, which intention since the people
must ghess, and can have no assurance of it, but by conjecture, it follows
that they must believe at a venture, that the Host of the Mass is Christ, and
bestow a conjectural worship upon it, or adore it conditionally, saying,
Adrianus Quodlibet. q. 10. Suppos. 2. page 70. Concilium Constantiense excusat
simplices adorantes hostiam non consecratam, quia tacit implicatur conditio,
si consecratio sit recte facta, etc. Et Diabol^^ sic transfiguratur, ut
credatur Christus, and jubet se adorari, si sic adoret, Adoro te, si tu es
Christus.
(as Pope Adrian the VI. teaches) I adore thee, if the Consecration be well
made, and if thou art Christ. But whether it be Christ or no, it is left to
conjecture.

I pass by a thousand other absurdities and inconveniences which attend this
doctrine; Innoc. III. lib. 4. de Myster. Missae. Est enim hic color and sapor
quantitas and qualitas, cum nihil alterutro sit coloratum, aut sapidum, aut
quantum and quale.
as that in the Host the accidents are without a subject, that is, there is
length in it, but nothing that is long; whiteness, and nothing white; color,
and nothing colored; and as the Doctors say, Quantitas sed non quantum, and
accidentia quae non accidunt, simitas sine naso, claudicatio sine crure.

And their saying that the Gabriel Biel speaks thus in the fourth lesson upon
the Canon of the Mass. Qui creavit me (sifas dicere) dedit mihi creare se. Qui
creavit me sine me, creatur mediante me. Whence he infers that Priests are
Gods.
Priest makes God with words, and creates his Creator, and makes a body, which
is before it be made. And that Christ's body being already in heaven, the Priest
makes him on earth; as if while Philip is studying at Paris, some body begot
him at Rome. So that Christ begins to have a new being besides the natural,
namely a Sacramental being, as they speak, which is offered in the Mass for a
propitiatory sacrifice. We thought that one person could have but one being,
and that the only natural being of Christ, was the price of our redemption.

Also that doctrine makes the body of Christ more spiritual then spirits. For
souls, though they fill no place, and be not circumscriptively in a place, yet
they are but in one place, and cannot be separated from themselves, nor far
from themselves. But as for Christ's body in the Mass, they are not contented to
say, that he is in no place, and fills no space, and has no extent; so that
all his parts are under one point only, and that head and feet in the Host,
differ not in situation; So far as to hold, that if any had dipped a pin in the
Chalice, the Lords body should be whole in the drop remaining at the pins end;
And if any had dipped the hair of his upper-lip in the consecrated Chalice, the
whole body of the Lord should remain hanging at the end of every hair: But to
make the absurdity most superlative, they make Christ's body separated from
himself, remote from himself, higher and lower then himself, being in heaven
and upon Altars, not in the space between. All that is covered with the
Almighty power of God, without any regard to his Wisdom, or to his Truth, or to
his Word, which says, that Christ is like unto us in all things but sin. By
these inventions, that good Word of God is impugned, and the glory of the Son
of God exposed to ignominy. For by that doctrine, Christ being fallen into the
mire, cannot rise out of it, and may be stolen and stabbed, as the Jesus of
Billettes of Paris, and cannot save himself from Mice. Wherefore there was need
that the Cautelae or Caveat's of the Mass should make a provision against these
inconveniences. All that to raise the dignity of Priests, who by that doctrine
can make God, and have Christ in their power locked up in a box, doing things
that all the Angels and Saints together cannot do, for they cannot make Christ,
nor create a thing which is already.

Thus they have overthrown the nature and the end of this Sacrament: For
Sacraments are signs. Having then abolished the signs, they have abolished the
Sacrament. For the bread and wine being no more, nothing but accidents in the
air remain, which have no relation nor convenience with the substance of
Christ's body. They abolish also the end of this Sacrament, which is not to
bring down the body of Christ to us, but to raise up our hearts to him.

CHAP. 4. How and in what sense the Fathers alleged by the Cardinal, call the
Sacrament the body of Christ, and say that Christ's body is made in the
Eucharist, and that we eat his flesh in it. Answer to the Cardinals
depravations.
AFter we have heard the heavenly Oracle, and understood what was the
institution of the Lord Jesus, if we would decide this difference by the
testimonies of men, we should offer a disgrace to the eternal Son of God, and
subject divine authority to man's judgment. Especially seeing that the Word of
God is so clear in this point, that bringing light to it from other places, is
like lighting a candle to see whether it be day.

Wherefore we desire the Reader not to mistake our end, when we allege the
Fathers, either in this, or in other questions. We do it not, to ground the
heavenly truth upon the testimonies of men, but to defend the ancient Fathers
against the injustice of our Adversaries, who wrest the Fathers, and set them
upon the rack, to force them to bear testimony for untruth, and make them speak
contrary to their mind.

Neither do we allege them in this question, to be interpreters of the words
of Christ and his Apostles. For where the Word of God interprets it self, there
needs no other interpretation. But we allege them, to wipe off from us the
ordinary calumny, that we oppose the consent of Antiquity, as though our belief
were but of late date, or as if that which was from the beginning could be new.
For although our belief be grounded upon the only Word of God, yet it is a
singular delight and content unto us, when reading the Fathers of the first
age, we find in them the same things that we teach, and perceive that we are
hated for a doctrine which was believed by them, whom the Romanists make a show
to reverence.

Cardinal du Perron in the fourth chapter, brings many testimonies of Fathers
for the real presence of Christ's body. He begins by Authors not to be received,
Damascenus, Euthymius, Theophylactus, and Anastasius Sinaita. Of whom the first
writ about the year of Christ, 470. the second in the year 1118. the third in
the year, 1070. and the last about the year, 630. all long after the time of
the four first Councils, to which the Cardinal had said, that he would confine
himself. Yet let us see whether they say any thing that may prejudice us.

These Authors then observe, that the Lord said not, This is the figure of my
body, but this is my body. Who knows not that, seeing that all the Evangelists
that speak of this institution, affirm so much? I say more. For I maintain that
the nature of the action required that he should speak so. For he instituted a
Sacrament, wherefore it was convenient that he should use Sacramental words,
and follow the style of Scripture (which is to give unto the sign, the name of
the thing signified, when it speaks of Sacraments.) And that in a figurative
action, he should use figurative words, conformable to the nature of the action.

He adds a testimony of Chrysostom, and another of Gaudentius, both to this
purpose, Christ said, This is my body; Let us believe it, and see it with the
eyes of the Spirit. Truth knows not untruth. So much we also believe, but with
the expositions which Scripture brings. And Scripture teaches us, that Christ
gave bread unto his Disciples; That we eat bread in the Lords Supper; That the
same bread is his body; That the cup is the New Testament in his blood, and by
consequent is not really his blood. That the bread which we break, is the
Communion of the body of Christ; That the Disciples came together to break
bread, who yet neither could nor would break the natural body of the Lord; That
the cup which the Lord drunk with his Disciples, was the fruit of the Vine;
That it is the remembrance of him; That we eat bread to announce his death;
That Christ ascended to heaven, and left the world, and is no more in the
world; That heaven contains him; That he is like unto us in all things but sin;
That Christ did not lift up the Host; And that his Disciples, whose example we
ought to follow, did not worship it. After that, alleging Euthymius or
Theophylactus, late Greek Authors, separated from the communion of the Roman
Church, is deriding God to abuse men.

The Cardinal adds a place of Ambrose, but he corrupts it, making Ambrose to
say, in the ninth chapter of the book of those that are initiated into
mysteries, The Lord Jesus himself cries, This is my body; before the blessing
of the heavenly words, he is named another kind, after the consecration he is
called the body of Christ, This passage is unfaithfully translated. There is in
Ambrose, Ante benedictionem verborum coelestium alia species nominatur, post
consecrationem corpus Christi significatur. That is, Before the blessing of the
heavenly words, another kind is named; after the consecration, the body of
Christ is signified or represented. The Cardinal has translated, he is named
another kind, instead of another kind is named, to make way for the depravation
of the following Clause, where he translateth significatur, is called, instead
of, is signified, or represented. Which falsification he coloreth with the
allegation of another text of Ambrose, which he quoteth not, where Ambrose
says, that Christ was signified the Son of the highest; but there also
signifying is not calling, but declaring or manifesting. Should not that man
show himself to be out of his right sense, that would say, that God is
signified Almighty, instead of saying that he is called Almighty? Or that
Virigil was signified Prince of the Poets, instead of saying that he is so
called?

But that we may not lose time in confuting all the allegations of the Cardinal
out of the Fathers, where the Sacrament is called the body of Christ, and where
they say that by the consecration, the bread is made the body of Christ, it is
necessary to show the sense and intent of the Fathers, and to know their style.
For they speak so clearly of this matter, that they leave us no reason to doubt
of their intention.

I say then, that the Fathers followin^ the traces of the holy Scripture* speak
of three sorts of bodies of Christ. First of his natural body, which was
crucified for us; and of two mystical bodies, the one of them the Church, which
Scripture often calls the body of Christ, the other his Sacramental body, which
we receive in the Lords Supper. Wherein also the follow they style of
Scripture, which uses to give unto the signs, the name of things signified by
the signs.

Austin in the third Book of the Questions upon Leviticus, qu. 57. Solet res
quae significat, ejus rei nomine, quam significat, nuncupari.
The thing that signifies, uses to be named by the name of the thing that it
signifies. And in the 102. Epistle to Exodius, Aliquando res quae significat,
nomen ejus rei, quam significat, accipit.
Sometimes the thing that signifies, takes the name of the thing that it
signifies.

The same Father applies this rule to the Eucharist, in the 23. Epistle to
Boniface, Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in se ipso? and tamen in
Sacramento, non solum per omnes Paschae solennitates sed omni die populis
immolatur. Si enim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum, quarum Sacramenta
sunt, non haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine
plerumque etiam ipsarum nomina accipiunt. Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum
Sacramentum corporis Christi corpus Christi est, Sacramentum sanguinis Christi
sanguis Christi est, ita Sacramen^um fidei, quod Baptismus intelligitur, fides
est.
Was not Christ once sacrificed in himself? and yet he is sacrificed unto the
people in a sacred sign, etc. That man lies not, who being asked, answers
that he was sacrificed. For had not the Sacraments some likeness unto the
things of which they are Sacraments, they should not be Sacraments at all. Now
because of that likeness, they take most often the names of the things
themselves.

And in the twelfth Chapter against Adimantus, Non enim Dominus dubitavit
dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret s^gnum corporis sui.
The Lord made no difficulty to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of
his body. Of which place we shall see hereafter a notorious depravation by our
Cardinal.

The Roman Decree, in the second Distinction of the Consecration, in the Canon
Hoc est, Co^lestis panis qui Christi ca^o est, suo modo vocatur corpus Christi,
cum re vera sit Sacramentum corporis Christi, illius videlicet, quod palpabile
mortale in cruce positum est; vocaturque ipsa imm^latio carnis quae sacerdotis
manibus sit, Christi passio, mors, crucifixio, non rei veritate sed
significante mysterio.
The heavenly bread, which is the flesh of Christ, is in its way, called the
body of Christ, although to speak truly, it be the Sacrament [or sacred sign]
of the body of Christ, even of him who being visible, palpable and mortal, was
put on the Cross. Then he brings an example, that the immolation of the flesh
of Christ, which is done by the hands of the Priest, is called the Passion, the
Death, and Crucifixion of Christ, not according to the truth of the thing, but
in a significant mystery. Upon which the Gloss of the Doctors speaks rarely,
Et ibi Glossa. Coeleste Sacramentum, quod vere repraesentat Christi carne,
dicitur corpus Christi sed improprie, verum dicitur suo modo, sed non rei
veritate sed significante mysterio; ut sit sensus, vocatur Christi corpus, id
est, significatur.
The heavenly Sacrament (say they) which truly represents the flesh of
Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperly. Yet it is so called, not
according to the truth of the thing, but by a significant mystery. So that the
sense is, that it is called the body of Christ, because it is signified.
Certainly great is the strength of truth, and I wonder how our Adversaries
suffer such a Gloss, in such an authentic book, whereby their doctrine is so
clearly condemned.

Wherefore Austin in the third Book against Maximin. chap. 22. lays down that
maxim about Sacraments. Haec enim Sacramenta sunt, in quibus non quid sunt,
sed quid ostendunt, semper attenditur, quoniam signa sunt rerum aliud
existentia, aliud significantia.
These things (says he) are Sacraments in which it is not regarded what they
are, but what they signify. For they are signs which are one thing and
signify another: That is, Baptism is water, and signifies the blood of
Christ; and the Eucharist is bread and wine, and signifies the body and blood
of Christ.

Wherefore also, in the third Book of Christian Doctrine, chap. 5. he gives
warning that Christians should take heed of mistaking the signs for the things
signified. Ea demum est miserabilis animae servitus signa pro rebus accipere.
It is (says he) a miserable bondage of the soul, to take the signs for the
things. And in the ninth Chapter, As to follow the letter, and to take the
signs for the things signified, is a servile infirmity, so to interpret the
signs uselesly, is an ill wandering. This is directly the sickness of the Roman
Church, which worshippeth the Sacrament, as if it were Christ himself, and
takes the sign for the thing signified.

Theodoret is very pregnant upon this point. In his first Dialogue, entitled,
the Immutable, he gives the exposition of these words, This is my body. (...).
The Lord (says he) has given unto the ^ign, the name of his body; and
shows how sometimes the name of the thing signified is given unto the sign,
as when the Lord called bread his body, and sometimes the name of the sign is
given to the thing signified, as when he calls himself the bread and the vine.
(...).
Our Savior (says he) has made an exchange of names, and has given to his
body the name of the sign (that is, when he called himself the bread) and gave
to the sign the name of his body, (namely when he said, This is my body) and so
he who called himself the Vine, called the sign (that is, the wine) his blood.

And a little after, (...)
His will was, that those that participate of the divine mysteries, should not
regard the nature of things that are seen, but that by the exchange of the
words, Ut autem literam s^qui and signa pro rebus, quae his significantur,
accipere servitis infirmitatis est, ita inutiliter signa interpretari male
vagantis erroris est.
they should believe the change that is done by grace. For the same that called
his natural body meat and bread [John 6.] and called himself the Vine, [John
15.] the same has honored the visible signs with the name of his body and
blood, having not changed their nature, but added grace unto nature. Here two
things are very considerable: The one, that he denies that in the holy
Communion, Christ has changed the nature of bread and wine: The other, that he
makes these words, I am the Vine, like unto these, This is my body, and says
that it is an exchange of words, and that in the first the name of the sign is
given to the signified thing, and in the second, the name of the signified
thing, is given to the sign.

For these causes, the Preface prefixed to the Roman Edition of the Dialogues
of Theodoret, gives this excuse for Theodoret, Quanquam Theodoretus hoc
fortasse nomine aliqua venia dignus videatur, quod de ea re ejus tempore, ab
Ecclesia nondum fuisset aliquid promulgatum. Et minus mirandum est, si dum
adversus hareticos acerrime disputat, veritatis tuendae studio longius
provectus in alteram partem nimium quandoque declinat.
Perhaps Theodoret may seem worthy of some pardon, because in his time the
Church had not yet published any thing about that point. And it is less to be
wondered at, if while he is disputing vehemently against heretics, being
carried away with his zeal to defend the truth, he does sometimes lean too much
on the contrary side. And the Jesuit Gregorius de Valentia in the book of
Transubstantiation Cap. 7.. Quod si. Theodoretus de aliis quibusdam erroribus
notatus est in Concilio Ephesino. Et paulo ante. Antequam quaestio illa de
Transubstantiatione in Ecclesia palam agitaretur, minime mirum est, si unus aut
alter, aut etiam aliqui ex veteribus minus considerate and recte hac de re
senserint and scripserint.
does reject the authority of Theodoret, and says that Theodoret was also
noted of other errors in the Council of Ephesus. And in the same place, Before
that question was openly agitated in the Church, it is no wonder if one or two,
or some number also of the Ancients have believed and written less
considerately and truly of that matter. In the same place he puts Gelasius and
John of Constantinople among the Fathers that have spoken amiss of that matter.
Of whom we shall speak hereafter.

We ow to the Jesuit Jacobus Sirmundus the works of Facundus an African Bishop,
who lived in the time of the Emperor Justinian. in book 9. chapter 5. p. 404. he
says that it may be said in some sort, that Christ has received the adoption
of children, because he received the Sacraments or sacred signs of the same,
when he was circumcised, and when he was baptized. Which he illustrateth by the
example of the holy Communion, in which the Sacrament of the body of Christ, is
called the body of Christ, although it be not the body of Christ, but because
it contains the mystery of his body. These be his own words, Facun. l. 9. cap.
5. page 404. Sicut Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis ejus quod est in pane and
poculo consecrato, corpus ejus and sanguinem dicimus, non quod proprie corpus
ejus sit panis, and poculum sanguis, sed quod in se mysterium corporis ejus and
sanguinis contineant. Hinc and ipse Dominus benedictum panem and calicem quem
discipulis tradidit, corpus and sanguinem suum vocavit. Quocirca sicut Christi
fideles Sacramentum corporis ejus and sanguinem accipientes, corpus and
sanguinem Christi recte dicuntur accipere, sic and ipse Christus sacramentum
adoptionis cum suscepisset, potuit recte dici adoptionem filiorum suscepisse.
It is (says he) as the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, which is in the
consecrateed bread and cup, is called his body and blood, not that this bread
to speak properly is his body, and this cup his blood, but because these things
contain the mystery of his body and blood. Wherefore also the Lord himself
called the blessed bread and cup which he gave to his Disciples his body and
blood. Wherefore as the godly receiving the Sacrament of his body and blood,
are well said to receive the body and blood of Christ, so Christ may well be
said to have received the adoption of Children, when he received the Sacrament
of that adoption. I owe a commendation to the fidelity of this Jesuit, for had
he been of no better conscience then his fellows, he would have suppressed or
corrupted that text; where these words especially are to be observed, that the
consecrated bread is not (to speak properly) the body of Christ, nor the cup
his blood, but the mystery or Sacrament, that is, the sacred sign of the same.

But nothing brings more light to the intelligence of the expressions of the
Fathers, which say that what we receive in the Communion is the body of Christ,
then to observe that they put a difference between the body which is received
in the Sacrament, and the body which was crucified for us, and that in this
matter (as I said before) they take the word body of Christ in three senses,
sometimes for his natural body which was crucified for us, sometimes for his
mystical body which is the Church, sometimes for his sacramental body
administered in the holy Communion.

Clemens Alexandrinus in the second book of the Pedagogue chapter 2. (...).
There is a twofold body of Christ, the one his carnal body whereby we are
redeemed from corruption; the other his spiritual, by which we are anointed;
and participating with the Lords incorruption is drinking the blood of Jesus.

Hierom upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ex. Hier. in Ep. ad Ephesians. lib. 1.
Can. Dupliciter. Dupliciter intelligitur car^ Christi, vel spiritualis illa
atque divina de qua ipse ait caro mea vere est eibus; vel caro ea qua crucifixa
est, and sanguis qui militis effusus est lancea.
The flesh of Christ is understood two ways, either that spiritual and divine
flesh, of which he says himself, My flesh is meat indeed; or that flesh which
was crucified, and that blood which was shed by the soldiers spear. And note
that this place is alleged in the Roman Decree in the second Distinction of
the Consecration.

In the same Distinction these words of the same Father are alleged, Ex
Hieron. in Levit. Can. De hac. De hac quidem hostia quae in Christi
commemoratione mirabiliter fit, edere licet. De illa vero quam Christus in ara
crucis obtulit, secundum se nulli edere licet.
It is lawful indeed to eat of that host, which is done wonderfully in
commemoration of Christ. But it is lawful to none to eat that host in it self,
which Christ offered on the altar of the Cross.

And in the same place, Did. 2. de Consecratione Can. Corpus. Corpus and
sanguinem Christi dicimus illud, quod de fructibus terrae acceptum and prece
mystica fructificatum recte sumitur ad salutem spiritualem in memoriam
Dominicae passionis.
We call the body and blood of Christ, that which being taken from the fruits
of the earth, and consecrated by the mystical prayer, is rightly taken by us
for spiritual salvation, in memory of the passion of the Lord. Is there any
thing of all that can be said of the body crucified for us? Is it a body of
Christ taken from the fruits of the earth? Can the crucified body of Christ be
consecrated by prayer? He speaks then of the Sacramental body of Christ.

Yea Pope Innocent the III. in book 4. of the Mysteries of the Mass, chapter 36.
distinguishes these two sorts of flesh or body of Christ. The form of bread
(says he) comprehends both the one and the other flesh of Christ, the true
and the mystical.

Austin in many places calls that which we receive in the Lords Supper the body
and blood of Christ. Yet upon Psalm 98. he brings in Christ speaking thus,
Spiritualiter intelligite quod locutus sum, Non hoc corpus quod videtis
manducaturi estis, and bibituri sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent.
Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendavi, quod spiritualiter intellectum
vivificabit vos.
You shall not eat this body which you see, and shall not drink the blood which
shall be shed by those that shall crucify me. I have recommended a sacred sign
unto you which being spiritually understood shall quicken you. Himself in
Sermon 53. de Verbis Domini. Pene quidem sacramentum omnes corpus ejus dicunt,
Almost all call Christ's body that which is the sacrament or sacred sign of the
same.

The Canon Hoc est in the same Distinction says as much, Sicut ergo coelestis
panis qui Christi caro est, suo mode vocatur corpus Christi, cum revera sit
Sacramentum corporis Christi, etc. non rei veritate sed significante mysterio.
Et ibi Glossa: Dicitur corpus Christi, sed imaroprie. Unde dicitur suo modo,
sed non rei veitate sed significante mysterio.
The heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ is called the body of Christ
in its way, although in truth it be the sacred sign of Christ's body. Here we
have plainly two bodies of Christ, the one natural which was crucified for us,
the other Sacramental which is a sign and sacrament of the other; and as the
Gloss says upon that Canon, It is named Christ's body but improperly; wherefore
it is said, in its way, not according to the truth of the thing. Note that the
Canon speaks of a body which in some sort is the body of Christ. Which would be
absurdly said of the natural body of Christ, namely, that it is the body of
Christ in some sort.

Thus Austin upon Psalm. 33. says, Aug. in Psalm. 33. Ipse se portabat quodam
modo cum diceret, Hoc est corpus meum
that the Lord carried himself in some sort when he said, This is my body. And
in Epistle 23. Epist. 23. Secundum quendum modum sacramentum corporis Christi
corpus Christi est.
The Sacrament of Christ's body, is Christ's body after a certain manner. Would
any man say that Christ's natural body is his body after a certain manner? Is it
not as much as if Austin said, that the Sacrament is not really the body of
Christ?

Ephrem Patriarch of Antioch speaks plainly of a body of Christ received in the
Eucharist, which is not in substance the natural body of Christ. Ex Phorii
Bibliotheca Edition. August. page 415. (...).
The body of Christ (says he) which the believers receive loses not his
sensible substance (that is, the substance of bread) and is not separated from
the intelligible grace. Thus also Baptism being altogether spiritual and only,
keeps the propriety of his sensible substance, even of water, and loses not
that which it was. Note that he makes the body of Christ which changes not
substance, to be the same thing in the Eucharist as the water in baptism.

Cyprian is very express upon this, for speaking of that body of Christ which
is administered in the Sacrament, he ascribes things to it which cannot be
proper to the natural body of Christ. In Epistle 76. Dominus corpus suam panem
vocat de mutrorum granorum adunatione congestum.
Bread made and composed with the union of many grains, the Lord calls his
body. It is then the body of Christ even when it is compounded with many
grains. And he says that by this body of Christ compounded with many grains,
the people, that is, the Church must be understood; For such was the opinion of
that Father, and of Austin also Nam quando Dominus corpus suum panem vocat de
multorum granorum adunatione congestum populum nostrum quem portabat indicat
adunatum. Et quando sanguinem suum vinum appellat de botris atque acinis
plurimis expressum atquein unum coactum, gregem item nostrum significat
commixtione adunatae multitudinis copulatum. Si Novatianus huic pani Dominico
adunatus est, si Christi poculo ipso commixtus est, etc.
When (says Cyprian) the Lord calls his body the bread compounded with the
union of many grains, it signifies that our people, which he bore, is united
together. And when he calls his blood the wine pressed out of many clusters and
grains, and gathered together, he signifies our flock also which is gathered
by the mixture of an united multitude. And upon that he asks of the heretic
Novatianus, Whether he be joined to that bread of the Lord which is the Church,
and whether he be mingled in that cup of Christ, that is, (as he expounds
himself) If he retains the unity of the Church? How remote is that language
from the Doctrine of the Roman Church? He that believed that Christ in the
Sacrament bore the people in his hands, and that this bread which he calls his
body, and this wine which he calls his blood, was the Church, and would that
every Christian should make part of that bread; was very far from believing
that the bread was transubstantiated into the natural body of Christ. It is
plain then that he puts in the Eucharist another body of Christ then his
natural body which was crucified for us, even a mystical and sacramental body.
Note that he says not, that the bread made up of many grains is become his
body, but that he calls his body that which is bread made up of many grains.

The same Father in the sixty third Epistle, where he disputes against those
that put nothing but water instead of wine in the cup of the Lords Supper,
maintains that there must be water in the cup mingled with wine. One of his
reasons is, that by the wine Christ is understood, and by the water the people.
Epist. 63. contra Aquarios seu Hydroparastatas. Si vinum tantum quis offerat,
sanguis Christi incipit esse sine nobis. Si vero aqua sit sola, plebs incipit
esse sine Christo.
If (says he) one offers nothing but wine, the blood of Christ begins to be
without us; but if the water is alone, the people begins to be without Christ.
This Father puts the people in the cup as well as Christ. Now he was not so
bereaved of reason as to think that the people was really within the cup. He
did not then believe that Christ was in it really, since he puts Christ and the
people alike in the cup.

Austin followed Cyprian in that opinion, when in the twenty sixth treatise
upon St. John's Gospel, speaking of the words of the Jews murmuring and saying,
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? He says Litigabant utique ad
invicem, quoniam panem concordiae non intelligebant. Et paulo post. Hunc itaque
eibum and potum societatem vult intelligi corporis and membrorum suorum quod
est Ecclesiae praedistinatis and vocatis, etc.
They quarrelled among themselves, because they understood not the bread of
concord. And a little after, speaking of these words, He that eats my flesh,
has eternal life, he gives this exposition, By this meat and drink, the Lord
will have the society of his body and members to be understood, that is, his
holy Church of the predestined, etc. This Father saying that the body of
Christ which we eat in the Lords Supper is the Church of the elect, says by
consequent, that this body which we eat is not really the natural body of
Christ, but another mystical and Sacramental body. Ipsum sacrificium est corpus
Christi, quod non offertur ipsis, quia hoc sunt and ipsi.
And in book 22. of the City of God, chapter 10. he gives a reason why they make
not the sacrifice of Christ's body to the martyrs, because themselves are the
body of Christ.

Cyprian especially seems to me to speak very plainly, and to put in the
Eucharist another body of Christ then that which was crucified for us, and
another blood then that which was shed on the Cross, when he says in the sixty
third Epistle, Nec corpus Domini potest esse farina sola and aqua sola, nisi
utrumque adunatum fuerit and capulatum, and panis unius compage solidatum.
The Lords body cannot be meal alone and water alone, unless both be joined and
kneaded together to make with them solid bread.

Who will think that this holy Doctor was so void of reason as to think that
Christ's natural body was made of meal? Yet his words are very express, that
Christ's body is made up of meal. Whence it is plain that he speaks of the
Sacramental and mystical body, not of the natural body of Christ. Sanguis
Christi non aqua est utique sed vinum.
And in the same Epistle he says, that the blood of Christ is wine not water.

Origin spoke thus in the same time upon Matthew. 15. where after a long
discourse of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and after he has said,
Ille cibus qui sanctificatur per verbum Dei perque obsecratione^, juxta id quod
habet materiale, in ventrem abit and in secessum emittitur.
that this meat which is sanctified by the Word of God and by Prayer, descends,
as for the matter, into the belly, and then is sent out into the draught, he
adds, as for the close, Et haec quidem de typico symbolicoque corpore.
Let this be said of the figurative and symbolical body. It was then another
body then the natural.

The same appears, in that the Fathers say that the body of Christ which is
distributed and eaten in the Lords Supper, is bread wherewith our bodies are
sed, and take increase by the digestion, which cannot be attributed to the
natural body of Christ, nor to accidents without substance; For colors, lines,
and figures cannot feed the body. But that is proper to the Sacramental body,
which is the natural body of Christ in the Sacrament, in the same manner as the
picture of Alexander, is the true Alexander represented. Justin Martyr toward
the end of his second Apology, describes the ancient form of administering the
Lords Supper among Christians. (...).
They that among us are called Deacons, give to every one bread, and wine, and
water, to be participant of the same, upon which bread and wine, thanksgivings
were said before, and they carry some of them to the absent, and this food is
called among us the Eucharist. He calls bread and water, that which was given
and administered to the people after the consecration. Having spoken thus, he
adds, (...).
For we take not these things as common bread or common drink. But in the same
manner as Jesus Christ our Savior being made flesh by the Word of God, had
both flesh and blood to save us, likewise we have been taught that the food
over which thanks were given by the prayer of the Word proceeding from him, by
which our blood and our flesh are fed by transmutation [of food] is the flesh
and blood of that Jesus that was made flesh. He says expressly enough, that the
consecrated bread is the flesh of Christ, but in that he adds, that with that
consecrated bread our bodies are fed by transmutation or digestion, he shows
evidently, that he holds not that the natural body of Christ enters into our
stomachs, but that the said bread is made the body of Christ in a mystical and
Sacramental way. And the comparison which he uses, brings us to it. For as the
eternal Word was made flesh without transubstantiating the flesh, and without
transubstantiating himself into flesh, so Justin believed that the Lord Jesus
present by his divine virtue, made this bread his body, without
transubstantiating the same, and that it was bread still, even when it was
distributed. This bread then, according to Justin, is the body of Christ made
flesh, but so that it is bread still, even in the distribution; that it is
received into the stomach, that our bodies are fed with it, and that it turns
into the substance of our flesh. This bread is Christ made flesh (as Austin and
the Roman Decree told us) in its way, and in Sacrament, and by a signifying
mystery, not according to the truth of the thing.

M. du Perron Page 186.
in his Book of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, against Monsieur du Plessis,
having not apprehended these two acceptions of the body of Christ, brings wild
answers, which give no satisfaction about the things here alleged. He
expounds these words of Justin, proceeding from him, as if Justin spoke of
prayer proceeding from Christ, whereas he speaks of the Word proceeding from
the Father.

What was Justins belief in this point, Justin himself shows sufficiently in
his Dialogue against Tryphon, speaking thus, Justin. in Tryph. page 82. (...).
Christ gave the bread, that we might remember that he was made a body for them
that believe on him, for whose sake he was made passible, and the cup which he
instituted for us, to do in remembrance of his passion.

And in the same Dialogue, (...), etc. (...), etc. (...).
The oblation of fine meal, was a figure of the bread of the Eucharist, which
Jesus Christ our Lord has appointed to be done in memory of his passion.

Quoniam membra ejus sumus, and p^r creaturam nutrimur, creaturam autem nobis
praestat, Solemn suum oriri faciens, and pluens quemadmodum vult, eum calicem
qui est creatura corpus suum confirmavit, ex quo nostra auget corpora.
Irenaeus in his fifth Book speaks the same language. Because we are his
members, and are fed by the creature, and that he affords us his creature,
making his Sun to rise, and his rain to fall according to his pleasure, he has
affirmed that the cup which is a creature, whereby he makes our bodies to grow,
is his body. I enter not into an examination of the reason of Irenaeus, whereby
he gathers that the cup is the body of Christ, because it is a creature
whereby our bodies are fed and grow. Which Platonical opinion, that God is the
soul of the world, and all creatures are Gods body, Austin confuteth in the
fourth Book of the City of God, chap. 12. Only I say, that Irenaeus shows
thereby that he believed that it was bread still, not Christ's natural body in
substance. For it would be a profane belief, to think that our bodies are fed
and fattened, and growing with the substance of the body of Christ; That would
be sending Christ to the draught, and exposing him to a strange ignominy; And
that without profit, since after that manducation, bodies will die nothing the
less. The following words of Irenaeus, confirm the same thing. Quando ergo and
inixtus calix and fractus panis percipit verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia sanguinis
and corporis Christi, ex quibus augetur and consistit carnis nostrae substantia.
When then the cup mingled and the bread broken receives the Word of God, it
is made the Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ, from which the substance
of our flesh is increased and made up. Truly our Adversaries seem to me
injurious to that Martyrs memory, affirming that he believed that our bodies
are fed and made up with the flesh of Christ received in the Sacrament. Observe
these words, the blood and body of Christ, wherewith the substance of our
bodies is increased and made up, that one may not think that he speaks of the
bread before it be consecrated. This word increased especially, is troublesome
to the Cardinal, wherefore he translates it strengthened, which is an evident
corruption.

The same in the fourth Book, chap. 34. speaking of the Eucharist, says, that
Offerre Deo oportet primitias ejus creaturae. Et ibid. Hanc oblationem Ecclesia
sola puram offert fabricatori, offerens ei cum gratiarum action ex creatura
ejus.
we must offer unto God the first fruits of his creature. And that the Church
alone offers that pure oblation unto the Creator, offering unto him of his
creature with thanksgiving. To which words, whereby he expresses plainly that
what the Church offers in the Eucharist, is the creature and work of the
Creator, and fruits of the earth, he adds other words, that call these
creatures, and these fruits of the earth (that is, bread and wine) the body of
Christ. Quomodo autem constabit eis eum panem in quo gratiae actae sunt corpus
esse Domini sui and calicem sanguinem ejus, si non ipsum fabricatoris Mundi
filium dicunt, id est, verbum ejus, per quod lignum fructificat, defluunt
sontes, and dat [terra] primo quidem foenum, post deinde spicam, deinde plenum
triticum in spica?
How (says he) can they be certain that the bread upon which graces were said,
be the body of the Lord and the cup his blood, if they acknowledge him not the
Son of the Maker of the world, that is, the Word by which the wood bears fruit,
and springs run down, and the earth gives first the blade, then the ear, and
then the full corn in the ear? This Father affirms, that our bodies are fed
with the body and blood of the Lord, which cannot be attributed to Christ's
natural body, but to the Sacramental body, which Irenaeus describes as a
creature of God, who makes the ground to bear fruit. And note these words, that
the bread upon which thanks or graces are said, is the Lords body. For he says
not that the bread becomes or is changed into the body of the Lord, but that
the bread is the body of the Lord, yea that bread which is a creature, and
which the earth has produced by the virtue of the Creator. I examine not here,
whether the reason of Irenaeus be solid, whereby he infers that the bread is
the body of Christ, because Christ is the Word whereby the earth bears fruit,
and brings Wheat, of which that bread is made; for by that reason all
creatures, and the world in general, should be the body of God, which is the
opinion of the Plato Philebo and Timaeo, (...), etc. August. l. 30. in Faustum
Manichaeum. Cicero somnio Scipionis, and de natura Deorum. Aspice hoc sublime
candens quod vocant Jovem. Virg. Aeneid. 6. Principio coelum and terras, etc.
Platonicians, of Tully, of Pliny, of Virgil, that God is to the world, that
which the soul is to the body. I say only that Irenaeus in the alleged place
speaks of a body of Christ, which cannot be the body crucified for us, for the
crucified body of Christ was not produced by the earth, is none of the fruits
of the earth, and our bodies get neither food nor increase by it.

It is evident also, that he believed that these fruits of the earth, or
creatures which he calls the body of Christ, have that virtue, that the
thanksgivings or blessings which are said over them in the Lords Supper, make
the bodies which are fed thereby, to become partakers of immortality.

He adds, Offerimus Deo quae sunt ejus, etc. Quemadmodum enim qui est a terra
panis, percipiens vocationem Dei, jam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia,
ex duabus rebus consta^s, terrena and coelesti; sic and corpora nostra
percipientia Eucharistiam, jam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis
habentia. Offerimus ei non quasi indigenti, sed gratias agentes donationi ejus,
and sanctificantes creaturam. Quemadmodum enim Deus non indiget little quae a
nobis sunt, sic non indigemus offerre aliquid Deo. Sicut Solomon ait, qui
miseretur pauperis, foeneratur Deo.
We offer unto God of his own goods, preaching conveniently the communication
and unity of flesh and spirit. For as the bread which is of the earth,
receiving the vocation [or invocation] of God is no more common bread, but the
Eucharist composed of two things, the one earthly, the other heavenly; so our
bodies receiving the Eucharist, are no more corruptible, having the hope of
resurrection. He joins in the Eucharist, the earthly thing with the heavenly,
wherefore also he says, that this bread is no more common bread, but still he
calls it bread. To understand by the earthly thing, the body of Christ, as the
Cardinal In his Book against Du Plessis, page 188.
understands it, is to oppose the style both of Scripture and Fathers, which
call the body of Christ, the bread come down from heaven, and debasing the
dignity of Christ's body, and denying the signs to be part of this Sacrament,
since they are neither the earthy nor the heavenly thing.

Irenaeus goes further, for following that discourse of the bread and wine
which the Church offers unto God, he says that these things are offered unto
God, not because he has need of them, for (says he) Deus non indiget eorum
quae a nobis sunt, God has no need of the things that come from us. It is
clear that by the things that come from us, he understands bread and wine, and
the fruits that the earth brings. Wherefore also he reckons alms among them;
for he adds, Whereas God has no need of the things that come from us, we
have need to offer something to God, as Solomon says, He that shows mercy to
the poor, lends to God upon usury.

Before I go further, I cannot forbear to show the Cardinals learning in Greek.
The Greek text of Irenaeus is lost, and we have nothing but the Latin Version,
which is none of the best; In that version there is, Jam non communis panis
est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti. The
Cardinal corrects that version, and says that there is not in the Greek (...),
that is, which is composed, but (...), which is a preterit Participle, and must
be translated which was composed. This is a woeful ignorance, for as compositus
in Latin is preterit, and yet is always understood in the present; likewise
(...) signifies, which is composed, not which was composed. Thus Col. 1.17.
(...), is translated in the version of the Roman Church, Omnia in ipso
constant. And 2 Pet. 3.5. (...), Terra de aqua consistens. And Clemens
Alexandrinus, in the first Book of the Pedagogue, chap. 6. (...), The Church
like a man, is composed with many limbs. According to the Cardinal, we should
say that the Church has been composed with many limbs, but that is so no more.
And so in other compositions, Aeschines in Timocratem.
(...), stantes in judicio. And (...), mores sedati and compositi. In a word,
that preterit Participle has always a signification of the present Tense, as
in Latin these words, mortuus, sepultus, caesus, vestitus, fractus, etc. Can a
man speaking like the Cardinal, have any relish of the Greek tongue?

But to return to our matter, it appears by the fore-alleadged places of
Irenaeus, that he speaks of another body, then Christ's natural body.

The same appears, in that the Fathers speak often of pieces, and parts, and a
residue of Christ's body; a thing which may be said of the Sacramental, not of
the natural body of Christ, which cannot be divided in pieces, and of which ho
residue is found. How profane or brutish should that man be, that would ask
for a piece of Christ? Eusebius in the sixth Book of his History, speaking of
Serapion sick to death, says that a Priest sent him by a little boy, a little
piece of the Eucharist. May one say, that he sent him a piece of Christ? Or
should he have sent him the Eucharist by a little boy, if he had believed that
it had been the Lords body?

Pope Gelasius in the Canon Comperimus, in the first Book of the consecration,
Comperimus quod quidam sumpta tantummodo corporis sacri portione a calice
sacrati cruoris abstineant.
We are certainly informed (says he) that some having taken part of the body
of Christ, abstain from the cup, which he calls a great sacrilege. Evagrius in
the fourth Book, chap. 36. (...).
The ancient custom in the Royal City, requires that when many pieces of the
immaculate body of Christ remain, children not yet corrupted, such as go to
petty Schoolmasters, are sent for to eat them. Though Evagrius had not spoken
of the pieces, nor of the remnant of the body of Christ, yet that custom of
giving the fragments of the bread of the Lords Supper to a company of little
School-boyes, is a certain proof that the Church believed not that it was the
true body of Christ crucified for us. Our Adversaries would account that a
great profanation. It was then the Sacramental body of Christ; and as Origin
says, the symbolical or figurative body of Christ.

This expression, that the bread is the body of Christ, is a thousand times
repeated in the writings of the Ancients, when they speak of the bread of the
Eucharist. It is the doctrine of our Churches, that the bread is the body of
Christ, as Christ teaches us, who giving the bread to his Disciples, said,
This is my body. But the Roman Church denies that the bread is the body of
Christ, but says that the bread becomes the body of Christ, and is
transubstantiated into Christ's body. As if an Alchymist had converted silver
into gold, it should be ill spoken, to say, This silver is gold, but it should
be said, This gold was made of silver. Thus if bread be converted into the
natural body of Christ, that bread is not the. body of Christ, but ceasing to
be bread, it was converted into the body of Christ. Wherefore Bell. lib. 1. de
Euchar. c. 1. and l. 3. c. 19.
Bellarmine affirms that these words, This bread is my body, either must be
figuratively taken, so that the bread be the body of Christ by signification,
or they are altogether absurd and impossible. For it cannot be, that the bread
be the body of Christ in substance, but it may be so in Sacrament. Yet there is
nothing more frequent in the Fathers, when they speak of the consecrated bread,
then to say that bread is the body of Christ, and that the Lord called bread
his body, and that he said, that bread is his body, not that he changed it into
his body.

Theodoret in the first Dialogue, (...).
The Lord giving the mysteries, called bread his body. And Tertullian in the
third Book against Marcion, Panem suum corpus appellans, ut and cum hinc
intelligas corporis sui figuram pani dedisse.
He called bread his body, that hereby thou may understand that he has
given unto bread to be the figure of his body. Chrysostom in the 24. Homily
upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, makes this Question, (...).
What is the bread? He answers, The body of Christ. Justin Martyr told us
before, that the bread wherewith our bodies are fed, is the body of Christ.
Cyprian in the 63. Epistle, That which Christ called his blood was wine. And so
Gandentius, Gaudent. in Exodus tractatu secundo de Paschate. Ego sum vitis vera,
satis declarat sanguinem suum esse omne vinum quod in figura passionis ejue
offertur.
The Lord declares enough that his blood is all the wine which is offered in
figure of his passion.

Hierom in the second Question to Hedibia, Nos audiamus, ganem quem fregit
Dominus deditque Discipulis esse corpus Domini salutaris.
Let us hear that the bread which the Lord brake and gave to his Disciples, is
the body of the Lord and Savior. And the Canon, Qui manducat, in the second
Distinction of the consecration, Panis est corpus Christi, The bread is the
body of Christ. And in the Canon Corpus, Corpus Christi illud dicimus quod de
fructibus terrae acceptum, and prece mystica consecratum.
We call that the body of Christ, which being taken from the fruits of the
earth, is consecrated by the mystical prayer. And Ambrose in the fourth Book of
the Sacraments, chap. 4. Hoc igitur astruamus, quomodo potest qui panic est
esse corpus Christi.
Let us show how that which is bread, can be the body of Christ.

In all these expresses of the Ancients, our Adversaries find figures, and
wrest them into a figurative sense, using the Fathers in the same manner, as
they do the Holy Scripture.

Truly, that man must be either ignorant, or wilfully blind in the style of the
Ancients, that acknowledges not that the Fathers in this matter take Christ's
body in three senses, one natural and two mystical, the Church and the
Sacramental bread, which is indeed a symbolical body, but sanctified by the
divine virtue of the Son of God. Wherefore they call these fearful mysteries
the holy bread, the heavenly bread, the bread come down from heaven, whereby
Christ is made ours, so that we dwell in him, and he in us. But this makes
nothing for Transubstantiation, and incloseth not the natural body of Christ
under the elements.

We must not think strange, if sometimes the Ancients attribute to this
Sacramental body, things that are proper to the natural, as to have suffered
for us, and to have been bruised on the Cross. For it is the style both of
Scripture, and of the Fathers, to atttibute unto signs, that which is proper
only to things signified. As when we show the Kings picture, we say, Here is
the man that won such and such battails, who dyed in such a place, or in such a
year.

Now it is easy to conceive, how and in what sense Chrysostom so often
inculcates, that we eat, and break, and see the body of Christ in mysteries;
and why Absit ut de his quicquam sinistrum loquar, qui Apostolico gradui
sacerdotum Christi corpus sacro ore conficiunt.
Hierom in the Epistle to Heliodorus says, that the Priests make the body of
Christ with their sacred mouth. Hierom was not so dull as to believe that
Priests could make the natural body of Christ: That would be putting Priests
above Christ, and ascribing a power unto them, greater then that of all the
Angelical power. A body which is already, cannot be made while it is. Hierom
speaks of the Sacramental body, which is made by the prayer of the
Consecration. For himself told us before, that none can eat of the body of
Christ crucified.

The Father which seems to be most favorable to our Adversaries, is Ambrose,
who in the fourth book of the Sacraments, chap. 4. inculcates often, that the
bread becomes Christ's body by the consecration. It is not Christ's body (says
he) before the consecration; but after the consecration, I tell thee, It is
Christ's body. Whereupon he alleges many examples of the transmutations made
by Gods power: For example, that we were old creatures, but are now become new
by consecration: That Christ was born of a Virgin, contrary to the order of
nature: That Moses with his rod divided the Sea: That a piece of wood cast by
Moses into bitter waters, made them sweet: That Elisha made iron to swim above
the water. Whence he infers, that God is powerful to make this bread to be
the body of Christ by the consecration. But in all these, there is no more then
what we say. For we know, that by the consecration the bread becomes the body
of Christ, yet remaining bread still, and without any change of the substance
of bread, as when a piece of wax becomes the Kings Seal, and yet remains wax
still. Saint Ambrose says so much expressly in the same chapter, where he bgins
his dispute in these words, Hoc igitur astruamus, quomodo potest, qui panis
est, esse corpus Christi.
Let us establish this, how that which is bread can be the body of Christ. So
that he will have it to be together, both bread and the body of Christ. And a
little after, Si tanta vis in sermon Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae non
erant, quanto magis operatorius est, ut sint quae erant, and in aliud
commutentur?
If there was such a virtue in the word of the Lord Jesus, that the things that
were not, should begin to be, how much more shall it be effectual in making
things that were, to be, and to he changed into other things? These words are
very pregnant, that the bread is changed into a thing that was not, and yet
continues to be that which it was before, that is, bread. And this expression
of Ambrose, is set down in the very words which we allege here, in all the
ancient editions. And so is alleged in the Decree of Yuo Carnutensis, in the
second part, chap. 7. And by Gratian in the second Distinction of the
Consecration, in the Canon Panis. By Lombard in the fourth Book of the
Sentences, Did. 10. in the letter D. By Thomas in the third part of the Sum,
Question 78. Article 4. Not according to the falsification of some new Editions
of Ambrose, which have omitted sint quae erant, in which words lies all the
strength of the sentence. To the same purpose are these words of the same
chapter, Sicut similitudinem mortis bibisti, ita similitudinem pretiosi
sanguinis bibis.
As thou did drink the likeness of his death, thou drinkest also the likeness
of his precious blood.

The Cardinal Du Perron against M. du Plessis, page 287.
answers that the end of Ambrose (saying, If there be such strength in the
Word of the Lord, to make things that were not, to have a beginning of being,
how much more can it make things that were, to be, and to be changed into other
things?) was to say, that if the Almighty power of God could make things pass
from the not being to the being, it may with more reason, preserving them in
the universal latitude of the being, make them pass from one kind of being to
another. By these words he says, that God in the Eucharist preserves the
bread in a latitude of Universal being, which the Roman Church believes not.
Also it is hard to comprehend how the substance of bread being abolished, a
thing which is no more, is preserved in the universal latitude of being. These
are his ordinary Chimera's to amuse the Reader, when he finds himself run
aground. By the same reason, when God turned the waters into blood, and the rod
into a Serpent, these waters and that rod remained in being in the latitude of
the universal being: And by consequent, these examples can no more be opposed,
or compared by Ambrose as less miraculous, with the change which is made in the
Eucharist.

Du Perron against du Plessis, page 285.
Upon that the Cardinal uses to make many exclamations, and to ask To what
purpose is it to bring examples of the creation of the world, of the
transmutation of creatures, and of the unspeakable generation of Christ's body,
to prove that it was in our Lords power to make the bread of the Eucharist to
be the sign of his body?

By speaking thus, he makes us speak against our sense. We say not that Ambrose
had alleged these examples to prove that the bread is the sign of Christ's
body. We know well that he believed something more, as we also do. He believed
that the bread remaining bread, was the body of Christ, and that by an
ineffable mystery; that bread remaining bread, is made unto us the body of
Christ. And that by this participation Christ is made ours, and we are
conjoined with him, which is the doctrine of the Apostle, saying, The bread
which we break, 1 Cor. 16.16.
is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? It is bread then, not flesh in
substance: It is bread which is broken; not a body which cannot be broken. And
by eating this bread, we communicate by faith with the natural body of Christ,
but we eat not that natural body with our mouth and teeth. It is a divine work,
which to express, Ambrose stretches his wit, and swells in lofty words as much
as he is able: Neither must we wonder that in such a Divine and Spiritual
matter, he has much ado to express his conceit. Besides, if we consider what
examples Ambrose alleges, we shall find that well nigh all speak of a change
without transubstantiation, and without production of any substance, as the
regeneration of the godly, the Sea divided by Moses, the waters of Mara
sweetened; the iron swimming upon the water.

Yet we have in the following chapter of the same book of Ambrose, the terms of
the public service, Ambros. lib. 4. de Sacram c. 5. Dicit sacerdos, Fac nobis
hanc oblationem ascriptam rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis
and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi.
The Priest says, Let this oblation be accounted unto us, reasonable,
acceptable, which is the figure of the body and blood of the Lord. This word
figure displeased the Roman Church; for now that clause is found in the Canon
of the Mass, saving only the word figure, which was put out, as savouring
heresy. In his book against du Plessis, page 288.
The Cardinal says for answer, that the Roman Church acknowledges a figure in
the Eucharist. That figure (if he may be believed) lies in that the accidents
(which fraudulently they call species) vail the body of Christ. I answer, that
the Cardinal believes not that this figure is the sacrifice or oblation which
God lays to our account for our sins, and which is reasonable and acceptable,
as it is said in the words of the ancient service. Had not this word figure
been displeasing to the Roman Church, it had not been put out. Besides, the
accidents of the bread, cannot be figures of the body; a roundness without any
round subject, cannot be a figure of the Lords body which has an humane form.
Figures help to know things signified by these figures. But our Adversaries
say, that these accidents cover the body of the Lord, and hinder the sight and
knowledge thereof.

He answers in the second place, that this clause of the ancient Service, is
before the consecration, and when there is nothing yet upon the Altar, but the
simple figure of Christ's body. It was impossible for the Cardinal to write
this, without acting against his own conscience. For although that clause was
pronounced before these words, This is my body; yet the Roman Church believes
not that the Priest asks that the bread not consecrated be the offering which
may be put to our account before God. Thus before the consecration, the Priest
says that he Tibi offerimus hoc sacrificium laudis pro redemptione animarum.
offers a sacrifice of praise for the redemption of souls, which cannot also
be said of the bread not consecrated, which is not offered unto God for our
redemption. It is evident then, that the Priest speaking thus, regards the
sacrifice which he undertaketh to do, and for which the Roman Church holds that
the Mass is instituted, without regarding the time, either before or after the
consecration. And that this word of Figure was blotted out, when the quarrel
was moved about Transubstantiation, that it might not be perceived that this
sacrifice is no real sacrifice, but the sacrifice of the Lords Passion in
figure and commemoration.

The same Ambrose, in the book of those that are initiated into mysteries, chapter
9. speaks thus, It is a true flesh which was crucified, and which was buried.
It is then also truly the Sacrament of that flesh. The Lord Jesus himself
cries up. This is my body. Ante benedictionem verborum coelestium alia species
nominatur, post consecraionem corpus significatur.
Before the blessing of the heavenly words, another kind is named. After the
consecration, the body of Christ is signified. The same Father upon chap. 11.
of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, has these words, Quia morte Domini
liberati sumus, hujus rei memores in edendo and potando, carnem and sanguinem
quae pro nobis oblata sunt significamus. That is, Because we are delivered by
the death of the Lord, we remembering that by eating and drinking, signify the
flesh and blood of the Lord which were offered for us. In his book against du
Plessis of the Eucharist, page 294.
Cardinal du Perron to elude this notable authority, puts out the comma after
potando, and translateth this place in this manner; By eating and drinking the
flesh and blood, we signify the things that were offered for us. The absurdity
of that traduction is evident. For what are the things offered for us, but the
body and blood of Christ? Here is then the jolly version of the Cardinal, By
eating and drinking the flesh and blood, we signify the flesh and blood: Thus
that which signifies, and that which is signified, shall be all one. Wherefore
this falsification being not able to subsist alone, the Cardinal adds another
depravation, and instead of Significamus.
signify, translates declare, as if Ambrose said, we declare the things
offered, which wants common sense. But Ambrose in the following lines confirms
our interpretation: For speaking of Christ's blood, he says, Beneficii divini
sanguis testis est, in cujus typum nos calicem mysticum percipimus.
This blood is a witness of the divine grace, in figure of which we receive the
mystical cup of blood.

In vain do they object unto us some sentences of the Fathers, which say that
the thing that we receive in the Sacrament, is the true body of Christ that was
crucified for us. For the Sacramental body, is the true and natural body of
Christ in Sacrament and Commemoration: As the statue that represents Julius
Caesar, is the true Julius Caesar represented, even the Conqueror of Gauls, he
that overcame Pompeius, not another imaginary person. And the Fathers that
expound these words, This is my body, by This is the sign or figure of my body,
understand the true and natural body of Christ, and give to the Sign, the name
of the thing signified.

So much will serve, (I think) to show in what sense the Fathers have called
that which is broken and given in the Communion, the body of Christ; and to
prove that they do not take always this word of body of Christ, for the body
crucified for us, but sometimes for the Church, sometimes for the Sacramental
and mystical body which is given in commemoration of the natural body of
Christ. The books of the Fathers must be read with care, and with an equitable
and prudent judgment. He that reads them, must know the style of the times,
the occasions, the customs, the circumstances, and the connection of their
sentences, referring all to the analogy of faith, bringing a favorable
interpretation to it. If they say that the bread is the body of Christ, or that
by the consecration the body of Christ is made, they speak of the Sacramental
body, which they distinguish in a thousand places from the natural. But when
sometimes they say, that the thing given in the Eucharist is the true body of
Christ, themselves warn us that the name of the thing signified is given unto
the Sign, and that this bread is the true body of Christ, that is, the
Sacrament or Sign of the true body of the Lord.

But in the matter in hand especially, the Fathers take care to explain their
mind, teaching that the substance of bread and wine remains after the
consecration; As we shall show in the following Chapter.

CHAP. 5. That the Fathers did not believe transubstantiation, but believed
that the substance of bread and wine remains after the consecration.
THe word of Transubstantiation is a monster which the corruption of the last
ages has hatched, bred, and reared up. It was established by an Article of
Council in the year 1215. in the Council of Lateran under Innocent the III. For
of the change of the substance of bread into the substance of Christ's natural
body, there is no trace in the Fathers of the fitst ages, well understood, and
faithfully alleged. For the transmutation of which Justin Martyr speaks in the
second Apology, is not the transmutation of bread into the Lords body, but the
transmutation of the symbolical and sacramental body of Christ into our flesh
by the disgestion of bread. Wherefore also Ireneus in the forealleadged place
says not only that our bodies are fed by it, but also that they get increase
by the same.

Leo the I. Bishop of Rome, in the twenty third Epistle to the Clergy of
Constantinople, speaks of a change which is done in the Lords Supper; not of
the change of bread into the substance of Christ's body, but of the believers
into the flesh of Christ. Epist. 23. ad Clarum. In illa mystica distributione
spiritualis alimoniae hoc impartitur, hoc sumitur, ut accipientes virtutem
coelestis cibi in carnem ipsius qui car^ nostra factus est, transcamus.
In the mystical distribution of the spiritual meat, this is distributed, this
is taken; that we receiving the virtue of the heavenly meat, be changed into
the flesh of him that was made our flesh.

In the second Dialogue of Theodoret it is said indeed that the sacred signs
are changed by the consecration, and become the body of Christ; but it is an
Eutychian heretic that speaks, who by a pretended transmutation of the bread
and wine goes about to establish the transmutation of the humane nature of
Christ into the divine, as we shall see hereafter.

We have already seen how Justin, Ireneus and Cyprian call bread and wine and
fruits and creatures of God, that which is given and received in the Lords
Supper.

Origin upon Matthew. 15. speaking of the Eucharist, Quod sanctificatum per
verbum Dei and per obsecrationem, non suapte natura, sanctificat utentem; nam
id si esset, sanctificaret etiam illum qui comedit indigne, etc.
That which is sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer, does not of its
nature sanctify him that uses it; for if it were so, it would also sanctify
him that uses it unworthily. And a little after. Quod si quicquid ingreditur
in os, in ventrem abit, and in secessum ejicitur, and ille cibus qui
sanctificatur per verbum Dei perque obsecrationem, juxta id quod habet
materiale, in venrem abit, and in secessum ejicitur, etc. Et haec quidem de
typico symbolicoque corpore.
If all that enters into the mouth, goes into the belly, and is cast out into
the draught, this meat also which is sanctified by the word of God and by
prayer, as for that which is material in it, goes down into the belly and is
cast out into the draught. And a little after he makes this conclusion of his
discourse. Let this be said of the typical and symbolical body. In this place
of Origin, observe that he speaks of the bread consecrated and sanctified by
the word of God, that the says that it sanctifies not of its nature, and
that, as for the matter of it, it goes out into the draught; Things which
cannot be attributed unto the true body of Christ, for it sanctifies of its
nature, and is not cast out into the draught. And cannot also be attributed to
the accidents of bread, as roundness and whiteness; for these accidents are not
the matter of bread, and are not sent into the draught. This can be attributed
to nothing but the bread which by Origin is called a symbolical and figurative
body.

Of the truth of his testimony none can doubt seeing that it is in the Editions
set out by our Adversaries, and that the famous Sixtus Senensis has inserted
it whole in his Bibliotheca Sacra.

Wherefore Cardinal du Perron, after he has made some show of doubting of the
truth of this testimony, yet says that he will not touch that string, but
extends his oratory upon Invectives against Origin, and sets forth h s errors
at large, saying that the alleged place, is a particular whimsey of the
spirit of Origin, which he forgeth against the common doctrine of the Church.
And upon these words of Origin that the bread consecrated by prayer, is cast
out into the draught, he cries out In his book against du Plessis, p. 222.
Shut up your ears, Christians; as if these words were read with the ears. I
acknowledge indeed that Origin with his many excellent virtues, and his rare
doctrine, had many errors. But I may say also that never any man's writings
were more narrowly scanned, or past through a more rigid and violent censure
then those of Origin suffered, Vide Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 12.
by those that lived after him, especially by Ephiphanius, Hierom, and
Theophilus of Alexandria, out of their animosity against Ruffinus and John of
Jerusalem, who were Origenists. Wherefore the name of Origin is so far from
weakening the authority of that place, that it rather increase^h the strength
of it and adds weight to it. For if Origin writing so, had taught against the
belief of the Orthodox Church, so many exact and partial examiners would not
have omitted it. Yet none of the Ancients reproved him for speaking so. For not
only Austin, a meek and impartial man, and Theodoret, who have made a
description of the errors of Origin, but even Epiphanius and Hierom, the
enemies of Origin, never put that among his errors that his doctrine about the
Eucharist was not sound. The silence of the enemies of Origens memory is in
this point a manifest and public approbation of his doctrine.

Here the Cardinal raises his style, and brings forth out of a Paschal Epistle
of Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria the condemnation of Origin upon the point
of the Eucharist. For (says he) Theophilus condemns him for teaching that the
Holy Ghost sets not inanimate things on work, and works neither in them, nor
by them. And upon that alleges thus the words of Theophilus Non recogitat
aquas in Baptismate mysticas adventis Sancti Spiritas consecrari, pane ^^que
Dominicum quo Salvatoris corpus ostenditur, and quem frangimus in
sanctificationem nostri, and sacrum calicem, quae in mensa collocantur, and
utique in anima sunt, per invocationem and adventum Sancti Spiritus
sanctificari.
Origin considers not that the mystical waters in the Baptism are consecrated
by the coming of the Holy Ghost; And that the bread of the Lord by which
[ostenditur] is showed or represented the body of the Savior, and which we
break for our sanctification, and the cup, which are set upon the table, these
things being inanimate, are sanctified by the invocation and coming of the
Holy Ghost. I know not where the Cardinals mind was wandering when he mustered
up these useless proofs, yea such as are against him. Theophilus does not find
fault with Origin for denying the Transubstantiation of the bread, nor for
saying that the bread of the Lords Supper, as for the matter, goes to the
draught, and sanctifies not by its nature; nor for calling the consecrated
bread a symbolical and figurative body; But for saying that God imployeth not
inanimate things and sanctifies them not. May not God sanctify inanimate,
things without transubstantiating them? Does he not sanctify the water of
Baptism, though it remain water still? Does Theophilus reprove Origin for not
believing that the water of Baptism is transubstantiated? Certainly the
Cardinal takes here his measures amiss. Yea he brings an authority of
Theophilus which says expressly that the bread of the Lord shows or
represents the body of Christ. But who was that Theophilus? Vide ^ocratem l.
6. c. 2. and 7, and 9. and 12. Et Sozomenum. l. 8. c. 2. 12. 13. 14.
One of the most perverse and corrupt Bishops of all the ancient ages. A man
acting sometimes against, sometimes for the Anthropomorphites, a persecutor of
Chrysostom, and the cause of his death. A man without faith and without
conscience. But let us come to other witnesses.

Theodoret in the first Dialogue entitled the Immutable, disputes against an
Eutychian who maintained that the humane nature of the Savior was changed by a
substantial change into the divine nature, and defended his error with the
example of the pretended transmutation of the bread of the Eucharist into the
substance of the Lords body. Theodoret answers him thus. (...).
The Lord who had called meat and bread that which is naturally his body, and
who again called himself a vine, honored the visible signs with the
appellation of his body and blood, having not changed their nature, but having
added grace unto nature. So many words, so many proofs. It was much said
already that God had honored the signs, even the bread and the wine with the
name of his body. But he says more, affi^ming that the Lord has not changed
the nature of these signs, which is fighting directly against
transubstantiation. We must remember that the dispute betwixt the heretic and
Theodoret was about the change made in the substance, that M. du Perron may not
say that by the nature the accidents only are understood.

The heretic did not speak of accidents, but maintained by the example of the
change made in the Eucharist, that the substance of the human nature of Christ
by virtue of the incarnation had been changed into the substance of the divi^e
nature. It had been unreasonable for Theodret to affirm against that heretic
that the accidents were not changed, seeing that the question is of the change
in the substance.

A little before, he had said, (...).
Our Lord has made an exchange of names, and has given to his body the name
of the sign [namely when he said I am the bread] and to the sign the name of
his body, namely when he says, This is my body. Nothing can be more clear and
expre^s.

In the second Dialogue entitled the Inconfounded, The divine mysteries are
(...).
signs of the true body. By speaking so, he says clearly enough that the
divine mysteries are not the true body.

A little after, the Eutychian having said that (...), etc.
as the signs of the body and blood of the Lord are other before the
invocation of the Priest, but that after the invocation they are changed, so
the Lords body after the assumption is changed into the divine substance, which
is the language of the Roman Church of our days. Theodoret answers him; Thou
art taken by the net which thou have woven; For even after the consecration,
mystical signs change not their own nature; for they remain in all their; first
substance figure and form, and are visible and to be handled as before. But
they are understood to be the things which they were made, and are believed and
venerated as made that which they are believed to be

To these words of Theodoret which are most urgent against the Roman Church,
namely that the mystical signs after the consecration do not change nature but
remain in their first substance: In his book against du Plessis page 537.
M. du Perron answers in a way more to be admired then praised. For arming
his wonted ignorance in Greek with boldness, he gives to the words of
Theodoret a new interpretation, rej^cti^g that of Gentianus Hervetus, followed
by Bellarmin, by Gregorius of Valentia, and generally by all our adversaries
that have written of this question. Theodoret says that the mystical signs
after the consecration do not change narure. (...), that is, (as our
Adversaries translate) manent enim in priore substantia and figura and forma.
But the Cardinal, the worst Grecian of them all, translateth, for they remain
in the figure and form of the first substance. Can any thing be devised more
absurd and more repugnant to the Greek? To translate as he does, there should
be in the Greek, (...). Besides he contradicts Theodoret, makes all his
reasoning ridiculous, and makes him answer out of purpose. For, as I said, the
dispute was about the change in the substance, the heretic proving by the
example of the transmutation of the bread into the substance of the body of
Christ, the transmutation pretended by the Eutychians of the humane nature into
the substance of the divine nature. Theodoret to contradict them, says not
that the accidents, the figure and the outward form of bread remain, but that
the substance of bread remains after the consecration. It being the question to
show that after the incarnation the substance of the flesh of Christ remains,
Theodoret should speak against reason and against himself, if, to show that, he
alleged that the substance of the bread being changed, the accidents and the
outward show remain. That would have been pleading directly the Eutychians
cause, who said that the substance of Christ's flesh being changed, the
accidents and the outward appearance remain. But the Cardinal, that he may have
the honor to say some new thing, will have the Reader to believe that he
understood the Fathers better then any, and rejects the interpretation of all
the men of his Church that writ before him.

The same Theodoret in the third Dialogue entitled the Impassibile, disputes
thus against the Eutychians. (...).
If the flesh of Christ was transformed into the nature of the Godhead, to what
purpose do [Christians] participate to the signs of his body? For the figure is
in vain when the truth is abolisht.

The same reason Tertullian uses against the Marcionites in chapter 40. book 4.
against Marcion. Acceptum panem and distribubutum corpus suum fecit dicend^,
Hoc est corpus meum, id est figura corporis mei. Figura autem non fuisset nisi
veritatis esset corpus.
Christ having taken bread and distributed it to his Disciples, made it his
body, saying, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body. Now there would
have been no figure, had he not been a true body. He means that no figures and
no representations are made of things that are not.

Among our Adversaries those that go more roundly to work, blame Theodoret
openly. We heard before how he is condemned by the Jesuit Gregory de Valentia,
in the Preface of the Roman Edition prefixed before the Dialogues of Theodoret.
Our Cardinal also taunts him, and speaks contemptuously of him in these words.
Against Du Plessis page 451.
Though Theodoret, having some remnant of the leaven of Nestorianism, which he
was accused to favor, should speak of the Eucharist (which was one of the
chief arguments whereby the doctrine of Nestorius was impugned) less really and
reverently then it might be wished, the wonder were not very great. This is an
unjust brand put upon that excellent man. His books purge him of that blame, in
which there is not one spot of Nestorianism. So far he is from it, that in the
Catalogue which he has made of Heretics he puts Nestorius, and impugneth
Nestorianism with all his power. Yet the Cardinal being prone to have a better
opinion of Theodoret, goes about to excuse him, saying, he spoke thus
obscurely, because he might not be understood by the Catechumens. This Cardinal
always takes things in the contrary sense. In the second Dialogue Theoderet,
being asked by the Heretic, (...).
How do thou call the gift which is presented before the Priests invocation?
answers, We must not speak clearly, for perhaps some are here that are not
yet initiated, that is, some Catechumens: whereupon the heretic says, Let
then the answer be in enigmatical terms. Wherefore Theodoret, that he may not
speak clearly, answers, that this gift which is offered is meat made up with
such seeds, instead of saying It is bread. Thereby it appears that he spoke
obscurely, for fear that saying plainly that it was bread, he should make the
meat contemptible which was laid upon the sacred table. But the Cardinal takes
this in the quite contrary sense, that Theodoret did not speak of this
Sacrament in terms high enough, and would not discover that high mystery of
Transubstantiation before Catechumens.

We have a book of Pope Gelasius (for the title says so much) against
Nestorius and Eutyches, where this sentence is found; Certe Sacramenta quae
sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christi, divina res est, propter quod and per
eadem divinae efficimur consortes naturae. Et tamen esse non desinit substantia
vel natura panis and vini. Et certe imago and similitudo corporis and sanguinis
Christi in action mysteriorum celebrantur.
Truly the Sacraments which we take of the body and blood of Christ, are a
divine thing; wherefore also by them we are made consorts of the divine nature,
and yet it cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine. And
indeed the image and the likeness of the body and blood of Christ, are
celebrated in the action of mysteries. Our Adversaries receive this authority,
and admit it as true and not falsified, and have inserted this book in
Bibliotheca Patrum. But they dispute who is this Gelasius, whether it was Pope
Gelasius, as the title of the book says, and as it appears by Fulgentius who
transcribes many passages out of it in his answer to the questions of Ferrandus
Diaconus, especially in the answer to the second question. Or whether it be
Gelasius Bishop of Cesarea of whom Hierom speaks in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical writers, as Bellarmin and Gregorius de Valentia are of opinion.
Or whether it be Gelasius Cyricenus, as Baronius holds; which are all ancient
Authors approved by the Roman Church. Lib. de Transub. cap. 7. Sect. quod si
Neque Gelasius ille fuit author satis clarus; Non igitur nobis debent pancorum
ejusmodi testimonia praejudicare.
Gregorius de Valentia speaks of that Author with contempt, saying, That
Gelasius was not an Author famous enough; wherefore such testimonies of some
few Authors of that sort, howsoever they may be expounded, can bear us no
prejudice, seeing that we have a cloud of other most grave witnesses for the
truth of transubstantiation.

In the book of the Eucharist against M. du Plessis page 563.
Cardinal du Perron has bestowed upon this only place of Gelasius four and
thirty great pages, and upon the three fore-alleadged texts of Theodoret
threescore and two; making the Readers miserable that seek the truth by those
ways. For whereas there are about fifty controversies between us and the Roman
Church, upon the only question of the real presence, a thousand places may be
alleged out of the Fathers. Upon each of which texts if a great book must be
made, when shall we have a decision but of one question? This is the fruit of
not being content with Scripture, which decides a question in one word, because
it is God that speaks. The worst is, that those thirty four pages are employed
about nothing. For after he has quarrelled with that book of Gelasius about
things that concern not the question in hand, in the end he returns to the
common answer, that when Gelasius said that the nature and substance of bread
and wine remain, by the substance the accidents must be understood, that is,
the color, the figure, and the taste of bread, yet without bread. Where is
conscience? Yea where is common sense? These men would make beasts of us, or
study to be such themselves. For who ever heard that the substance is an
accident? A thing far from all reason, especially in this dispute of Gelasius
against the Eutychians, who maintained that the substance of Christ's body was
changed into the substance of the Godhead. For the question was not about the
change of accidents. Had not Gelasius been out of his sense, if he had granted
to the Eutychians the transubstantiation of the substance of bread, and
affirmed only that the accidents of bread, the color, the figure and the taste
remain in the Eucharist? Had he not thereby yielded the bucklers to the
Eutychians? who said the same thing of the incarnation, by which they affirmed
that the substance of Christ's body is changed into the Godhead, although the
outward show of the body remained, using the example of the Eucharist to
confirm their error.

Ephrem Patriarch of Antioch speaks thus. Ex Bibliotheca Photii page 415. Edit.
Augustanae. (...), etc.
The body of Christ which the believers receive, loses not his sensible
substance, and is not separated from the intelligible grace. Baptism also being
altogether spiritual only keeps the propriety of this sensible substance which
is water, and loses not that which it was. This is one of the most express
places to this purpose. For first it shows in what sense the Fathers call the
bread the body of Christ. Also it says positively that this body does not lose
its sensible substance, that is, the substance of bread. And to give more
light, it brings the example of Baptism, teaching us that as the sanctified
water yet remains water, likewise that body which is given in the Sacrament,
yet remains bread.

To this join that notable testimony of Facundus which we alleged before,
That we call the body and blood of Christ that which is the Sacrament of his
body in the consecrated bread and cup. Facundus lib. 9. cap. 5. p. 404. Non
quod proprie corpus ejus sit panis, and poculum sanguis, sed quod mysterium
corporis ejus sanguinisque contineant.
Not that the bread is phoperly his body and the cup his blood, but because
they contain the mystery of his body and blood.

Chrysostom is fervent in amplifications and hyperbolical words, so far as to
say that we make the Altar red with blood, that we set our teeth in Christ's
flesh, that we hugg him with our embraces, that spiritual fire flows from the
sacred table; that there we receive fire reached with tongs by a Seraphin. That
we are mingled and kneaded with Christ; that we embrace his Cross, and put our
fingers in his wounds. That Christ suffers in the Eucharist. That his bones
are broken in it. And that Christ drunk his own blood. Words which being
literally taken, should be absurd, even in the judgment of our Adversaries.
And the Cardinal who sets forth the testimonies of the Fathers with so much
ostentation, could not believe them. But let us hear Chrysostom speak, when he
is out of his fits of exstatical oratory. He says in the 83. Homily upon
Matthew, (...).
When the Lord gave this Sacrament, he gave wine. And in the Homily upon Psalm
22. Divine wisdom has prepared this Table for his servants and handmaids in
their presence, that every day he might show us bread and wine according to the
order of Melchisedeck, in the likeness of the body and blood of Christ. And
upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, Hom. 17. (...), etc.
Do not we offer every day? We offer indeed, but by making the remembrance of
his death. And that is one, not many. How is it one and not many? Because it
was once only offered within the holiest of holies: And this is a figure of the
same. And a little after, (...).
We offer not another victim as the High Priest, but we make still the same. Or
rather we make the commemoration of this sacrifice.

In the imperfect work upon Matthew ascribed to Chrysostom, these words are
found in the II. Homily, where it is spoken of King Balthazar punished for
putting the holy vessels to a profane use, Si ergo haec vasa sanctificata ad
privatos usus transfer sit periculosum, est in quibus non est verum corpus
Christi, sed mysterium corporis ejus continetur; quanto magis vasa corporis
nostri quae sibi Deus ad habitaculum praeparavit?
If it be so dangerous to transport to private uses sacred vessels, in which
the true body of Christ is not, but the mystery of his body is contained, how
much more the vessels of our bodies, which God has prepared for his own
habitation? Note that he says not, the true body of Christ was not, but is not
contained in the sacred vessels, that one may not think that he speaks only of
the vessels of Balthazar. For upon the example of Balthazar, he takes occasion
to give a general rule. In vain they say that this book was corrupted by the
Arians, and that some clauses in it favor Arianism. For the Arians never
dissented from the Orthodox about the point of the real presence. How much this
place is displeasing to our Adversaries, they have showed it in the last
Editions, where under color of repurging this book from Arianism, they have
clipped this passage, and cut off these words, In quibus non est verum corpus
Christi, sed mysterium corporis ejus continetur. In which the true body of
Christ is not, but the mystery of his body is contained; In the Edition of
Paris, Printed for Odet Petit. in Saint James-street at the Golden Lilly, the
inscription says openly, that the work in that Edition is repurged from the
corruption of Arians. Among which corruptions these goodly expurgators have put
this passage, as savouring of heresy, as if denying transubstantiation were
Arianism.

Peter Martyr has taken out of a Manuscript of the Florentine Library, this
passage of an Epistle of John Chrysostom to Cesarius a Monk, which also is
found in Bibliotheca Patrum, Printed at Cullen, Anno 1618. in Tome 8. inserted
in a book against the Severians. Sicut enim antequam sanctificetur panis, panem
nominamus: Divina autem illum sanctificante gratia, mediante sacerdote,
liberatus quidem est ab appellatione panis, dignus autem habitus est Dominici
corporis appellatione, etiamsi natura panis in eo permansit.
Before the bread be sanctified we call it bread, but the divine grace
sanctifying the same by the Priests means, it is indeed delivered from the name
of bread, and thought worthy to be called the Lords body, although the nature
of bread remain in it. The Jesuit Gregorius de Valentia in the seventh Chapter
of the book of Transubstantiation, Ad testimonium illius Johannis
Constantinopolitani, etc. Falsissimum est quod ille Johannes fuerit D. Johannes
Chrysostomus, etc. Turrianus aperte convincit fuisse Johannem illum, non autem
Chrysostomum.
says that this passage is not of John Chrysostom, but of another John of
Constantinople; Which he says after the Jesuit Turrianus. This I say to
answer Cardinal du Perron, who by a long discourse labors to evince that this
place is not of Chrysostom; for it is all one to us whose it is, since our very
Adversaries ascribe it to an ancient Author.

How many testimonies of Fathers could we bring, which call that which is
received in the Sacrament, bread, wine, meal, fruits created from the earth?
And that not only before, but even after the consecration?

Justine Martyr in the second Apology, They that among us are called Deacons,
give to every one bread, and wine, and water, upon which graces have been said.

Tertullian in the third book against Marcion, chap. 19. Panem suum cerpus
appellans, ut and hinc jam eum intelligas corporis sui figuram pan dedisse.
He has called bread his body, that thereby also thou may understand that he
has given to bread to be the figure of his body.

Ireneus in the third book chap. 34. Quomodo constabit eis eum panem in quo
gratiae actae sunt, corpus esse Domini sui? etc.
How should they know that the bread over which graces were said, is the Lords
body?

Justin in the Dialogue against Triphon. (...), etc.
It appears in this Prophecy concerning the bread which our Lord Christ gave
us in memory of his Incarnation.

Ignatius in the 76. Epistle to the Philadelphians, (...). One bread is broken
to all.

Cyprian in the 76. Epistle, Dominus corpus suum panem vocat de multorum
granorum adunatione congestum.
The Lord calls his body the bread made up with the conjunction of many
grains.

Dionysius surnamed Areopagite, in the book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, chap.
3. (...).
He lays open that which is celebrated by the signs holily set forth; for
having uncovered the bread which was covered and whole, and having broken it in
many pieces, and distributed the cup which is one, he does figuratively
multiply the unity.

Basil in the 27. chap. of the book of the Holy Ghost. (...).
Which of the Saints has left us in writing the words of invocation when the
bread of the Eucharist and the cup of blessing are showed?

In the first Tome of the Councils we have an Epistle of Julius the first
Bishop of Rome, which says, That Christus in institutione and commendatione
Ecclesiastici sacrificii panem and vinum discipulis suis dedit, in quibus
corpus and sanguinem suum commendavit.
Christ in the institution and recommendation of the Ecclesiastical Sacrifice,
has given bread and wine to his Disciples, in which he has recommended his
body and his blood. Observe that he says, not only that the Lord gave bread
and wine to his Disciples, but also that he distinguishes the bread and wine
from the body of Christ.

Ephrem speaks the same language: Ephrem Ad eos qui filii Dei naturam scrutari
volunt. Inspice diligenter quomodo sumens manibus panem benedicit, ac frangit
in figuram immaculati corporis sui, calicemque in figuram pretiosi sanguinis
sui benedicit and tribuit discipulis suis.
Consider diligently how the Lord, having taken the bread in his hands, blessed
it and brake it, for a figure of his immaculate body, and blessed the cup for a
figure of his precious blood, and gave it to his Disciples.

Thus also Hierom alleging Jovinian in the second book, In typo sanguinis sui
non obtulit aquam sed vinum.
The Lord to give a figure of his blood, did not offer water but wine. And so
Cyprian in the sixty third Epistle, Vinum fuit quod sanguinem suum dixit.
It was wine which the Lord called his blood. And in the same place, The body
of Christ is not meal only.

Austin in the third book of the Trinity, chapter 10. Panis ad hoc factus in
accipiendo Sacramento consumitur.
Bread made purposely for that, is consumed in receiving the Sacrament.

Fulgentius and Beda allege these words of the same Father, Fulg. l. de
Baptismo Aethiopis moribundi. Beda in 1 Cor. 10. ex sermon Augustini ad
infantes. Quod ergo vidistis, panis est and calix, quod vobis etiam oculi
vestri renunciant. Quod autem fides vestra postulat instruenda, panis est
corpus Christi, etc.
That which you see is bread and a cup, as also your eyes announce him unto
you. But the instruction which your faith requires, is, that bread is the body
of Christ. In the same place he declares what that body of Christ is. Corpus
Christi si vis intelligere, audi Apostolum dicentem fidelibus, Vos estis corpus
Christi and membra, etc.
If thou will (says he) understand what the body of Christ is, Hear the
Apostle saying to the believers: You are the body of Christ and his members. If
then you are the body of Christ and his members, your mystery is laid upon the
Lords table. So far was that Father from believing the transubstantiation of
the bread into the natural body of Christ.

Cyrillus of Alexandria upon John 4. in the fourteenth chapter, Credentibus
discipulis fragmenta panis dedit, dicens, Accipite and Manducate, hoc est
corpus meum.
He gave to his believing Disciples pieces of bread, saying, Take, eat, this is
my body.

Gaudentius Gaudent in Exodus Tractatu 2. de Paschate, Recte enim vini specie
tum sanguis ejus exprimitur, quia cum ipse in Evangelio dicit, Ego sum vitis,
vera, satis declarat sanguinem suum esse omne vinum quod in figura passionis
ejus affertur.
By the element of wine his blood is well expressed; Because where he says in
the Gospel, I am the true vine, he declares sufficiently that his blood is all
the wine which is offered in the figure of his Passion.

Neither do the Fathers only speak so, but even the Canon of the Mass; for it
was made when transubstantiation was not yet invented. Whosoever will consider what
the words of the Priest are after the Consecration, shall easily acknowledge
that they are prayers which were good sometimes, when they were said over bread
and wine, and other gifts of the people laid upon the table, but that they are
become absurd and contrary to the Priests intention ever since they have been
pronounced upon an host, which they pretend to be the Lords body.

After the words of consecration, the Priest offering the host unto God, says,
Supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris, ut accepta habere
dignatus munera pueri cui justi Abel.
Over which things be pleased to look with a propitious and serene face as thou
were pleased to accept the presents of Abel thy just child. What does he mean
by these things? Can he understand Christ who is but one? And who ever called
Christ these things? And how can they without offering an outrage to the Son of
God, beseech God that the sacrifice of his only Son be as acceptable unto him,
as once the sacrifice of Abel was, who offered a beast? For observe that he
compares not the devotion of those that offer, with the devotion of Abel, but
that which the Priest offers with the gifts which Abel offered.

The Priest adds, Supplices te rogamus Deus omnipotens, jube hac praeferri
per manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum.
We beseech thee Almighty God, command that these things be carried up by the
hands of thy holy Angel into thy high Altar. This also cannot be applied unto
Christ; for Christ needs not the mediation of Angels to be carried up or
presented to his Father. The Priest having thus prayed that the Angel should
carry up these things, why does he not stay till the Angel carry them away, but
eats them presently after?

The following words especially are considerable. The Priest says, Per quem
Domine haec omnia semper nobis bona creas, sanctificas, vivisicas, benedicis.
By Christ our Lord, by whom O Lord thou createst always all these goods unto
us, thou sanctifiest, quickenest, and blessest them. Let them tell us what all
these goods are. Is it Christ? But what reason to call Christ these goods? yea
all these goods, as if there were great many of them. Besides the Priest speaks
of goods which God creates always, and which he quickens and sanctifies
always. Nothing of that is proper unto Christ. And that which is the strangest
of all, the Priest says that God creates these goods always by Jesus Christ.
Does God create always Jesus Christ by Jesus Christ? Does God quicken and bless
Jesus Christ by Jesus Christ? But if by all these goods the Priest understands
bread and wine, how unreasonable is it to demonstrate the bread and wine by
saying these goods, when that bread and that wine are no more? and to call
those goods that which is brought to nothing? How unreasonable is it to give
thanks unto God for creating bread and wine, yea for creating that bread and
that wine, which is no more when the host is worshipped, and when they pretend
to sacrifice the eternal Son of God? and to speak of offering unto God bread
and wine which are not, when the spirits of the people should be bent to
glorify God, for redeeming us by the sacrifice of the death of his Son.

The Reader who has yet some liberty of judgment left, will consider this,
and bewail the misery of our age, and the thick darkness which Satan has cast
upon the clarity and simplicity of the Gospel. For when we allege the word of
God, which alone ought to rule us, they turn it wholly into figures. So that
when Scripture says that we eat bread, and break bread, and that we drink the
fruit of the vine, and that Christ in his humanity is no more in the world, and
is gone, we must understand that it is not bread that we eat, that it is not
bread that we break, that it is not the fruit of the vine that we drink; and
that Christ's body has not left the world, but remains in it invisibly.

Now to defend these interpretations, they have recourse to the Fathers as
infallible Judges: But when those Fathers are produced which say that the
substance of the bread remains after the consecration, and affirm with the
Apostle, that we eat and break bread, then they will create more figures, and
the Fathers must be understood in a contrary sense. For these Doctors by the
substance will have us to understand the accidents, and by bread and wine the
show of bread and wine; And to distract or overwhelm the spirits that seek for
instruction, they will make a great volume upon one only passage of a Father. O
miserable age! Why are men's spirits entangled in a labyrinth without issue,
instead of resting with simplicity of faith upon Christ's institution, by
speaking and doing as he did? For so we might be all agreed.

Here truth is so strong, that it has fetched many confessions from the prime
men among our Adversaries, who acknowledge that there is nothing in Scripture
that obliges us to believe Transubstantiation; Which they ground only upon the
Authority of the Roman Church. Cardinal Cajetan expounding these words, This is
my body, says, In the Gospel nothing is found that obliges us to believe the
conversion of bread into the body of Christ. Cajet. in summam Thomae, part. 3.
q. 75. Art. 1. Alterum quod Evangelium non explicavit, and express ab Ecclesia
accepimus, scilicet conversionem panis in corpus Christi.
The other point (says he) namely the conversion of bread into the body of
Christ, is not expounded in the Gospel, but we have expressly received it from
the Church. Bellarmine alleges Scotus saying, Bell. lib. 3. de Euch. c. 23.
Sect. Non dissimili. Scotus dicit non extare ullum locum Scripturae tam
expressum ut sine Ecclesiae declaratione evidenter cogat Transubstantiationem
admittere. Atque id non est omnino improbabile, etc.
That there is no Text in Scripture so express as to compel us evidently to
believe transubstantiation, if we had not the declaration of the Church. To
whlch opinion Bellarmine joins his own; for he adds, That which Scotus says,
is not altogether improbable. For although Scripture seem to us clear enough to
convince a modest man, yet it may be doubted with good reason whether the thing
be so, that most learned and most acute men, of whom Scotus is one, have been
of a contrary opinion. In the same place he reproves Scotus for saying that
before the Council of Lateran held in the year 1225. Transubstantiation was not
an Article of faith. For he believes, with others, that the Roman Church can
make new Articles of faith. Melchior Canus says the same as Cajetan and Scotus
in the third book of Theological places, chap. 3.

CHAP. VI. What is the signification of the word Sacrament: And in what sense
the Fathers call the Eucharist the body of Christ.
THE word Sacrament according to the property of the Latin tongue, signifies a
pawn or money deposited in a Court for the parties pleading, with that
condition that the party that is cast, must lose also the money deposited.

Also Sacramentum in the good Latin Authors, is as much as an oath: And thence
comes the French word Serment: But more commonly by the word Sacramentum, that
oath was understood which a Soldier took unto his General.

When the Latin tongue began to decay, the Old Christians called Sacrament any
mystery, any doctrine that was hidden and sacred, and the intelligence thereof
was not exposed to every man's sight. In that sense the vulgar version received
in the Roman Church, takes the word Sacrament. Thus the 1 Timothy 3.16.
incarnation of the Savior. Ephesians. 1.9.
The will of God. Dan. 2.27.
The Statue of Nebuchadnezzar. Rev. 17.7.
The mystery of the great harlot. Ephesians. 5.32.
The union of Christ with his Church, are in the Greek text of Scripture called
Mysteries, and in the vulgar version Sacraments.

But in the end use has so prevailed, that the word Sacrament signifies a
sacred sign of Gods Covenant in Christ, instituted by God in his Church; and
such are Baptism and the Lords Supper. In this sense the Latin Fathers, and the
Roman Church of this time, and ours take the word Sacrament: For we willingly
comply with the usual words, so that the truth of things may remain;
understanding no other thing by this word Sacrament, but that which Scripture
Genesis 17.21. Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 11.24.
calls a sign, Signa cum ad res divinas pertinent, Sacramenta appellantur.
a seal, and a commemoration.

Austin in the fifth Epistle to Marcellinus, says, That Signs when they belong
to divine things, are called Sacraments. And in the fifth book of the City of
God, chapter 5. Sacrifium visibile est invisibilis sacrificii sacramentum, id est
sacrum signum.
The visible sacrifice is a sacrament of the invisible sacrifice, that is, a
sacred Sign. And against the adversary of the Law and the Prophets in the
second book, chap. 9. Sacramenta, id est sacra signa. And Lombard Lombard. l.
4. Did. 1. Sacramen^um est invisibilis gratiae visibilis forma. Et Sect. Apud.
Sacramentum nomen genericum, significat signum rei sacrae. Et cap. 9. Sect.
Primo.
the Master of Sentences, defines thus a Sacrament, Sacramentum est sacrae rei
signum, A Sacrament is a sign of a sacred thing. He says also that it is a
form or outward show of an invisible grace. And Bellarmine in the first book of
the Sacraments, chap. 7. The word Sacrament signifies a sign of a sacred thing.
Wherefote when the Fathers call the Lords supper the Sacrament of the body of
Christ, by these words they understand that the Lords Supper is the sacred sign
of the body of Christ. It is a great abuse to call the body of Christ a
Sacrament; for it is making the body of Christ a sign of himself, and a figure
of himself. As if the King were the picture of himself, and the Kings person
the picture and image of his person.

Wherefore Austin will have us to lift up our minds from the Sacraments, that
is, from the visible signs, to the things signified. August. contra Maximinum.
l. 3. c. 22. Haec Sacramenta sunt in quibus non quid sim, sed quid ostendant,
semper attenditur. Quoniam signa sunt rerum, aliud existentia, aliud
significantia.
These things (says he) are Sacraments, in which we have regard always, not
to that which they are, but to that which they represent; because they are
signs of things, which are one thing and signify another.

For that reason the same Father denies that the Sacrament of the body of
Christ is the body of Christ but after some manner, and according as the signs
by reason of the resemblance are called with the name of the things signified,
Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium. Si sacramenta quandam similtitudinem earum quarum
sunt Sacramenta non haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem
similitudine plerumque etiam ipsarum nomina accipiunt. Sicut ergo secundum
quendam modum Sacramentum corporis Christi corpus Christi est, Sacramentum
sanguinis Christi sanguis Christi est, Ita sacramentum fidei fides est.
If the Sacraments (says he) had not some resemblance with those things
whereof they are Sacraments, they should not be Sacraments at all. Now because
of that resemblance they take more often the names of the things themselves. As
then the Sacrament of the body of Christ is after some manner the body of
Christ; and the Sacrament of the blood of Christ is the blood of Christ; so the
Sacrament of faith (meaning Baptism) is faith. And in the same place upon that
the Apostle calls Baptism a burial, Romans 6. he says that Sacramentum tantae
rei non nisi ejusdem rei vocabulo significavit.
Saint Paul could not express the Sacrament of so great a thing, but by the
name of the same thing. Where it is clear that by the Sacrament he means the
sacred sign.

Wherefore every time that it is spoken in Austins books of the Sacrament of
the body of Christ, the true interpretation is to translate the sacred sign of
the body of Christ.

CHAP. VII. That the Fathers not only call that which we receive in the
Eucharist, sign, figure, symbol, type, and antitype, and commemoration; but
also teach that the words of the Lord are sacramental, that is, that in these
words the name of the thing signified is given to the sign.
THere is nothing more frequent in the books of the Fathers then to call the
Eucharist a sign, a figure, and a type of Christ's body. Austin in the third
book, Potuit significando praedicare Dominum Jesum Christum, aliter per linguam
suam, aliter per Epistolam, aliter per Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis ejus.
cap. 4. Paul could by signifying preach the Lord Jesus Christ, otherwise by
his tongue, otherwise by his letters, otherwise by the sacred sign of his body
and of his blood.

And in the twenty sixth Treatise upon John, speaking of the body of Christ;
Hujus rei sacramentum, etc. Res vero ipsa cujus Sacramentum est, omni homini ad
vitam, nulli ad exitium quicunque ejus participes fiunt.
The sacred sign of this thing, (even the unity of the body and blood of the
Lord) is prepared, etc. And is taken at the table by some to life, and by some
to perdition. But the thing it self, of which it is a sacred sign, turns unto
life to every man that is partaker of the same, and to none unto perdition.

And upon Psalm. 98. he personates Christ speaking thus, Non hoc corpus quod
videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me
crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendavi, spiritualiter intellectum
vivificabit vos.
Understand spiritually that which I said unto you: You shall not eat this body
which you see, and shall not drink the blood, which they that crucify me,
shall spil. I have recommended a sacred sign unto you, which being spiritually
understood, shall quicken you.

And in the eleventh Sermon of the words of the Lord, Nunquid and Judas quamvis
primum ipsum manibus ejus confectum Sacramentum carnis and sanguinis ejus cum
caeteris Discipulis manducaret and biberet, mansit in Christo, aut Christus in
eo?
Did the wicked Judas, the seller and betrayer of his Master, abide in Christ,
and Christ in him? although he eat and drunk the first sacred sign of his flesh
and blood done by his hands, with other Disciples.

And in the twenty sixth Treatise upon John, Qui non manet in Christo, and in
quo non manet Christus, procul dubio nec manducat spiritualiter carnem ejus nec
bibit ejus sanguinem, licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat dentibus
sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi.
He that abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, doubtless
neither eats his flesh, nor drinks his blood spiritually, although he press
the sacred sign of the body and blood of Christ carnally and visibly with his
teeth.

Tertullian in the third book against Marcion chap. 19. Panem suum corpus
appellans ut and hinc jam eum intelligas corporis sui figuram pani dedisse.
Christ has called bread his body, that thereby thou may understand that he
has given to bread the figure of his body. Pamelius in his notes upon
Tertullian, is much vexed with this sentence, and says that perhaps these
words were added by some other. Yet he acknowledges that he found it in the
Manuscript of the Vatican, and that it is found in all Editions.

The same Tertullian in the fourth book, chap. 40. Acceptum panem and
distributum discipulis corpus suum illum fecit, dicendo hoc est corpus meum, id
est, figura corporis mei. Figura autem non esset nisi veritatis esset corpus.
Caeterum vacua res quod est phantasma siguram capere non posset.
Christ having taken bread and distributed it to his Disciples, made it his
body, saying, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body. Now it had not
been a figure, if he (that is Christ) had not been the body of truth [or the
true body.] An empty thing as a ghost [or illusion of the fancy] could not be
capable of a figure. He disputes against the Marcionites who denied that
Christ was a true body, and made of him an illusion of the fancy, a mere ghost.
Tertullian proves that Christ has a true body, because he was figured by the
ceremonies of the Law, and by the figure of the Lords Supper, when he said,
This is my body: that is, the figure of my body. For a thing which is not
truly, cannot be represented by figure. Which is the same reason that Orig. in
Marcion. Dialog. 3. Tom. 1. Theod. Dial. 3.
Origin and Theodoret used against those that denied the truth of Christ's body,
as we shall see hereafter.

Here the Cardinal is struggling and sweating. And to avoid the strength of
these words so express, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body, he
finds in Tertullians words an Hyperbaton, that is, a transposition of words out
of their due order: Confessing thereby that these words make for us, unless
they be put out of order. Then he would have this clause thus mended, This is
my body, that is (if we must believe him) this, namely the figure of my body,
is my body. Is not that abusing God and men? Should he have thus turned the
words of Tertullian upside down to make him say things which even the Roman
Church believes not? For the Roman Church believes not that the figure of
Christ's body is Christ's body. Wherefore that exposition needs another
exposition. So after he had changed and overturned Tertullians words by an
extravagant exposition, he does afterward change his own exposition into
another. Tertullian (says he) means that the bread which in the Law was the
figure of our Lords body, is in the Gospel the body of Christ. To that second
exposition he should have added a third; for this second exposition as well as
the third, speaks against the belief of the Roman Church, which believes not
that the bread is the body of Christ: nor that the bread which under the Law
was a figure, is under the Gospel the true body of Christ. If in Tertullian one
Hyperbatick passage be found, a thousand may be found that are not so. And how
unlike is it that in these words, This is my body, that is, the figure of my
body, there is an Hyperbaton? Can any man speak more clear and more natural
words? Besides, by putting thus Tertullian upon the rack, he takes away the
strength of Tertullians argument, who because this bread is the figure of
Christ's body, proves that Christ has a true body; since figures are images of
things that are truly. And if Tertullian in the same chapter speaking of the
figures of the Law, says that the bread under the Old Testament was a figure
of Christ's body, it follows not that it is no more a figure of Christ's body
under the New Testament. The word fuisset regards the time in which Christ
instituted his holy Supper. For Tertullian writ about one hundred and seventy
years after: As if he said, Christ would not have instituted the figure of his
body, if he had not a true body.

Theodoret in the first Dialogue, The Lord gave to the fign the name of his
body. There is in the Greek, that the Lord has given to the symbol, the name
of his body. G^ntian Hervet translateth. (...).
He has given to his body, the name of the symbol and the sign, and to the
symbol the name of his body.

Maximus in his Greek Notes upon Dionysius expounds this word symbol, saying
(...).
that it is some sensible thing taken for an intelligible thing, as bread and
wine for the immaterial and divine food and gladness.

The same Maximus speaking of the Eucharist, opposes the symbols to the truth,
(...), These things are signs, not the truth. It is the style of the Greek
Fathers as Bellarmin acknowledges, saying, Dionysius c. 1. Eccles. Hierarchiae
and alii Patres Graeci, Sacramenta vocant symbola, id est, signa.
Dionysius in the first chapter of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and other
Greek Fathers call Sacraments Symbols, that is signs,

Thus Eusebius in the eighth book of the Demonstration, having said, that
Christ gave to his Disciples the symbols of his dispensation, adds (...).
commanding to celebrate the image or figure of his own body. All this ought to
have kept Cardinal du Perron from his cold Criticisme upon the word Symbol.

The same Theodoret in the same place, (...), etc.
The Lord has honored the visible signs with the name of his body and blood,
having not changed their nature, but added grace unto nature.

And a little after, (...)?
Tell me truly, of what do thou think the sacred meat to be a sign and
figure? The answer is, It is a sign of the body and blood of the Lord.

And in the second Dialogue, (...).
Tell me then the mystical signs which are offered unto God by the Priests, of
what are they signs? The heretic whose name is Eranistes answers, Of the
body and blood of the Lord. Observe by the way that Eranistes in the Dialogues
of Theodoret, signifies a contributor, as one that pays his shot, not a
beggar, Du Perron against du Plessis p. 504.
as our Cardinal thinks. It is a Conference where the heretic contributes what
he can. It is true that Eranist sometimes signifies a beggar, as the same
Theodoret says in the beginning of his Dialogues. But in the same place he
declares that in these Dialogues, he takes that word for a contributor.

Theodoret adds, (...).
If then the divine mysteries are signs or images of the true body, etc. There
is in the Greek antitypes, calling those things antitypes which he had called a
little before symbols or signs.

And in the same place, (...).
The mystical signs do not change nature; no not after the consecration, for
they remain in their first substance, figure and shape. And a little after, to
show that the change is not in the thing, but in the word, he makes Eranistes
to say (...).
The mystical sign changes name, etc.

Clement in the fifth book of Apostolical Constitutions, chap. 16. C^m antitypa
mysteria pretiosi corporis and sanguinis nobis tradidisset, etc. exiit ad
mo^tem Olivarum.
Having given us the mysteries figurative of his precious body and blood, etc.
he went up into the Mount of Olives. And such was the thanksgiving that used to
be said in his time in the participation of the Lords Supper. Gratias tibi
agimus Pater pro pretioso sanguine Jesu Christi qui effusus est pro nobis, and
pro precioso corpore cujus haec antitypa persicimus, etc.
We give thee thanks, our Father, for the precious blood of Jesus Christ, which
was shed for us; and for the precious body, of which we do these signs by his
command to announce his death.

Origin in the third Dialogue against the Marcionites; Origin. in Marcion.
Dial. 3. tit. 1. Quod si, ut obloquuntur isti, carne destitutus erat and
exanguis, cujusmodi ^ carnis, cujus corporis and sanguinis signa and imagines
panem and poculum ministravit, jussitque per illa Discipulos memoriam sui
renovare?
If Christ was without flesh, and without blood, as these men contend: of what
flesh, of what body, and of what did he administer the signs and images, even
the bread and the cup, and commanded his disciples to renew by them his
remembrance? It is the same reason that Tertullian uses in the fourth book
against Marcion chap. 40.

Dionysius surnamed the Areopagite, in the third chapter of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, calls six times that which is upon the sacred table, and given to
the communicants, signs or symbols.

Ephrem ad eos qui filii Dei naturam scrutari volunt, cap. 4. Inspice item
diligenter quomodo sumens in manibus panem benedicit and frangit in figuram
immaculati corporis sui, etc.
Ephrem. Consider carefully how the Lord taking the bread in his hands, blessed it
and broke it, for a figure of his immaculate body, and gave and distributed to
his Disciples the cup for a figure of his blood.

Ambrose in the fourth book of the Sacraments, chap. 5. affirms, that in his
time this clause was in the public service. Make this oblation to be set to
our account, acceptable and reasonable, which is the figure of the body and
blood of the Lord. Which words were said indeed before the consecration; but
they ask of God, that the thing to be consecrated, be received as an acceptable
offering. For our Adversaries themselves acknowledge, that the bread not
consecrated cannot be the oblation which is put to our account, and is accepted
before God for our sins.

The same Father upon 1 Cor. 11. Quia morte ejus redempti sumus, hujus rei
memores, in edendo and potando, carnem and sanguinem quae pro nobis oblata sunt
significamus.
Because we have been redeemed by his death, we remembering that, in eating and
drinking signify the flesh and blood which are offered for us. And in the same
place, Quia beneficii divini sanguis testis est. In cujus typum nos calicem
mysticum sanguinis ad tuitionem animae and corporis percipimus.
The blood is a witness of the divine benefit; For the figure of which, we
receive the mystical cup of blood for the preservation of the body and soul.

Macarius in the twenty seventh Homily, (...).
In the Church bread and wine are offered to be antitypes or figures of his
flesh and blood, and they that participate to the bread which appears, eat
spiritually the flesh of the Lord.

Eusebius in the first book of the Demonstration, chap. 8. (...), etc.
We celebrate the memory of this sacrifice upon the table, by the signs of his
salutary body and blood, according to the Laws of the New Covenant.

And in the same place, (...).
He gave to his Disciples the signs of the divine dispensation, commanding to
celebrate the figure of his own body, otherwise to make the image of his own
body. A place where the word symbol is expounded to be a figure or image.

And in the fifth book of the Demonstration; chapter 3. (...).
First our Savior and Lord, then all the Priests that have followed him in all
Nations, celebrating the holy spiritual service according to the Ecclesiastical
Ordinances, signify unto us by the bread and wine, the mysteries of his body
and blood.

Gregory Nazianzen praising his Sister Gorgonia, commends her devotion for
reserving in her hand some part of the signs of the precious body of the Lord.
(...), etc.
If sometimes her hand had treasured up some of the antitypes or signs of the
precious body or blood of the Lord, she mingled it with her tears.

That custom of giving leave to women to carry away in their hands some of the
bread and wine of the Lords Supper, and to keep it, was a proof that they
believed not Transubstantiation in those days. For in those days it would be
thought an horrible profanation to suffer a woman to touch the Host: Wherefore
Gregory calls that which his sister carried away, the antitypes or signs of the
body and blood of Christ. And that which is more remarkable, is, that Gregory
says, that she received Baptism a little before her death. Which is a proof
that she carried away the Sacrament without eating of it.

The same Gregory in the second Oration of the Passover, speaks thus of the
Eucharist, (...).
We shall participate of the Passover; which indeed is yet in figure, although
more evidently then in the ancient Passover: for the Legal Passover (I make
bold to say so) was a more obscure figure of a figure. He says that the
Passover was a figure of the Lords Supper, as a less clear figure is a figure
of another more express figure.

Gaudentius in the second Treatise upon Exodus, Recte etiam vini specie tum
sanguis exprimitur.
With good reason his blood is expressed by the element of wine. Again Ibid.
Rationaliter in eo figura corporis Christi.
In the bread, the figure of Christ's body is reasonably understood.

Hierom upon 1 Cor. 11. Benedicens, etiam passurus, ultimam nobis
commemorationem sive memoriam dereliquit. Quemadmodum si quis peregre
proficiscens aliquod pignus ei quem diligit relinquat, ut quotiescunque illud
videt possit ejus beneficia and amicitias memorare.
When he blessed, even going to suffer, he recommended to us the last
commemoration or remembrance. As if one going on a journey should leave some
token to him whom he loves, that whenever he sees it, he may remember his
benefit and love. Should Christ have left himself for a token and a remembrance
of himself?

The same Hierom against Jovinian, In typo sanguinis sui non obtulit aquam sed
vinum.
The Lord did not offer water but wine for a type of his blood.

Chrysostom upon Matthew in the eighty third Homily, (...).
If Jesus died not, of what is this celebration a symbol and sign? See thou
how careful he was that we should always remember that he died for us?

Procopius Gazaeus upon Genesis 49. Dedit sui corporis imaginem vel effigiem aut
typum discipulis, haud amplius admittens and acceptans Legis cruenta sacrificia.
He gave to his Disciples, the image, or likeness, or type of his body,
receiving no more the bloody sacrifices of the Law.

Suidas upon the word (...), (...).
The Church makes an offering of the signs of the body and blood of Christ.

Austin is beyond all the Fathers in evidence upon this subject. To him
therefore I reserve a chapter by himself.

CHAP. VIII. Some passages of Austin, wherein he teaches that Christ's words,
This is my body, and Except you eat my flesh, etc. are figurative. The
Cardinals answers are examined.
Austin Si praeceptiva locutio est aut slagitium aut facinus vetans, aut
utilitatem aut beneficentiam jubens, non est figurata. Si autem slagitiu^ aut
facinus videtur jubere, aut utilitatem aut beneficentiam vetare, figurata est.
Nisi manducaveritis, inquit, carnem filii hominis and sanguinem biberitis, non
habebitis vitam in vobis, facinus vel flagitium videtur jubere. Figura est ergo
praecipiens passioni Dominicae esse communicandum, and suaeviter atque utiliter
recondendum in memoria quod pro nobis caro ejus crucifixa and vulnerata sit.
in the third book of Christian doctrine, chapter 15. having said that the precepts
of Gods Word which command to do a good work, or forbid to do a wicked work,
must not be figuratively understood; And those precepts which seem to command
an evil work, or forbid a good work, are figures, and that the words must be
figuratively understood; brings for example the commandment of eating the Lords
flesh and drinking his blood: these are his own words; Except you eat (says
Christ) the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in
you. He seems to command a crime or a wicked act. It is then a figure,
commanding to communicate to the Lords passion, and to lay in our memory
sweetly and profitably that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

The Cardinal made a great book purposely upon the testimonies which we allege
out of Austin, where he spends forty eight long pages about the exposition of
this last passage. Before he enters upon the matter; he makes a little
pedantical exord out of Virgil, Nunc animis opus Aenea, nunc pectore firmo, as
having a hard combat to atchieve.

His discourse is both long and intricate, and needs an Oedipus to unriddle it.
But in that long discourse he answers not the two things wherein lies the
whole strength of that place. The one is that Austin expounding these words,
Except you eat my flesh, etc. says not only that these words are typical, but
also declares very expressly that in that text by eating the flesh of the Lord
and drinking his blood we must understand communicating unto the death of
Christ, remembering with pleasure and profit that Christ was crucified for us.
An exposition which neither he nor the Roman Church approves. For when we say
to our adversaries, Since Austin tells us that these words are figurative,
expound us that figure, and express it in plain words; their answer is that the
figure lies in that the flesh of Christ is not eaten grossly and visibly by
bits, like flesh of the shambles, but that it is taken whole in a miraculous
way under the species of bread. But that is not Austins exposition, who will
have the figure to consist in this, that eating the flesh of Christ signifies
a man's meditating in his memory the Lords death and passion. If Austin spoke
ill by speaking so, why does the Cardinal trouble himself to excuse him? and if
he spoke well, why are we blamed for speaking as he did?

The other thing that we observe in Austins words is that the exposition which
our adversaries give to it, tends to establish the real manducation which is
done with the mouth in the Sacrament. But Austin in this passage would take us
off from all oral manducation, and keeps us altogether to that which is done
with the heart and by the memory and meditation of his death.

To which add that Austin holds that these words, Except you eat the flesh of
the Son of man, you have no life in you, taken literally, enjoin a wicked act.
Now there is no less wickedness in swallowing a whole man's flesh then in
eating it bit after bit. For either way, it is devouring Jesus Christ; which
thought Austin would put far from us, putting instead of it, not the
sacramental manducation, but the serious and profitable meditation of our
Saviors passion.

If the exposition which our adversaries give to that figure be considered, it
will be found that they acknowledge no figure at all; for to eat Christ in the
Host, according to their belief, is a real, not a typical manducation.

Let the pious Reader sadly consider what will become in the end of Christian
Religion, seeing that the Word of God is removed from the people, and the
people sent back to the reading of the Fathers where they understand nothing;
and that they which probably might get some intelligence in them, are kept back
from it, being discouraged and confounded by the infinite length and labor,
since upon one only place of a Father a whole book is made. If the decision of
our differences lies upon that issue, when shall we have done examining some
twenty thousand passages of the Fathers alleged on both sides? And if we stand
to the Cardinals expositions, they shall be found a hundred times more obscure
then the text of the Fathers which he takes in hand to expound. Oh wretched men
that cast themselves purposely into a darkness without end, and into a maze of
uncertainty, to avoid the clarity, certainty, and brevity of the Word of God!

Fulbertus Carnutensis Fol. 168. Figura est ergo (dicet haereticus)
praecipiens, etc. Petavius upon Epiphanius says that these words [dicit
haereticus] are not found in his manuscript.
in his Sermon against the Jews, takes a shorter way, and makes this place of
Austin advantageous to the Roman Church, by the addition of two words,
alleging thus St. Austin; Except you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink
his blood, you have no life in you; It is then a figure [will the heretic say]
commanding, etc. Our Cardinal made conscience to follow him in that
depravation. But he followed his example in the following passage.

Austin in the 12. chapter of the book against Adimantus speaks thus, Non enim Deus
dubitavit dicere Hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui.
The Lord made no difficulty to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of
his body. Other Advocates of Transubstantiation answer, that the Roman Church
denies not that in the Eucharist we receive the sign of the Lords body; but
they say that it is a sign joined with the truth. But that answer cannot
subsist: For Austin says not only that Christ gave the sign of his body, but
teaches also how these words, This is my body, must be understood. Austin
declares that the Lord by his body understood the sign of his body. An
Exposition esteemed heretical by the Roman Church, and for that we sustain so
much hatred.

Cardinal du Perron not able to bear the strength of that reason, has recourse
to his boldness in depraving, and does like Fulbert in the forealledged place.
For he puts in these words of his own according to you, which turn this clause
into a contrary sense, making Austin to say, The Lord made no difficulty to say
this is my body, when he gave, according to you, the sign of his body; as if
Austin spoke according to the sense of the Manicheans.

Had we used the fourth part of that license, we should be called Forgers,
Atheists, Ungodly, impudent; for these are the flowers of their ordinary
oratory. But for my part, that I may spare this Prelates memory, I will impute
this fault to extremity of grief and despondency to see his game go against him.

I maintain that it is most false that Austin spoke according to the sense of
the Manicheans, and affirm that the sense which he puts upon Austins words, is
contrary to his intention, which I must open to the Reader.

The Manicheans affirmed that there was two Gods, the one good, the other evil;
and said that the evil god was author of the Law, and the good, author of the
Gospel. To make good their opinion, they labored to make the Law to justle
against the Gospel, and to find contrariety between them. Among other
contrarieties they marked this, that the Law said that the soul is in the
blood, and therefore forbade eating of blood, saying Deuteronomy. 12.23. Be sure that
thou eat not the blood, for the blood is the life. To this they opposed this
sentence of the Gospel, Matthew. 10.28. that none is able to kill the soul,
although it be certain that men can shed and disperse the blood. Austin
answers two things to that objection. That either when the Law says that the
blood is the soul, it speaks only of the blood of beasts, or that it is a
typical locution, which according to the custom of Scripture, attributes unto
the sign the name of the thing signified; in the same manner as Christ said
This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. And in the same manner as
the Apostle said that the stone was Christ, because it was a sign or figure of
Christ. These are the very words of Austin, Nam ex eo quod scriptum est
sanguinem pecoris animam ejus esse, praeter id quod sapra dixi non ad me
pertinere quid agatur de pecoris anima, possum etiam interpretari praeceptum
illud in signo esse positum; Non enim Dominus dubitavit dicere Hoc est corpus
meum, cum fignum daret (...) oris sui.
As for that which is written that the blood of the beasts is the soul of the
same; besides what I said already, that I care not what becomes of the soul of
a beast, I may also expound that this command [which forbids eating of blood,
because the blood is the soul] is put in sign; [that is, because the blood is
the sign of the soul] For the Lord also made no difficulty to say, This is my
body, when he gave the sign of his body. And to confirm that exposition, he
adds in the same chapter that other example, The stone was Christ, of which
words he says that the sense is, The stone signified Christ. St. Austin will
have these locutions, The blood is the soul, and This is my body, and The stone
was Christ, to be alike; and he teaches that the name of things signified in
these expresses is given unto the signs. For he adds in the same chapter,
Illud quod Lex dicit, etc. quia sanguis est anima, esse positum dicimus, sicut
alia multa; et pene omnia scripturarum illarum sacramenta signis et figuris
plena sunt futurae praedicationis quae jam per Dominum nostrum Jesu declarata
est, Sic est enim sanguis anima quomodo petra erat Christus, sicut dicit
Apostolus, Bibebant de spirituali sequente eos petra; Petra autem erat
Christus. Notu^ est autem filios Israel petra percussa bibisse aquam in eremo;
de quibus loquebatur Apostolus cum haec diceret, nec tamen ait, Petra
significabat Christum, sed ait, Petra erat Christus.
That which the Law says that the blood must not be spilt, but eaten because
the blood is the soul, we say that it is put as many other things; and almost
all the Sacraments of these Scriptures are full of signs and figures of the
future preaching which now is declared by our Lord Jesus. For so is blood the
soul, as the stone was Christ, as the Apostle says, They drunk of the
spiritual stone that followed them, and the stone was Christ. Now it is known
that the children of Israel, the stone being smitten, drunk water in the
wilderness; of whom the Apostle spoke when he said these things: and yet he
said not the stone signified Christ, but this stone was Christ.

Let us apply these last words to the subject in hand, since Austin joyneth
these examples; and let us say that the Lord says not This signifies my body,
but, This is my body; in the same manner as the Apostle said not This stone
signifies Christ, but This stone is Christ; For (says Austin) the Scriptures
are full of such figures. Will the Cardinal have that to be the language of the
Manicheans? And since Austin says that in these words, the stone was Christ,
the sign is named with the name of the thing signified; why shall we not say
the same of these words, This is my body, since these two examples are set
together by Austin, and that the one serves to clear the other?

To make the abuse extreme, the Cardinal by this addition, according to you,
charge Austin of calumny. For it was not the belief of the Manicheans that
the bread of the Eucharist was the sign of the body of Christ. The Cardinal
himself says so much Chapter 6. of his book of the passages of St. Austin p. 38.
unwittingly, when he says that the Manicheans believed that Christ had no
true body. For how could those that deny the truth of Christ's body, believe
that bread in the Eucharist was a sign of a thing that is not? And if Austin
spoke according to the opinion of the Manicheans when he expounded Christ's
words This is my body, by these, This is the sign of my body; we must say also
that the stone was Christ, because according to the opinion of the Manicheans,
not according to truth, it signified Christ. For Austin sets these two texts
together as much alike.

To this notable text we join another more express yet, out of the 23. Epistle
to Boniface. Austin labors to show to Boniface that Baptism may be called
says, because it is the Sacrament or sacred sign of faith, according as the
signs use to take the name of things signified. Among other examples he brings
the Lords Supper which is called the sacrifice of Christ, although it was but
the sign and commemoration of the same, It being certain that Christ was never
sacrificed but once. In the same manner as the Lords day is called the day of
the Lords resurrection, as if he did rise again every Lords day, because upon
that day the memory of Christ's resurrection is celebrated; and in the same
manner as the sign of the sacred body of Christ is in some respect the body of
Christ, being so called because of the resemblance or representation. These are
then the very words of that good Doctor, whereby he proves that Baptism may be
called Faith, because it is the Sacrament or Sacred sign of Faith.

Saepe ita loquimur ut Pascha propinquante dicamus crastinam vel perendinam
esse Domini passionem, cum ille ante annos multos passus sit. Nempe ipso die
Dominico dicimus, Hodie Dominus resurrexit, cum ex quo resurrexit tot anni
transierint. Cur nemo tam ineptus est ut nos ita loquentes arguat esse
mentitos, nisi quia istos dies secundum illorum quibus haec gesta sunt
similitudinem nuncupamus, ut dicatur ipse dies qui non est ipse, sed
revolutione temporis similis ejus, and dicatur illo die fieri propter
sacramenti celebrationem quod non illo die sed jam olim factum est? Nonne semel
immolatus est Christus in semet ipso? and tamen in Sacramento, non solum per
omnes Paschae solennitates, sed omni die populo immolatur. Nec utique mentitur
qui interrogatus eum responderit immolari. Si enim Sacramenta quandam
similitudinem earam rerum quarum sunt Sacramenta non haberent, omnino
Sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine plerunque ipsarum rerum nomina
accipiunt. Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum Sacramentum corporis Christi
corpus Christi est; Sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est, ita
Sacramentum fidei fides est.
We often speak in this manner; When Easter draws nigh, we say that to morrow
or the next day is the Lords passion, whereas he suffered many years before.
Thus upon the Lords day we say, this day the Lord rose again, although so many
years past since he rose again. Why is none so silly as to tax us of untruth
when we speak so, but because we call these days after the likeness of those
days in which these things were done? so that this day is said to be the same
day which is not the same, but the like by revolution of time; and by reason of
the celebration of the Sacrament that thing is said to be done that day which
was not done that day, but was done a long time before? Was not Christ once
sacrificed in himself? and yet he is sacrifice in the Sacrament, not only in
all the Easter-solemnities unto the people, but every day. Neither does that
man lie, who, being asked, answers that he is sacrificed. For if Sacraments
had not some resemblance with those things of which they are Sacraments, they
should not be Sacraments at all. And from that likeness commonly they receive
the name of the things themselves. As then the Sacrament of the body of Christ
is in some sort the body of Christ, and the Sacrament of the blood of Christ
the blood of Christ, likewise the Sacrament of faith (that is baptism) is faith.

We have seen before that Austin told us in many places that this word
Sacrament is as much as a Sacred sign; so that the true exposition of these
words, Sacramenta plerunque ex hac similitudine ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt,
is this, The sacred signs m^re often by reason of that resemblance take the
name of the things themselves. And these words, secundum quendam modum
Sacramentum corporis Christi corpus Christi est, must be thus translated, The
sacred sign of the body of Christ is in some sort the body of Christ. Now to
make us understand in what sort the Sacrament of Christ's body is the body of
Christ, he gives many examples, namely that it is as every year two days
before Easter they say, This day is the passion of the Lord; and as every Lords
day is the day of Christ's resurrection; And as the Baptism is Faith. In which
expresses he says that the Sacraments are named with the name of the thing
signified.

In his 2. book of the Eucharist against du Plessis in the 22. Authority, chapter 3.
The Cardinal in a long perplexed discourse says very little. This is the
summary, That the Sacrament has two relations with the body of Christ. The one
as he is dead under the formal object of immolation. The other as he is
glorious under the formal object of manducation. And that in the first respect
the Sacrament is not that which it represents, but only in the second; and
that Austin speaks in the alleged place, of the Sacrament in the first respect
only.

By these words the Cardinal manifests his opinion which he declared in the
Convocation of the Clergy held in the Convent of the Dominicans of Paris, in a
full audience: Of this we spoke before in the Controversy of the Sacrifice.
namely that Christ is not really sacrificed in the Eucharist. He tells us then
that these words Christ is sacrificed in the Mass, signify nothing else, but
that the sacrifice of Christ is represented in the same; and that the sign (as
Austin says here) takes the name of the thing signified. But as for the real
presence of the body of Christ, and the manducation, he denies that Austins
sentence can be applied to it: But Austin holds him too fast to let him escape
thus: For he says not only that in the Sacrament the body of Christ is in some
sort immolated or sacrificed; But he says that the Sacrament of Christ's body
is in some sort the body of Christ, namely in as much as the signs take the
names of things signified. And the examples which Austin brings, exclude
altogether the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament; For Christ dies not
every year two days before Easter, and rises not really from the dead every
Lords day, but only in sign and commemoration; And Baptism is not really Faith,
but is the sign of Faith.

In all these examples Austin shows how the signs are named with the name of
things signified, which are not present, and are not really done. Had not St.
Austin been out of his right sense, if having said that infants which have no
Faith, yet have it in some sort because they have received the sign of Faith,
which sign according to the custom of Scripture may be called with the name of
the thing signified; if I say, having said that, he had proved it with a clean
contrary example, namely by the example of the Eucharist where Christ is really
present, according to the opinion of our adversaries? Would he have brought
that example, the Sacrament is the body of Christ, for an instance of a figure
like to this, Baptism is Faith, if the Sacrament were the body of Christ truly
and without figure? This then remains firm by Austins words, that the sign of
Faith is Faith, as the Sacrament of Christ's body is called Christ's body.

I pass by the Cardinals error, how he believes that the body of Christ in
the Eucharist is set forth as living and glorious: For the Apostle will have us
to eat this bread, and drink this cup, to announce the Lords death till he
come, 1 Cor. 11.26. And Christ giving the bread and the cup, said, This is my
body which is broken for you, and this cup is the New Testament in my blood
which is shed for you. He would then have us to receive his body as broken and
as dying for us, and his blood as shed. Is it not nonsense to say, that in the
Mass Christ is sacrificed as dead, and yet eaten as glorious and risen again,
seeing that he was not yet glorious when he gave the Sacrament to his Disciples
to eat?

All these reasons serve also to confute those who by the Sacrament of Christ's
body understood the species or accidents. For these examples of Baptism, of the
Lords day, and of the day of his passion, exclude the presence of things
signified. Neither did Austin know accidents without a subject. It is a new
doctrine of which we shall speak hereafter.

We must not leave out what the same Father says upon the third Psalm, In Ps.
3. initio. In historia Novi Testamenti ipsa Domini nostri tanta and tam miranda
patientia quod cum tamdiu pertulit tanquam bonum, cum ejus cogitationes non
ignoraret cum adhibuit ad convivium in quo corporis and sanguinis sui figuram
discipulis commendavit and tradidit.
So great was the patience of our Lord and so admirable, that he suffered Judas
so long as a good man, although he was not ignorant of his thoughts when he
admitted him to the banquet in which he recommended and delivered unto his
Disciples the figure of his body and blood. Had Austin believed
Transubstantiation, he would have said rather that Christ had received Judas to
the banquet in which he really gave his own body. For the end of Austin in this
sentence is to praise the Lords goodness and patience, which he would have far
more exalted if he could have said that he had given to Judas his own body,
then by saying that he had given him the figure of his body.

The Roman decree in the second distinction of the Consecration in the Canon
Hoc est brings a sentence, as from Austin, which we alleged before. We will
but observe now how the Cardinal abuses it. The sentence is this, Ex lib.
Sentent. Prosperi. Sicut ergo coelestis panis qui Christi caro est, suo modo
vocatur corpus Christi, cum to vera sic sacramentum corporis Christi, illius
videlicet quod visibile, quod palpabile, quod mortale in cruce positum est;
Vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis, que sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio,
mors, crucifixio; non rei veritate sed significante mysterio.
As then the heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, is, in its manner,
called the body of Christ, whereas indeed it is the sacred sign of the body of
Christ, which being visible, palpable and mortal, was set on the Cross; and
that immolation which is done by the hands of the Priest is called the passion,
death, and crucifying of Christ, not according to the truth of the thing but by
a signifying mystery. Our Cardinal has beheaded that text, taking away the
first word as, that the connection and dependence of the text may not be known,
and that it may not be seen how the Author says of the Sacrament of the body
of Christ, that it is not the body of Christ according to the truth of the
thing, but in signifying mystery, as the sacrifice of the Eucharist is not the
sacrifice of Christ in truth but in signification.

Let the Cardinal wrest and clip that notable passage as much as he will, yet
all his Glosses shall never have that authority in the Roman Church which those
Doctors have which were the Glossaries of the decree, who put this Gloss in
the margent, Coeleste Sacramentum quod vere repraesentat Christi carnem,
dicitur corpus Christi, sed improprie. Unde dicitur, suo modo, sed non rei
veritate, sed significante mysterio. Ut sit sensus, vocatur Christi corpus, id
est significatur.
The heavenly Sacrament which truly represents the flesh of Christ, is called
the body of Christ, but improperly; wherefore it is said suo modo, in its
manner, not according to the truth of the thing, but by a significant mystery.
So that the sense of these words is, It is called the body of Christ, that is,
it is signified. To this Gloss the Cardinal answers nothing: Only he labors
to make the place suspected, contradicting the Roman decree and the Doctors
that Glossed it, and Lombard and all the Schoolmen who attribute this text to
Austin.

To end his Chapter gallantly In his book of the passages of Austin, chapter 8.
he shuts it up with these verses of Virgil of the second of the Aeneids,
Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine ab uno Disce omnes.

Which he translateth much to this purpose, The Cardinals French verses are
these. Voy maintenant des Grees l'embusche et l'imposture, Et d'un crime expose
tous leurs tours conjecture.
See now the Grecians base insidious wile,
And in one crime the stamp of all their guile.


This Prelat ignorant in the good letters, did not know that crimen in this
place of Virgil signifies not a crime, but a wicked man. Which appears by the
adjective masculin which Virgil adds; Et crimine ab uno disce omnes. As in
the Andria of Terence, Vbi est iste scelus qui me perdidit. But let us return
to Austin.

Beda upon 1 Cor. 10. alleges this testimony of Austin taken out of the
Sermon to the newly baptized. Quod ergo vidistis panis est et calix, quod vobis
etiam oculi vestri renuntiant. Quod autem fides vestra postulat instruenda,
panis est corpus Christi, calix sanguis. Id. ibid. Quomodo est panis corpus
ejus et calix? vel quid habet calix quomodo est sanguis ejus? Ista (fratres)
ideo sacramenta dicuntur quia in eis aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur. Quod
videtur speciem habet corporalem. Quod intelligitur fructum habet spiritualem.
Corpus ergo Christi si vis intelligere, Apostolum audi dicentem fidelibus, Vos
estis corpus Christi et membra.
This then which you have seen, is bread and a cup, as also your eyes relate it
unto you. But that which your faith (which must be instructed) demands, the
bread is the body of Christ, and cup his blood. Then he declares how the bread
is the body of Christ. How is (says he) the bread his body and the cup or that
which is in the cup his blood? These things (my brethren) are therefore called
sacred signs, because in them we see one thing, and understand another. That
which we see, has a bodily likeness or show; but that which we understand,
has a spiritual fruit. If then thou will understand what the body of Christ
is, hear the Apostle saying to the believers, You are the body of Christ and
his members.

Among many things considerable in this passage, three are especially so; The
one that Austin will have us to believe the relation of our eyes which show
that it is bread. The second that he is so far from believing
transubstantiation that he chooses rather in these words, This is my body, to
understand by the body of Christ the believers, that is the Church, then to
imagine any transubstantiation of bread into the Lords body. The third, that to
the corporal show he opposes not the body of Christ invisibly present, but the
Spiritual grace. According to our adversaries he ought to have said, That which
is seen is the species of bread; but that which is invisible and hid under the
species, is the body of Christ really present.

The Cardinal deals here prudently; for because this passage is a fragment
remaining of a lost Sermon; It will be time enough (says he) to answer when
our adversaries have recovered the book where Austin speaks that language. And
he gives this reason for it; Because (says he) all the strength they can raise
out of this, depends from the immediate connection of periods. And he says that
Beda does not always exactly relate Austins words. But Fulgentius a Disciple
of Austin, has preserved that Sermon to posterity. For it is found whole in
the Treatise of Fulgentius of the Baptism of an Ethiopian dying. Which book the
Cardinal having not seen, he is excusable that he would not trust Beda.

Such was the belief of this good Doctor, with whom, all things being
considered, none of the Fathers whose writings we have, is to be compared. A
man whose learning was joined with a singular holiness of life, and sweetness
of conversation. It seems that this good servant of God foresaw the abuse
which the posteriour ages brought forth, and to which the Hyperbolical
Allegories of some Doctors of his time tending to elevate the peoples devotion,
has given occasion contrary to their mind. This is known in that Austin speaks
more often and more clearly of this matter then any before him. Also in that
whereas he bestowed two long Treatises to expound our Saviors words, Joh. 6.
where it is spoken of the manducation of Christ's flesh, in those two Treatises
there is not one word of the real manducation of Christ's flesh with the mouth,
but he refers all to the spiritual manducation by faith, and to the union of
the faithful in one body. The same may be known in that having said in the
first Sermon upon the 33. Ps. that in the Lords Supper, Ferebatur Christus in
manibus suis quando commendans ipsu^ corpus suum ait, hoc est corpus meum.
Ferebat enim istud corpus in manibus suis; ista est humilitas domini nostri.
Christ bore himself in his own hands, least that any should abuse that
expression to gross thoughts, he says in the following Sermon, Quomodo
ferebatur in manibus suis, quia cum commendaret ipsum corpus suum and sanguinem
suum, accepit in manus suas quod noruut fideles, and ipse se portabat
quodammodo cum diceret hoc est corpus meum.
That Christ carried himself in some sort in his hands when he said, This is my
body. Which relates to the forealledged words of the same Austin, who speaking
of the bread of the Lords Supper, said, that it is the body of Christ in its
manner, although indeed it is the sacred sign of his body. These words, in some
sort, are never employed but to bring some exception and distinction, when a
thing being affirmed absolutely and without restriction, should be false. So we
say that a man is learned in some sort, when he is not universally learned. And
that the nature of the Son of God was mortal in some sort, that is, the humane
nature only, not the divine. But when it is question of the whole and real
presence of a body, that restriction has no place. It cannot be said that the
brains of a living man is in his head in some sort. One cannot tell that the
body of Christ crucified was in the Cross in some sort, or that it is now in
heaven in some sort. But if Christ crucified is represented in a picture, it
may be said that he is crucified there in some sort. Thus in the Eucharist he
is present in some sort, that is Sacramentally, and according as signs take the
names of things signified. But if he was present in it really and whole, it
were absurdly spoken to say that he is present in it in some sort. And
whosoever says that the Lords body is really present in the Eucharist in some
sort, says also by consequent that it is absent from it in some sort.

CHAP. IX. Examination of Cardinal du Perrons answer, whereby he endeavors to
give reasons why the Fathers call the Bread and Wine of the Lords Supper signs,
figures, types, and symbols of the body and blood of Christ, even after the
Consecration.
THE Cardinal finding himself bepelted with a hail of testimonies of Fathers
which call that which is received in the Sacrament, signs, and figures, and
types, even after the Consecration, seeks to take shelter under a dark
distinction which he has borrowed from others. In his 2. book of the Eucharist
against M. du Plessis, in the chapter where he treats of Theodoret, the same things
he says in the 4. book against King James, chapter 4. p. 871, and 872.
These are his words: There are (says he) two sorts of signs; some instituted
to supply the defect of presence, as the Paschal lamb, Manna, the stone of the
desert, the shewbread, the brazen serpent; Some instituted to supply the
defect of appearance, and to be forms and visible clothings for things which by
their own essence could appear and make themselves visible, as the species of
the flame in the bush, and of the dove in Christ's Baptism, the serpent tempted
Eve in the earthly Paradise, the humane forms which Angels put on. Now the
signs instituted to supply the defect of appearance are not exclusive, but on
the contrary inclusive and connotative of the reality. In another place to
prove that, he alleges Ibid. p. 472. where he mistakes Pope Hilary for
Paschasius in the book De corpore Dei, cap. 4.
Pope Hilary, and Alger, and Eutychius, who say that the body of Christ which
is taken upon the Altar, is both truth and figure. For want of ancient authors
he brings new ones, and such as are not receivable; for the ancients do not
speak so.

I do freely acknowledge those two sorts of signs, and know that there are
signs which signify a present thing: But in such signs two things shall be
found; the one that they are true signs, not false shows; the other that they
are signs of things of an invisible nature. For to give a false show for a
sign, and to be a sign of a thing present and of a visible nature, it is a mere
illusion and a superlative absurdity. This is seen by the examples which the
Cardinal brings; For the flame in the bush was a true flame, and a sign of Gods
presence which is invisible: And the dove which he speaks of, was a true dove,
and was the sign of a thing of an invisible nature, which was the Holy Ghost.
But in the Eucharist the Cardinal forgeth imaginary things, bread which seems
to be bread and is not, and yet is sign of a thing present and of a visible
nature. All signs serve to signify, and are helps to know. But here they forge
us signs, even the accidents of bread and wine, which hinder to see that which
they signify; which signify Christ, and hide the sight of Christ. They are
not then helps but hindrances to knowledge: As if a chest where a thief has
hidden stolen money, were called a sign or a figure of that money.

But the chief consideration is that the strength of those places of Fathers
that call that which is received in the Eucharist signs and figures even after
the consecration, lies not in that they call those things signs and figures,
but in that they will have the word my body to be interpreted the sign of my
body; Note.
an interpretation which the Roman Church abhors. Also in that they oppose
the sign to the truth, and from their being signs gather that they are not
really the Lords body. For we have alleged multitude of passages of the
Fathers which affirm that the Lord saying, This is my body, gave to the sign
the name of his body, and honored the visible signs with the name of his
body. And that these words Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. are
typical words, which signify that we must ruminate in our memory, and
profitably meditate that Christ dyed for us; and that these things are signs,
and not the truth: That the Lord saying This is my body, gave the sign of his
body; that we eat not the body which was crucified for us, but that it is a
Sacred sign which is recommended to us; That the Sacrament of Christ's body is
Christ's body, according as the Sacraments are named by the name of that they
signify; in the same manner as every Lords day is the day of Christ's
resurrection, and baptism is called faith because it is the sign of faith. And
that the Sacrament is called the Lords body after its manner, but that to speak
truly it is the Sacred sign of Christ's body which was crucified. All that is
full of weight and clarity; and to all that no answer is given.

And though the Fathers said no more but that the thing received in the
Sacrament is a sign or figure, is not that a sufficient proof against the real
presence of the Lords body under the accidents of bread? For how many passages
did we produce wherein they speak of the signs of Christ's body without speaking
at all of the presence of the natural body of Christ under these signs? When
the Fathers exalt the excellency of the Eucharist, is it credible that they
speak only of that which is less worthy in the Eucharist, namely of the signs
of Christ's body, and leave out that wherein our adversaries place the
excellency of the Eucharist, namely the real presence of the Lords body? Would
they have given thanks to God in the public service for establishing in his
Church the signs and antitypes of Christ's body without speaking of the real
presence of Christ's body under these signs? Had not that been an ungrateful
thanksgiving, and rather a forgetfulness then a remembrance? As if one having
received the gift of a horse or a sword, gave thanks for the bridle or the
scabbard, not for the horse or the sword. Certainly whosoever will commend the
excellency of a thing, will fix upon that which is most commendable and most
excellent.

I add that whosoever speaks of the Sacrament of Christ's body, says manifestly
that the Sacrament is not Christ's body. And who so affirms that in these
words, This is my body, the name of the thing signified is given to the sign,
says not that the sign is with the body, but will have it understood, that
This is my body, signifies, This is the sign of my body.

The premises afford an answer to that which the Cardinal adds; Could not
David (says he) after he had attained to the Crown, represent upon a stage,
and in a disguised habit and face, the combat which he had performed against
Goliath, and be by that means, though in diverse respects, both the sign and the
signified thing? May not then Christ who is the Evangelical David, represent in
the Eucharist under the commemorative species of his passion the combat which
he had on the Cross against the allegorical Giant of the Christians?

This Prelat ought to have reserved his eloquence for another Subject that had
some show of reason. In one point he deserves to be applauded, for comparing
that which is done in the Mass unto a play acted by a disguised man; and I
would not be he that should contradict him. But he is short of reason when he
thinks that David acting thus his combat upon a stage, should be a sign of
himself. Only his present action should be a sign and a representation of his
past action. And David acting thus should be a true person; But they give us
here for a sign bread in show, which is no bread indeed. Neither is it Christ
that does in the Mass that action which the Cardinal compares unto a play; It
is the Priest that moves, and makes the whole representation.

CHAP. X. Some passages of the Councils upon this subject.
THE Councils speak the same language as we heard the Fathers speak. The
Council of Nice in the 5. Canon speaking of the Eucharist, says, (...).
That all bitterness of spirit being taken away, the gift which is presented
unto God may be pure. It is evident that this Council believed that sometimes
an impure gift is presented unto God in the Eucharist, and that the offering
becomes impure and defiled when it is presented with hatred and animosity. They
did not then believe that the gift was the natural body of Christ. For it is
always pure and cannot be defiled by the vice of the person that offers it.

The Council of Ancyra in the 2. Canon commands the Deacons who have sacrificed
unto Idols to abstain from the Sacred service, and forbids them to present
either the bread or the cup. For the Deacons in those days carried to the
Communicants in the Church the bread and the cup: Which was not done but after
the consecration. Yet that which they presented is called bread by the Council;
(...), etc. (...).
Let the Deacons that have sacrificed abstain from all divine service, and
present no more neither the bread nor the cup.

The Council of Neocesarea in the 13. Canon, (...).
The Country Priest cannot offer in the principal Church of the Town when the
Bishop or the Priests of the Town are present, nor give the bread in the
prayer, nor the cup.

The third Council of Carthage in the 24. Canon prescribes, (...).
That in the sacred service nothing be offered but the body and blood of the
Lord (as also the Lord commanded it) that is, the bread and wine mingled with
water. See here above two hundred Bishops, of whom Austin was one; and that man
so famous, Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, expounding these words the body and
blood of Christ, as signifying bread and wine mingled with water. When the
Fathers call that which is received in the holy Communion, bread and wine, our
adversaries will have them to speak figuratively, and that by bread and wine
they understand the body and blood of Christ under the species of bread and
wine. But here is a Council that teaches the clean contrary, that when they
called that which is offered in the holy Communion the body and blood of
Christ, by that body and blood they meant bread and wine mingled with water.
Can any of our adversaries boast that he understands the Fathers better then
the Fathers understood themselves? or who will take upon him the authority of
correcting the interpretation which themselves give unto their words?

Because this Canon grieveth the Roman Church, it was corrupted and clipped in
the Latim Tomes of the Councils published by our adversaries, where there is
only, Ut in Sacramentis corporis et sanguinis Domini nihil amplius offeratur
quam ipse Dominus tradidit, hoc est, panis et vinum aqua mistum.
That in the Sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord nothing be offered
but what the Lord has commanded, even bread and wine mingled with water. But
God permitted that this falsification should be clearly convinced. For in the
sixth Council of Constantinople gathered again in the palace of Trull to make
Canons, this same Canon of the third Council of Carthage is repeated word by
word, as we alleged it; Trullana Synodo Can. 32. (...).
The holy Fathers assembled at Carthage did expressly call it to remembrance,
that in the sacred service nothing should be offered but the Lords body and
blood, as also the Lord has commanded it, that is, bread and wine mingled with
water. And it is found so, not only in the Greek Copies, but also in the same
Latin Tomes. The corrupters of the Canon of the Council of Carthage having
corrupted it in one place, forgot to corrupt it in another.

In Balsamon Patriarch of Antioch who has reduced the Canons of the Councils
into a body and made comments upon them, this Canon is found as we alleged it;
as also in Zonaras, and in the Canons published by du Tillet, yea in all the
Greek Copies published by our adversaries. The words of Balsamons Comment upon
this Canon, are considerable, Balsam. in Synod. Carth. Can. 40 p. 653. Edit.
Paris. (...).
The two and thirtieth Canon of the Synod of Trull gives an ordinance at
large, that the unbloody sacrifice be made with bread and wine mingled with
water, because bread is the figure of the Lords body, and the wine a figure of
his blood. Zonaras says the same upon the same Canon.

It is to be noted that the growth of the adoration of images and that of the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, were contemporanean and kept pace together.
Damascenus (whom we may call the Peter Lombard of the Grecians) in the eight
age, maintained the adoration of Images, and writ also for the defense of the
other abuse. And the same man was the first that imagined some change in the
substance of the bread. Thus the enemy of our salvation, Satan, labored to
plant these two sorts of idolatry at the same time.

The seventh Council of Constantinople in the year 754. was assembled purposely
to oppose the adoration of Images; by the order of that Council Images were
pulled down in all the East. As for Transubstantiation, which was not believed
in the Greek Churches, and is not yet to this day, the same Council knowing
that private men were secretly sowing that darnell, by a singular prudence and
dexterity made one plaster to serve to heal two sores, and confounded two
errors by one true doctrine, teaching that the true Images are those which
Christ has established in his Church, even the Sacraments; saying, (...).
That the holy Sacrament was chosen by Christ, as no other form or figure under
heaven being able to represent his incarnation. They add (...)
That he gave to his Ministers this sign and most evident commemoration. Again
(...).
The Lord has commanded us to offer the substance of bread, which is not made
in humane form, lest that idolatry should creep in. In the same place the bread
is called (...), The holy image of Christ. (...), etc.
And the true image of his natural body, to oppose it to the false images in
stone or picture. (...).
And the image of his flesh given by God.

In that Council there were 338. Bishops; so the seeds of idolatry were weeded
out for that time.

But God irritated by the wickedness of men, suffered that a monster of
impiety should reign at Constantinople, the execrable woman Irene, who put out
the eyes of her own son, and deprived him of the Empire. This woman to
strengthen her usurpation by the faction of the Image-worshippers which was
powerful, set up Images again over all the East, and assembled a Synod at Nice
(An. 787.) in which she caused the Council of Constantinople to be condemned.
That abominable Council established the adoration of Images, so far as to
pronounce anathema to all that would go so far as to venerate them, and no
further. In the records of that Council these goodly sentences are extant, That
Imago est melior oratione. That images are of equal value with the holy Gospel.
That Angels are corporal, having an aerie or a fiery body. And as for that the
Council of Constantinople had pronounced about the holy Sacrament, namely that
the bread is the image and figure of Christ's body. This is the judgment which
that goodly Council pronounced about that; Act. 6. Videtur quidem tota oration
abominanda, etc. Nemo enim unquam sanctorum Apostolorum qui tubae sunt Spiritus
Sancti, etc. incruentum nostrum sacrificium imaginem certe illius dixerit.
All that language seems abominable to us, etc. And which of the Saints and
Apostles (who are trumpets of the Holy Ghost) did ever call our unbloody
sacrifice an image of the Lords body?

We may well think that the Council of Constantinople was approved of God,
since it was so disapproved by such a detestable assembly. To be condemned by
such a rout, was a commendation, and an argument of goodness. Wherefore
Charlemayne, who at that time held the Empire of the West, caused that Council
of Nice to be condemned by a contrary Council which he assembled at Franckford.

I wonder how these Fathers of Nice, who affirm that the Apostles never said
that the unbloody sacrifice is a figure of Christ's body, did not know, that the
Apostles call the Lords Supper the remembrance of the Lords death, and the
commemoration of Christ, which is as good as calling it a figure, and that they
never call it a sacrifice*

But the Popes being bent to build the mystery of iniquity, undertook with all
their power the defense of that Council of Nice. So far that Pope Adrian who
lived in the time of that Council, writ a book in the defense thereof, yet
without meddling with Transubstantiation, against which Bertram the Priest writ
a book (now extant) by the command of King Charles the Bald, for which the said
Bertram received no blame or reprehension, because the Roman Church had not yet
pronounced any judgment upon that matter.

Yet the enemy of our salvation was preparing the way, to bring in by the same
way two sorts of Idolatry. For then he began to forge a multitude of miracles
by images, and by the Host, to invite the people to worship them. In the
following Ages images began to speak, to sweat, to bow the head, and to make
congies; and breasts of flesh grew upon an image of our Lady. At the same time
it was reported, that at the Mass in such and such places a pretty little child
was seen entering into the mouth of the communicants: That an Host being pricked
had bled: That in a chalice blood was found: That an Ass leaving his oats, had
kneeled before an Host that past by: That Bees having found an Host left in the
fields, had built a Chapel of wax upon it. Stories which I have seen my self
painted at Paris in St. Gervas cloister. And of these Surius and St. Austinin
are full.

Pope Innocent the third, in the third book of the Mysteries of the Mass, chapter
1. says, that some Shepherds having learned the words of the Consecration, and
singing them in the fields, were smitten by Gods hand. Durandus in the fourth
book of his Rational, chap. 35. adds, that these Shepherds having pronounced
the consecrating words upon the bread of their dinner, did transubstantiate all
into flesh. And that to avoid that inconvenience for the future, it was
commanded, that these words should be pronounced with a low voice, that the
people might not learn them. Bellarmin receives that history as true in his
first book of the Mass, chap. 12. The reasons which Pope Innocent brings in the
fore-alledged place are notable. Because (says he) Christ hid himself from the
multitude. Also because Anna said her prayer with a low voice. And because it
is written, that dying flies spoil the ointment of the Apothecary. Ergo, etc.
Who so will see a multitude of such miracles, let him read Jodoci Coccii
Thesaurus Tom. 2. l. 6. Art. 8. p. 694.
Idocus Coccius in the second Tome of his collection of Fathers. Of such
miracles no trace is found in any of the ancient Writers. For St. Basils life,
where some such miracles are found attributed to Amphilochius, is a fabulous
and supposititious book, as Bellarmin shows it in his book of Ecclesiastical
Writers.

In that age the use of Scripture was lost among the people, which then applied
themselves altogether unto images, well called the books of ignorant men; And
the whole religion began to consist in visiting relics, harkening after
miracles, clothing images, and keeping singing men, whose loud melody might
fill the vaults of Temples.

Errors being then in their growth, the Popes Thunders and Interdicts came soon
after, and Mendicant Friars, and the Great Pardons, and the fear of Purgatory,
and the turning of beads, with prayers in a tongue unknown to him that says
them, and the word of Transubstantiation established by an Article of a Council.

CHAP. XI. That the Fathers did not believe accidents without a subject in the
Eucharist.
ONe of the products of Transubstantiation, is, that it puts accidents without
a subject. The Roman Church did not only put in the Eucharist an humane body,
which keeps no place, a body Bell. lib. 1. de Eucharist. cap. 2. Sect. Secunda.
Dicemus quidem corpus Christi quantum, etc. ut non dicemus extensum.
without extent, without length, without diverse situation of parts, as being
whole in every crum of the Host, and having head and feet under the same point.
A body which being contained in no place, is nevertheless in a million of
several places at the same time, and by consequent is far from it self, and
both higher and lower then it self. But they added besides to raise error to
the highest enormity, that Catech. Trid. cap. de Euchar. Accidentia ipsa se
nulla alia re nisa sustentant.
in the host, the accidents, that is breadth, length, figure, color, and
taste, are without subject.

1. So that in the host, Innoc. III. de de Mysteriis Missal 4. cap. 11. Est
enim hic color, and sapor, quantitas, and qualitas, cum nihil alterutro sit
coloratum, aut sapidum, quantum aut quale.
there is whiteness, but no white thing; roundness, but no round thing; savor,
but nothing savoury; length and breadth, but nothing long or large, as Pope
Innocent speaks.

2. The Schoolmen speak much like that, saying that accidentia non accidunt,
albentia non albent, and that they are qualities which qualify nothing, and
are qualities of nothing.

3. By their doctrine, if the host fall into the mire, then the accidents bear
the mire that sticks to it, and are the subject of the substance.

4. If the host or chalice be poisoned, Platina in Victore III. Victor Henrici
fraud, ut Martinus scribit, veneno in calicem injecto, dum sacrificat necatur.
Naucler. gener. 4. Aventinus l. 7. p. 598. Trithemius Abbas Chronico
Hirsausiensi.
as when Pope Victor the third, and Matthew. Paris An. Chr. 1154. Cum
Archiepiscopus in sua reversus divina celebraret mysteria, hausto in ipso
calice, ut aiunt, veneno obiit.
Henry Archbishop of York, and the Emperor Henry the VII. were poisoned in
the chalice, we must say that lines and colors are poisoned, or that Christ is
poisoned.

5. Readers of the lowest capacity may comprehend that which I will say now.
That a leg is a substance, but lameness is an accident: The eye is a
substance, but the sight is an accident or a quality of the eye: and a sick
body is a substance, but the sickness of that body is an accident which happens
to that body. These Doctors then with their subtilty forging accidents without
a subject, do as if they said that there is halting without a leg, sight
without an eye, Sickness without a sick body, a race without a runner, an
Eclipse without Sun and Moon, heat and nothing hot.

6. Truly ruining the definition of a thing is ruining the thing; ruining the
reasonable animal, is ruining man; taking away roundness, is taking away the
circle or the globe. Now the substance or subject is of the definition of an
accident. Accidens est quod accidit subjecto; An accident is that which happens
to a subject. Then the accident is no more when the subject is no more; the
bread being no more bread, the whiteness of the bread is taken away, and the
length of bread, and the taste of bread.

7. The quantity Aristot. in Categ. Quantitatis. (...).
(say the Philosophers) is that whereby things are said to be so many, great or
small. Now here they forge us a quantity whereby nothing is great, or long or
broad.

8. Also the accidents according to this doctrine, are forms which inform
nothing, and qualities which qualify nothing.

9. Then it is evident, that one cannot abolish a relative, without abolishing
the other. Where there is no Father, there is no Son. Where there is no right
side there, there is no left side. Now the accident and the subject are
relative terms; Of which nevertheless these men will abolish the one which is
the subject, without abolishing the other; and the substance of the bread being
abolisht, they will have the taste, the length, and the roundness of the bread
to remain.

10. If the chalice be frozen, or the host moldy, then is their Christ frozen
or moldy. Or if that be displeasing to these Gentlemen, they must admit a
Mathematical length and breadth frozen and moldy, as if one said that the
triangles and pentagones of Euclides are frozen and moldy.

That prodigious doctrine was unknown to the ancient Fathers, and the least
trace of it is not found in the whole Antiquity. Had that been the belief of
the ancient Church, so many Pagans and heretics who have studied to disgrace
Christian Religion, and sought to pick holes in it, would not have omitted that
point, which brings such a swarm of absurdities along with it, giving the lie
to our eyes and our hands, and overthrowing common sense.

Austin speaks of accidents without a subject, as of an impossible and
contradictory thing; and of the union of a body with his proper qualities, as
of an inseparable thing. In the Epistle to Dardanus, which is the fifty
seventh, Toll ipsa corpora qualitatibus corporum, non erit ubi sint, et ideo
necesse est ut non sint.
Take away the bodies from the qualities of the bodies, the qualities shall not
have where to be, and therefore of necessity they shall not be.

And a little after, Si moles ipsa corporis penitus auseratur, qualitates ejus
non erit ubi sint, et ideo necesse est ut non sint.
If the mass of the body be quite taken away, there will be no place left for
the qualities: Let us say then after this good Doctor, If the mass or substance
of bread be totally taken away, the qualities or accidents of the bread shall
be no more.

The same Father in the second book of Soliloquies, Illud vero quod
interrogasti quis concesserit aut qui posse fieri videatur ut id quod in
subjecto est maneat, ipso intereunte subjecto? Monstrosum enim est et a
veritate alienissimum ut id quod non esset nisi in ipso esset, etiam cum id non
fuerit possit esse.
Who can grant that which thou have asked me, that the thing which is in the
subject, (that is the accident) can remain, if the subject be abolished? It is
a prodigious thing, and far from truth, that a thing which could not be, if it
were not in the subject, can subsist when that subject is no more. What can be
said more express? If Austin had believed Transubstantiation, would he not have
added that exception, that this rule has no place in the Eucharist? Would he
have thus justled against the f^undation of the holy Sacrament by a general
rule, and declaimed against it as a monstrous and ridiculous thing?

In the same fore-alledged Epistle to Dardanus, he rejects it as an absurdity
that a body may have parts not distant the one from the other, and not distinct
in situation, saying that Non e^go potuit obtinere quantitas corpori^ quod
potuit qualitas. Nam ita distantibus partibus quae simul esse non possunt,
quoniam sua quaeque spacia locorum tenent, minores minora, et majores majora,
non potuit esse in quibusque partibus tota, etc. et in nulla part tanta quanta
per totum.
The distant parts of a body cannot be together, because each of them keeps the
space of a place: the lesser parts holding less, and the greater more place,
and cannot be whole in every part. This is directly against the Roman Church,
which puts the whole body of Christ in every crum, and under every point of the
Host.

In the same place he says, Spacia locorum toll corporibus, nusquam erunt, et
quia nusquam erant nec erunt.
If the space of places be taken from bodies, they shall be nowhere, and
because they shall be nowhere, they shall not be at all. And Bellarmin, though
laboring to bring restrictions and interpretations to that passage of Austin,
acknowledges nevertheless that Austin speaks of the body of Christ, affirming
that Austin says, Bellar. l. 3. de Euchar. c. 7. Augustinus supra jam dixerat
destrui naturam humanam Christi si non detur ei certum spacium quo more aliarum
substantiarum corporearum, contineatur.
That unless a certain space be given to the body of Christ, wherein it be
contained after the manner of other bodily substances; the humane nature of
Christ is destroyed. And in the twentieth book against Faustus the Manichean,
chap. 11. Christ according to the substance of his body could not be together
in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Cross.

And in Epist. 101. to Evodius, Nullum esse quantulumeunque corpusculum quod
non pro suo modo loci occupet spatium. Nec in eo quod occupat ubique sit totum,
sed minus sit in part quam in tot^.
No body is so little, but that it fills according to his measure, the space of
a place; and there is none that be whole all over the space which it fills, and
that be not lesser in the part, then in the whole.

In that, this Father is grounded in good reason. For as our Adversaries
writing upon the fourth book of Aristotle's Physics, proves by many
demonstrations, that there can be no empty place, and that such an assertion
would imply many contradictions, so they use the same subtilty to prove that a
body cannot be without place and without filling some space. For it is no less
absurd to imagine a body without a place, then a place without a body.

And whereas Transubstantiation contains more wonders then the creation, if the
Author of the books of the wonders of Scripture, which are put among Austins
books, had believed it, he would not have omitted to speak of these wonders.
For in those books he searches all the wonders that are found in Scripture.
Nay, he speaks thus of the Eucharist, Aug. l. 3. de Trinit. cap 10. Haec
honorem habere possunt ut religiosa, stuporem autem habere ut mira non possunt.
These things may be honored as religious, but cannot be admired as miraculous.

In one thing it appears that the Fathers neither knew nor believed that in
the Eucharist the accidents were without a subject, that they never speak of
the species of bread in the plural. They speak indeed of the species of bread
and wine in the plural, because by the species they understand the substances,
and that bread and wine are two substances. But when they speak of bread by
itself, or of wine by it self, they never say the species of bread, or the
species of wine in the plural, because bread is one substance, not many. But
our Adversaries who by the species understand the accidents, speak of the
species of bread in the plural, and say that the Lords body is broken under the
species of bread, as if bread had many species. Wherein they speak against the
use of all ages, and against the rules of Philosophy, which never says the
species of a horse, or the species of Antony in the plural, to say his
accidents, and calls not the color of a horse his species. Their language in
that point, is both new and absurd, as well as their doctrine.

Finally, how could the accidents destitute of substance, under which they say
that the Lords body is enclosed, be signs of the body of Christ, seeing that
signs are helps to know? But our Adversaries say that the accidents of bread
are are coverings which hinder our senses to perceive Christ. As if a Chest
were the sign of Homers Iliad, because that book is hidden within it.

CHAP. XII. That the Fathers not only speak of a spiritual manducation which is
not done with the mouth, but also understand Christ's words, John 6. of a
spiritual manducation.
THE Fathers are full of expresses which turn our thoughts from the carnal and
oral manducation of Christ's body, to the spiritual, which is done by faith, and
warn us that Christ's words must be understood in a spiritual sense.

Tertullian in the thirty seventh chapter of the book of the Resurrection of
the flesh, expounding these words, The flesh profits nothing, Tertul. de
resur. carn. c. 37. Ex materia dicta dirigendus est sensus. Nam quia durum et
intolerabilem existimaverunt sermonem ejus quasi vere carnem suam illis edendam
determinasset, ut in spiritu disponeret tamen salutis, praemisit, Spiritus est
qui vivificat atque ita subjunxit, Caro nihil prodest, ad vivificandum scilicet.
We must (says he) direct the sense of these words according to the subject
that he speaks of. For because they esteemed his word hard and intolerable, as
if he had determined to give them really his flesh to eat: that he might make
the state of salvation spiritual, he said before, It is the Spirit that
quickneth: and then adds, The flesh profits nothing, that is, it profits
not for quickening.

And in the same place, Ibid. Quia et sermo caro erat factus, pr^inde in causam
vitae appetendus, et devorandus auditu, et ruminandus intellectu, et fide
digerendus. Nam paulo ante carnem suam panem quoque coelestem pronuntiarat,
urgens usquequaque per allegoriam necessariorum pabulorum, memoriam Patrum qui
panem et carnes Aegyptiorum praeverterant divinae vocationi.
The word was made flesh, and by consequent that we may have life, it must be
desired and devoured by hearing, and ruminated with the understanding, and
disgested with faith.

And in the same place, For he had declared a little before, thae his flesh was
the heavenly bread, urging by all means by an allegory taken from necessary
meats, the remembrance of their Fathers, who had preferred the bread and meat
of the Aegyptitians to the heavenly calling.

Clem. Alex. lib. 1. cap. 4. page 44. (...).
Clemens Alexandrinus is of the same mind; In another place (says he) even in
St. John's Gospel, the Lord declared it otherwise by signs, saying, Eat my
flesh, and drink my blood, propounding by Allegory the evidence of faith, and
the drink of promise.

Page 45. (...).
And a little after, He calls the Spirit flesh by Allegory, for the flesh is
created by him, and the blood enigmatically signifies the Word.

Again, Page 46. (...).
He said that the bread which I shall give you, is my flesh. Now the flesh is
moistened with blood, and the wine signifies the blood by Allegory.

Again, Lib. 2. cap. 2. page 68. (...).
He blessed the wine, saying, Take, drink, This is the blood of the vine. The
holy liquor of joy (meaning the consecrated wine) signifies by Allegory, the
Word that was poured for many. Note that he expounds the blood of the cup, to
be the blood of the vine, that is, wine.

In the end of Clemens the Summaries of Theodotus are added, where these words
are found, Page 536. (...).
The bread which I will give you is my flesh, even that whereby our flesh is
fed in the Eucharist. Then correcting himself, he adds, Or rather this flesh
is his body, which is the Church, the heavenly bread, the blessed assembly. It
is evident that the Fathers chose rather to say any other thing, and to use the
most remote and hard interpretations then to believe Transubstantiation.

Cyrillus or Origin upon Leviticus (for the Author is not certainly known) in
the seventh book, expounding these words, How can this man give us his flesh to
eat? speaks thus, Acknowledge that these things written in the divine volumes
are figures. See that thou understand them as spiritual, not as carnal. For if
you receive them as carnal, they hurt you instead of nourishing you.

Orig. in Levit. cap. 10. Hom 7. Est in Novo Testamento littera quae ^ccidit
eum qui non spiritualiter ea quae dicuntur adverterit. Si enim secundum
litteram sequeris hoc ipsum quod dictum est, Nisi mandicaveritis carnem meam
and biberitis sanguinem meum, occidit haec littera.
For there is in the New Testament a letter that kills him that observes not
the things which are spiritually spoken. For if thou followest according to the
letter, that very thing which is said, Unless you eat my flesh, and drink my
blood, that letter kills.

The same Author upon the Numbers, in the fourteenth chapter, Hom. 16. Bibere
dicimur sanguinem Christi non solum Sacramentorum ritu sed and cum sermones
ejus recipimus in quibus vita consistit; sicut and ipse dixit, Verba quae
locutus sum spiritus and vita sunt.
We are said to drink the blood of Christ, not only in the celebration of the
Sacraments, but also when we receive his words in which life consists, as
himself says, The words which I spoke unto you, they are spirit, and they are
life.

Basil in his Epistle to the Cesareans, which is the one hundred and forty
first, (...).
. We eat his flesh, and drink his blood, being by the incarnation made
partakers of the sensible life of the word, and of the wisdom. For the Lord
has called his mystical conversation, flesh and blood. The hardness of such
interpretations shows how far the Fathers were from believing
Transubstantiation, since that rather then to believe that bread and wine are
transubstantiated into flesh, they chose by the flesh of the Lord, which we
eat, to understand either his word, or his Church, or his conversation among
men. Any other exposition seems to them more convenient, and less hard then the
doctrine of Transubstantiation.

The same Father upon Psalm. 33. (...).
There is an intelligible mouth of the inward man, at which he is fed, being
partaker of the word of life which is the bread that came down from heaven.

Hierom upon the third chapter of Ecclesiastes, says that the flesh of Christ
is eaten when Scripture is read. Hoc solum habemus in praesenti saeculo bonum,
si vescamur carne ejus cruoreque potemur, non solum in mysterio, sed etiam in
Scripturarum lectione.
We eat his flesh (says he) and drink his blood, not only in the mystery, but
also in the reading of Scripture. For the true meat and the true drink which is
received from the word of God, is the knowledge of Scripture.

And in the Comment, upon the Psalms which is attributed to him, upon Psalm 44.
Ego corpus Christi Evangelium puto, etc. Quando dicit qui non comederit carnem
meam and biberit sanguinem meum, licet and in mysterio possit intelligi, tamen
verius corpus Christi and sanguis ejus sermo Scripturarum est.
I think that the body of Christ is the Gospel, and that Scripture is his
doctrine, when he says, he that eats not my flesh, and drinks not my blood,
etc. although this may be understood in mystery, yet to speak more truly, the
body and blood of Christ is the word of the Scriptures, and the divine
doctrine. And a little after, Caro Christi and sanguis ejus in auribus nostris
funditur; The flesh of Christ and his blood is poured into our ears. That
indeed is far from eating Christ with the mouth of the body. How far was Hierom
from the belief of our Adversaries, since by these words, This is my body, he
will have us to understand, this is my Gospel?

In the same place, Si quando audimus sermonem Dei, and sermo Dei, and caro
Christi, and sanguis ejus in auribus nostris funditur, and nos aliud cogitamus,
in quantum periculum procurrimus?
If when we hear the word of God, and that the word of God, and the flesh of
Christ, and his blood is poured into our ears, we think of something else, what
danger do we run into?

But the most pregnant of all the Fathers upon this point is Austin, who seems
to have made it his task to dissuade us from believing the manducation of
Christ with the mouth and teeth. Already we have understood how in the sixth
chapter of the third book of Christian doctrine; he was not content to have
said that these words of Christ, Except you eat my flesh, etc. are a typical
expression, but he declared very expressly how that figure must be understood,
namely that eating the flesh of Christ is meditating his death, and printing it
with fruit and pleasure in our memory.

We have seen also how in the 21. book of the City of God, 25. chapter he speaks of
two manducations of the flesh of Christ; the one done in the Sacrament or
sacred sign, the other spiritual, which he calls the only true manducation.
Ostendit quid sit non Sacramento tenus, sed re vera corpus Christi manducare.
The Lord shows (says he) what it is to eat the body of Christ, not in
Sacrament only, but also in truth.

Non solo Sacramento sed re ipsa manducaveru^t corpus Christi.
In the same place, They have eaten the body of Christ not only in Sacrament,
but in truth also.

The same upon the 98. Ps. upon that Christ had promised to give his flesh to
eat, he personates the Lord speaking thus to his Disciples, Spiritualiter
intelligite quod lecutus sum, non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis,
and bibituri sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum quod
vobis commendavi spiritualiter intellectum vivificabit vos.
Understand spiritually what I said unto you; You shall not eat this body which
you see, and shall not drink the blood which they that shall crucify me shall
shed. I have recommended unto you a sacred sign, which being spiritually
understood shall quicken you.

And in the second Sermon, de verbis Apostoli, If that which is taken visibly
in a sacred sign, is eaten spiritually in the truth it self, etc.

But he insisteth most upon that point in the 25, and 26. Treatise upon St.
John's Gospel, where he makes a long Comment upon the 6. chapter of St. John. In the
25. Treatise expounding the Lords words, Hoc est ergo manducare cibum, non qui
perit, sed qui permanet in vita^ aeternam. Ut quid paras dentes and ventrem?
Creed and manducasti.
This is the work of God, that you believe on him whom he has sent, he says.
This then (that is believing) is eating the meat which perishes not, but is
permanent unto everlasting life. Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly?
Believe and thou have eaten.

And in the 26. Treatise, Daturus Dominus Spiritum Sanctum dixit se panem qui
de coelo descendit, hortans ut credamus in cum. Credere in eum, hoc est
manducare panem vivu^. Qui credit in eum, manducat, invisibiliter saginatur,
quia and invisibiliter renascitur.
When the Lord would give the Holy Ghost, he said that he was the bread come
down from heaven, exhorting us to believe on him. For believing on him is
eating the living bread. He that believes on him, eats him; He is invisibly
fattened, because he is invisibly born again.

There also speaking of Moses, Aaron, and Phineas, who ate the Manna in another
manner then the incredulous do. Visibilem cibum spiritualiter intellexerunt,
spiritualiter esurierunt ut spiritualiter satiarentur. Nam and nos hodie
accipimus visibilem cibum, sed aliud est Sacramentum, aliud est virtus
Sacramenti.
They spiritually understood the visible meat, they were spiritually hungry,
they tasted spiritually that they might be satiated spiritually. For we also
take this day a visible food; but the Sacrament is one thing, and the truth of
the Sacrament is another thing. He says two things; for he speaks of a
spiritual manducation proper to the believers, and calls that which we eat in
the Sacrament a visible food. Now what is that visible food? Is it the Lords
body? But our adversaries say that it is invisible in the Mass. Is it the
accidents? But they are no food, unless they will give us lines, and colors,
and figures for meat.

A little after he shows of whom Christ speaks when he says, He that eats
this bread, shall not die for ever. Qui manducat intus non foris, qui manducat
in cord, non qui premit dente.
It is he (says he) that eats inwardly, not outwardly; he that eats in his
heart, not he that presses with his tooth.

We have showed before how in the same place by the bread of life which we must
eat, he understands the Church or the society of the believers. Then he adds,
Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam and illum bibere potum, in Christo manner
and illum manentem in se habere. Ac per hoc qui non manet in Christo and in quo
non manet Christus, proculdubio nec manducat spiritualitor carnem ejus, nec
bibit ejus sanguinem, licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat dentibus
Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi.
This is then eating this meat, and drinking this cup, even to abide in Christ,
and to have him abiding within us. By that reason, he that abides not in
Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without doubt eats not his flesh
spiritually, and drinks not his blood, though he press with his teeth carnally
and visibly the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Who sees not that
this good Doctor was set on by God to urge this so often and in such pressing
words, to prevent the error which Satan was contriving, and which he put forth
some ages after?

In the 27. Treatise after he has said that it was needful that Christ should
speak so that he might not be understood by all, he makes this conclusion of
his discourse, Illi putabant eum erogaturum corpus suum, ille autem dixit se
ascensurum in coelum, utique integrum. Cum videritis filiu^ hominis
ascendentem, ubi erat prius; certe vel tunc videbitis quia non eo modo quo
putatis erogat corpus suum. Certe vel tunc intelligetis quod gratia ejus non
consumitur morsibus.
The Jews thought that he would give them his body, but he tells them that he
was to ascend into heaven; in his whole person no doubt. When you shall see the
Son of man ascending where he was before, then at least shall you see that he
gives not his body in the same manner as you think; then at least shall ye see
that his grace is not consumed with biting.

These things are so clear and so express, that Pope Innocent the third, under
whom that word of transubstantiation was authorized by the Article of a
Council, being overcome with the force of truth, acknowledged, that when Christ
spoke of giving his flesh to eat, he meant the spiritual manducation, which is
done by Faith, not of that which is done by the mouth. Innoc. 3. lib. 4. de
Mysteriis Missae, cap. 4. De spirituali comestione Dominus ait, Nisi
manducaveritis carnem, etc. Hoc modo corpus Christi soli boni comedunt.
The Lord (says he) speaks of spiritual manducation, saying, Except you eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. In
this manner the good only eat the body of Christ. Wherefore also he says, He
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. For
he that abides in charity, dwells in God, and God in him. Why preparest thou
thy tooth and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten.

In effect, if by these words, Except you eat my flesh and drink my blood, you
have no life in you, Christ binds not the Christian to drink his blood with the
mouth of his body, I see not how the Roman Church can be excused for taking
from the people the cup of the Sacrament. For it is depriving the people of
life, seeing that taking the blood in the host is not drinking. Now Christ
says expressly, Except you drink. If in this point they believed the Ancients
and their Pope Innocent, they might know that for the spiritual participation
(which Christ recommendeth in this Chapter) eating and drinking are the same
thing; and that Christ uses both the Metaphors to signify that our souls
find in him a perfect and most complete food.

CHAP. XIII. That the Fathers believed not that the wicked, and unbelievers, or
hypocrites could eat the Lords body.
ACcording to the doctrine of the Roman Church, both good and evil men, true
believers and hypocrites eat the body of Christ really with the mouth of the
body. So that if Judas was partaker of the Holy Sacrament, as the Ancients
hold, we must say that he eat Christ really, and that Christ and the devil
entered into Judas at the same time.

This is contradicted by Christ himself, who says, that whosoever eats his
flesh has eternal life, and that he that eats the flesh of the Son of man
dwells in Christ, and Christ in him. For to eat Christ's flesh unworthily is
an impossible thing, since eating signifies believing, as we have proved, and
as both Austin and Pope Innocent acknowledge. For one cannot believe in Christ
unworthily, since in that Faith our worthiness consists. Wherefore St. Paul
says well, that there are some that eat the bread unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.29.
but says not that any eat the body of the Lord unworthily.

This is also contradicted by the Ancient writers. We have heard Austin already
saying, that those only eat the flesh of the Lord truly that eat it
spiritually. Whence it follows that the hypocrites and unbelievers that
participate the Eucharist, eat not the flesh of the Lord in truth and indeed.

Himself in the 26. Treatise upon John, Hujus rei sacramentum, id est unitatis
corporis and sanguinis Christi, alicubi quotidie, alicubi certis intervallis
dierum in Dominica mensa praeparatur, and de mensa Dominica sumitur, quibusdam
ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium; res vero ipsa cujus sacramentum est, omni
homini ad vitam, nulli vero ad exitium, quicunque ejus particeps fuerit.
The Sacred sign of this thing, that is of the unity of the body and blood of
Christ, in some places every day, in some places by certain intervals of days,
is prepared in the table of the Lord, and is taken by some to life, by others
to perdition. But the thing it self of which it is a sacred sign, is for life
to every man that is partaker of the same, but to none for perdition. And in
the same Treatise; He that dwells not in Christ and in whom Christ dwells
not, for certain eats not his flesh, although he press carnally and visibly the
sign of Christ's body and blood with his teeth.

And in the book of Austins sentences by Prosper, Sentent. 339. Qui discordat a
Christo, non carnem ejus manducat, nec sanguinem ejus bibit, etiamsi tantae rei
sacramentum ad judicium suae praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter accipiat.
Whosoever dissents from Christ, eats not the flesh of Christ, and drinks not
his blood, although he take every day indifferently the Sacrament of so great a
thing to the judgment [or condemnation] of his presumption.

And in the 5. chapter of the 21. book of the City of God, speaking of ill livers
that eat the Sacrament. Non dicendum eum manducare corpus Christi qui in
corpore non est Christi.
It must not be said, that a man who is not in the body of Christ, eats the
body of Christ. In the same place he personates Christ, saying, He that
dwells not in me, and in whom I dwell not, let him not say or think that he
eats my body or drinks my blood.

In the 59. Treatise upon John, comparing the other Disciples of Christ with
Judas, Illi manducabant panem Dominu^, ille panem Domini contra Dominum.
They ate (says he) the bread which is the Lord, but Judas ate the bread of
the Lord against the Lord, declaring that Judas did not ate the Lord.

In the 2. Sermon de verbis Apostoli, Tunc autem hoc erit, id est, vita
unicuique erit corpus and sanguis Christi, si quod in Sacramento visibiliter
sumitur, in ipsa veritate spiritualiter manducetur, spiritualiter bibatur.
Then the body and blood of Christ shall be life to every one, if that which is
taken in the Sacrament visibly is eaten in the very truth spiritually and drunk
spiritually.

Origin says the same upon Matthew. 15. Let this be said concerning the typical
or symbolical body. Many things also could be said of the Word it self which
was made flesh and true meat, which whosoever eats, lives eternally, and of
which no wicked man can eat.

Hierom upon the last chapter of Isaiah, Dum non sunt sancti corpore and
spiritu, nec comedunt carnem Jesu nec bibunt sanguinem ejus, de quo ipse
loquitur, Qui come dit carnem meam et bibit sanguinem meum, habet vitam
aeternam.
While they are not holy in body and spirit, they eat not the flesh of Jesus,
and drink not his blood; of which himself speaks; He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has eternal life. He could not speak more expressly.

CHAP. 14, Confutation of two shifts which the Cardinal uses upon all
occasions.
CArdinal du Perron pressed with the evidence of these testimonies shifts for
himself as well as he can. To that place of Austin upon the 3. Ps. that Christ
admitted Judas to the Supper in which he gave to his Disciples the figure of
his body and blood, Book 4. chapter 4. p. 871.
he answers that Austin speaks there of the figure, with a relation, not to the
true and proper body of Christ, but to his analogical body and blood; that is,
to the body and society of his Church. This Prelat hoped that no reader would
have the curiosity to consult the place, to see whether Austin speaks, in that
place of the Church, or of the figure of the Church. For he knew well enough
that Austin from the beginning of the exposition of the third Psalm unto this
place, speaks not at all of the Church nor of the figure of the Church, and
that in that assertion of his there is neither color nor shadow of truth.

He adds, that such is the sense in which Austin expounds the word of body
and blood of Christ, when he speaks of the Eucharist in those places where the
Catechumens were present, or the Infidels, as it appears by these words of the
26. Sermon upon John. By this meat and drink he would have the society of the
Saints to be understood. It is true, that Austin in many places expounds these
words, This is my body, and Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. as
if by this body and this flesh the Church was understood. But I could not yet
find any place in Austin where this word of blood is so expounded.

As for the Catechumens* or not initiated, and the Infidels before whom he
says that the Fathers spoke obscurely of mysteries, and did not discover their
intention, nor the belief of the Church, it is a shift which the Cardinal uses
upon all occasions. Page 872.
As in the 4. chapter of the 4. book; The Fathers (says he) call sometimes the
Eucharist a figure, whether it be that they may not reveal the secret of the
mystery before them that are not initiated; or to keep the analogy that it has
with our senses, to which the Eucharist shows nothing apparently but the
figure, not the naked truth of the body: Or in relation to the future state of
glory, in which respect the participation which we have here with the body of
Christ, is unto us as an earnest and a figure of the participation which we
have with the Godhead of Christ. And falling again to the same discourse in the
8. chapter he says that we must not learn the intention of the Fathers, by the
reading of the discourses where they were forbidden to expound their intention,
and the belief of the Church in that point, such as were the discourses that
were made before the Catechumens or the Infidels, in whose presence it was
prohibited to the Catholics to announce openly the belief of the Church about
the Eucharist. He brings for example the Treatises of Austin upon John, which
were popular Sermons delivered before all sorts of persons, both believers and
unbelievers, both initiated and not initiated; and Theodorets Dialogues, where
he professes to speak darkly and reservedly of the mystery of the Eucharist.
He will not then have us to look for the doctrine of the Church about the
Sacrament in Austins Treatises upon John, nor in Theodorets Dialogues. But he
says, that we ought for that matter trust the twelve books which Theodoret had
writ of the Sacraments if we had them, and Cyprians book of the Lords Supper,
and Chrysostom's Comments upon Matthew. 26. Page 878.
He adds that the examples which the Fathers allege to win and work upon the
minds of their adversaries, etc. they wrest and detort to that purpose as much
as they can. So he will not have us to stand to the verdict of the Fathers
whenever they speak before the Catechumens, or before Infidels, nor to those
writings where they speak incidently; Nor to those where they handle the
oblique, collateral, and accessory doctrine of the Eucharist, but to those
where they speak of the immediate, direct, and principal doctrine of the
Eucharist. Page 879.
He says also that we must consider the end of the conversion or transmutation
of bread of which the Fathers speak, and of the efficient cause which is the
Almighty power of God. This is the summary of all the Philosophy of our
Cardinal upon the point of the Eucharist. These are the tenter-hooks upon which
he has stretched his wit for the space of five and twenty or thirty years that
he has been sweating and beating his brains upon this matter.

Yet to all that the answer is most easy. For by all that subtilty he labors
only to sense himself against the places which call the Eucharist a figure and
a sign of Christ's body, not against those testimonies which say that these
words, This is my body, must be thus expounded, This is the figure or sign of
my body: And that Christ has given to the sign the name of his body, and
honored the visible signs with the name of his body; and that the words which
command us to eat the flesh of Christ, are a typical locution, which must be
thus interpreted, that we must meditate and call to remembrance that Christ is
dead for us. Neither does he guard himself from those authorities which deny
absolutely that we eat the body crucified for us, and say that the Sacrament is
the body of Christ, not in truth, but in signifying mystery, and that it is the
sign not the truth. And that the substance of bread and wine remains after the
consecration: and that the wicked eat not the body of Christ; and that there is
no other manducation but the spiritual. The Cardinal passes by all these, and
stays only upon those places where the Eucharist is called the figure of
Christ's body.

As for his refusing to stand to the writings of the Fathers where they speak
before the Catechumens, that is, before the persons not yet baptized, or before
the Infidels: It is very true, that sometimes the Fathers spoke more soberly of
the mystery of the Eucharist before the Catechumens, not to conceal from them
the sublimity of the mysteries, but for a clean contrary end; that is, for fear
the Sacrament should have been brought to contempt in the peoples estimation,
if the Pastors had spoken to them in plain and low terms, saying unto them
that it was bread and wine that was upon the table, and of the like nature as
the ordinary bread. This is clearly seen in the forealledged place of the
second Dialogue of Theodoret, where in stead of saying bread, he says a food
made up with such seeds, and that because (...).
of some persons not baptized which might be present.

Truly if in Sermons or writings which might be heard or read by unbaptized
persons there was need of such a reservation; it will follow that they never
ought to preach nor write openly and according to their intention, and that
they ought continually to disguise their belief, seeing that the Catechumens
were present at Sermons, and that a book once published is no more in the
Authors power, and is exposed to the sight both of baptized and unbaptized
persons, both of believers and unbelievers.

But how superfluous had that circumspection been toward the Infidels, seeing
that the revolted Christians, that were become enemies to the Faith might
reveal to the Infidels and to the Catechumens that which they had learned when
they were ranked among the believers before their revolt?

But how hurtful had that rule been, if it had been perpetual? For how just
might have been the complaint and the mistrust of the Catechumens? Would they
not have said to their Pastors that instructed them; You deceive us, you
disguise your belief; You speak to us against your sense. We desire to know of
you the true belief plainly before we be baptized.

The examples of antiquity testify sufficiently that the Fathers tie not
themselves to that rule. For we have the Apologeticks of the ancient
Christians, of Justin, and of Tertullian, and Origen's books against Celsus,
and Austins books of the City of God against the Pagans, in which they handle
the highest mysteries of Christian Religion.

If we must not heed the writings of the Fathers made for the Catechumens; why
does the Cardinal allege to us the Catecheses of Cyrillus and of Gregorius
Nyssenus, made purposely for the Catechumens? Why does he allege Chrysostomes
Sermons made before the Catechumens? Note that the number of the Catechumens
exceeded by much the number of the believers, because the custom then was to
receive baptism very late, and many times to put off baptism until the old age
and to the extremity. Yea why does he allege unto us any book of the Fathers,
seeing that there was none of those books but the Catechumens could read? who
would have laughed at their Pastors, if when they instructed them, they would
have taught them another doctrine then such as they had read in their books.
These are then mere Chimera's, and poor shifts, injurious against the Fathers,
whom the Cardinal taxes of hypocrisy, as men writing against their intention,
and (as he speaks) wresting and detorting the examples which they allege,
which is laying unsincerity and foul dealing to their charge. That the Cardinal
makes these vagaries rather to recreate his fine wit, then out of any belief of
that he asserteth, he shows it in some sallies that transport him, riding
aloft with his prancing oratory. As when he speaks thus in the 879. p. The
Fathers make two sorts of meditations; The one immediate, direct, and
principal; which considers the truth of the thing. The other mediate,
collateral, and accessory, which considers it according to a moral and
allegorical acception; being like the Echo and the reflected sound of the
litteral intelligence, to recreate the spirits of the readers by the sacred
mirth and ingenious invention of these allusions and allegorical applications.
With such frigasses of puff-paste words this Prelat did tickle his imagination.
This the Latins call in lent unguentum; essence of pearls, or aurum potabile,
in a mess of turnips. If then the Fathers have said, that, This is my body,
signifies, This is the sign or figure of my body, we must find in these words
an echo, a reflected sound, a collateral meditation, a sacred mirth, a
quintessence of Allegorical wheemsies.

Yet that we may deal more gently with this Prelat, let us grant him what he
asks. Let us suppose that the Fathers in their writings did purposely use
dark speeches, and disguise their belief for fear of being understood. For may
we not use his weapons against himself, and reject all the authorities which he
objecteth against us, saying that the alleged Fathers in those places did not
speak according to their sense? That such and such Catecheses were made for the
Catechumens? That in such and such Sermons part of the hearers were
Catechumens? and so make all their allegations doubtful and uncertain?

Yet let us see what reproaches he has especially against Austins Treatises
upon St. John. First by calling them Sermons, he gives them a title which the
Author gives them not, and we have no certain proof that ever these Treatises
were pronounced before the people. Also he calls these Treatises in contempt
popular Sermons made before all sorts of persons. If by popular Sermons he
means preached before the people, the same may be said of all the Sermons of
the Ancients; out of which nevertheless the Cardinal disdains not to bring
allegations. But if by popular he understands that they are written in a
familiar and low style, the reading of these Treatises shows the contrary. For
Austin never made any thing so exact and elaborate upon Scripture as these
Treatises; Chrysostoms Homilies are far more popular. These Treatises of Austin
are ten times shorter then his expositions of the Psalms, and yet there is ten
times more substance in them. But that which moves the Cardinal to speak of
these excellent books with contempt, is that he finds in them three or four
leaves together, in which he treats fully of the manducation of the flesh of
Christ, without speaking one word of Transubstantiation, or real presence,
although among all the writings of the Ancients there be not such a long
Treatise of this matter. For it is not incidently that Austin treats in that
place of this matter, but he makes it his task, and much ado he has to come
out of it. But although we had granted to the Cardinal that these Treatises of
Austin upon John are books out of which the intention of that Doctor cannot be
known, and which ought not to be regarded; will he say the same of his books of
Christian doctrine, or of the twenty third Epistle to the Bishop Boniface? Were
these books of Austin of Christian doctrine written for the Catechumens? Was
Boniface a Catechumen? And yet there Austin says that these words, Except you
eat my flesh, are a typical locution which signifies meditating the Lords
death: and that the Sacrament of Christ's body is in some sort the body of
Christ, according as signs take the name of the things signified.

The same I say of the Dialogues of Theodoret, which repeat and beat over this
matter, bestowing many pages about it. There the Reader may see with delight an
Eutychian Heretic maintaining the transubstantiation of bread into the body of
Christ; and an Orthodox Christian contradicting him, and using as express words
as he can, saying that after the consecration the visible signs do not change
nature, and that their first substance remains; and that Christ called the
bread his body, honoring the sign with the name of his body, without changing
the nature of the sign.

It is evident that the Cardinal abuses the Reader, and writes against his
conscience. For while he calls us away from Austins Books upon John, and from
the Dialogues of Theodoret, he sends us to other Books which are not in being,
and appeals to the twelve Books of the same Theodoret of the Sacraments, if we
had them; for he acknowledges that they are lost. He sends us also to Cyprians
Books of the Lords Supper, of whom he speaks thus: Such is (says he) the Book
of the Lords Supper of Cyprian, whether it be the Carthaginian or another of
the same age; for he addresseth his work to Cornelius Bishop of Rome
Contemporanean of Cyprian, and disputes against the Heretic Novatus of the
same time.

This Prelate feigneth to doubt whether this Book of the Lords Supper be
Cyprians, or of some other Author. And yet he could not be ignorant that it is
a supposititious Book. Bellarmine in his Book of Ecclesiastical Writers, speaks
thus of it, The Sermons of the Cardinal works of Christ (among which is this
Treatise of the Lords Supper) are of a learned and ancient Author, but seem not
to be of Cyprian; for first the style is far lower then that of Cyprian, etc.

Cardinal Baronius, An. 60. 51. De Cardinalibus operibus non est Cypriani.
The Book of the Cardinal works is not of Cyprian. The proofs of that are
clear; for in the Preface to Cornelius, the Author says, that he purposely
suppressed his name, whence it appears, that the Author is unknown. He styles
Cornelius, Your sublimity: But Cyprian calls always Cornelius brother. In the
Sermon of temptation and fasting, he says, that the Devil fell before man's
creation: which is repugnant to Cyprians opinion, in the Book of Zeal and Envy.
Besides that Authors style is barbarous and Monachal. His elegancies are,
animam Lazari potestative extraxerat. And partiabilis substantia Trinitatis.
And Caloris identitas. Him that has eaten Christ, he calls, Christi bajulum,
as if he were a porter. This is of the same kind, Distributus non demembratur,
incorporatus non injuriatur. By these it appears that the Book is new, and the
title to Cornelius supposed. In the Preface of that Book two passages are
found, taken well nigh word by word from the 42. Oration of Gregory Nazianzen,
who writ about 125. years after Cyprians death: In the Treatise of Baptism he
confuteth the opinion of Cyprian, about the rebaptization of Heretics. The
treatise of the words of Christ on the Cross, is found in Bibliotheca Patrum,
in the 2. Part of the 12. Tome, which contains the writings of Authors that
lived many Ages after Cyprian: whence it is made evident, that these treatises
of Cardinal Works are new, and of the dregs of the last Ages. To say that he
lived in the same Age as Novatus, because he disputes against Novatus (as the
Cardinal says) is speaking against common sense. By that reason if one in our
days write against Aristotle, he is Aristotle's contemporanean: And Hierome who
writ against Origin should be of the same age as Origin.

As for that the Cardinal says, that the Fathers call that which we receive in
the Eucharist the figure of Christ, because it appears so to the sense, it is
taxing the Fathers either of fraud, or great negligence: For if in this point
we must believe neither our senses nor our eyes, why do they speak according to
the report of the eyes? Why do they not give us warning that our sight is
deceived?

To say that they call the Sacrament a Figure, although the body of Christ be
really there, to oppose it to the full participation which we shall have in
heaven, is speaking against reason: For the inferior degrees are not figures
of the superior; by that reason the lowest rounds of a ladder should be
figures of the highest. Besides, the least Priest of the Roman Church (if he
may be believed) participates the body of Christ more then all the Saints of
Paradise. For there none of the Saints swalloweth Christ, none eats his flesh
really; So it will be found that the wicked which participate the Sacrament,
yea the Rats that carry the Host away, participate Christ's body more then those
prime Romish Saints, Francis and Dominick.

Of the Efficient cause of the change made in the Bread, which Ambrose and the
Suppositious book of the Lords Supper attribute to the Almighty power of God,
it was treated before when we spoke of Ambrose.

CHAP. XV. Showing how the Fathers say, that the Fathers of the Old Testament
ate the same meat which we eat in the Eucharist.
Whosoever says, that the Fathers that lived before Christ's Birth, ate the
same meat which we eat in the Eucharist, says by consequence that we eat not
the flesh of Christ with an Oral Manducation; for they could not really eat
with their carnal mouth a body which was not yet. But they might eat him in
Sacrament, as the signs are called by the name which they signify.

Such is the doctrine of the Apostle who affirms 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, and 4.
that the Fathers of the Old Testament were all baptized in the cloud and in
the sea, and all ate of the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink, for they drunk of that spiritual rock that followed them, and
that rock was Christ.

That it is the Apostles mind to say that these Fathers drunk of the same
drink, not only among themselves, but also with us, it appears by his
declaring that the drink which they drunk was Christ, even the same Christ
which we drink, and which we participate: of which participation he speaks soon
after. The same appears because this text cannot be expounded otherwise
without departing from the scope of the Apostle, which is to admonish us that
we be no idolaters or fornicators, as some of the Israelites were in Moses his
time, who although they had participated Christ in the Sacrament as well as we,
were punished nevertheless when they fell into idolatry and fornication.

It is evident also, that the Apostle speaks not of manducation by faith, since
he speaks of a manducation which all the Fathers participated, both good and
evil, and among others those that were punished for their fornication and
idolatry; but he calls Manna and the water flowing from the rock, spiritual
meat and drink, because they had a spiritual signification, and because they
were to be taken in a spiritual sense.

The old Christians, following the Apostles steps, say that the Fathers before
Christ's coming ate the same meat, not only among them, but with us also.

So speaks Austin in the 45. Treatise upon John. Ideo and sic ait, eundem potum
spiritualem biberunt, nam corporalem, non eundem. Quid enim illi bibebant?
Bibebant enim de spirituali sequente petra; petra autem erat Christus. Videte
ergo fide manente signa variata. Ibi petra Christus, nobis Christus quod in
altari Dei ponitur. Et illi pro magno Sacramento ejusdem Christi biberunt aquam
profluentem de petra. Nos quid bibamus norunt fideles. Si speciem visibilem
intendas, aliud est; si intelligibilem significationem, eundem potum
spiritualem biberunt.
The Apostle says, they drunk the same spiritual drink, but not the same
bodily drink. And what did they drink? they drunk of the spiritual rock that
followed them; now that rock was Christ. See then how faith remaining, the
signs are changed: there the rock was Christ, but to us that which is laid on
Gods altar, is Christ. And they, for a great Sacrament of the same Christ,
drunk the water flowing out of the rock. But the believers know what it is that
we drink. If you behold the visible form, it is another thing; If you regard
the intelligible signification, they drunk the same spiritual drink. In all
this passage it is plain, that Austin compares not the Israelites among
themselves, but with us; and affirms that they drunk the same drink as we do.
He says that they drunk indeed another bodily drink, for they drunk the water
flowing from the rock, and we drink wine in the Eucharist. It is (says he) the
same faith or doctrine, but the signs are differing. He calls then that which
is received in the Lords Supper, signs of Christ. Note here especially that he
joins these two things as like, that the stone in old time was Christ, but now
that which is laid on the altar or table of the Lord, is Christ. As then the
stone then was not Christ really, but in Sacrament; likewise that which now is
set upon the altar is not Christ really, but in Sacrament or signification:
Note also, that he says, that the visible form is another then in old time.
Now it is evident that he speaks of the species or form of bread, and of the
species or form of wine in the singular, because by the word species he
understands the substance of bread, which is one; not the accidents, which are
many. When he says that the signs of the Old Testament are changed into other
signs, it is evident, that as by the signs of the Old Testament the substances
of Manna and water are understood; So by the signs of the New Testament the
substances of bread and wine are understood, and not the accidents and show of
bread without bread, and the color and taste of wine without wine.

In vain the Cardinal answers, that the Sacraments both Old and New, were one
and the same thing in figure and signification, but not in truth and reality;
For neither in the old nor in the new Sacraments was then or is now the truth
and the reality. The truth contained in the Gospel opposed to the figures of
the Law, is found in Christ and in his death, not in the bread and wine of the
Sacrament. St. John teaches us so much, John 19.36. where he alleges the
prohibition made in the Law of breaking any bone of the Paschal Lamb. Of which
figure he finds the fulfilling, not in the Lords Supper, but in the Cross, in
which the Soldiers forbore to break the arms and limbs of the Lord. And the
Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 5.7. says that Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us,
nor with any regard to the Lords Supper, but speaking of the Lords death and
passion. And if Austin or any other of the Fathers puts the truth in the
Sacraments of the New Testament, and the figure in the Sacraments of the Old;
by that truth he understands not that Christ is really in the water of baptism,
or in the elements of bread and wine, or that the water or the bread is
transubstantiated into Christ; but by the truth he understands a more ample and
effectual grace then that which was under the Law, as John speaks in the first
Chapter, The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ. Upon
this the words of the same Father, upon the 77. Psalm are very express, Idem in
mysterio cibus and potus illorum qui noster, sed significatio^^ idem, non
specie. Qui^ idem ipse Christus illis in petra figuratus, nobis in carne
man^festatus est.
Their meat and drink was the same in mystery as ours, but the same in
signification, not in kind. For the same Christ which was figured unto them in
the rock, was manifested to us in the flesh. Where we clearly see the two
foresaid things. The one, that he compares not the Israelites among them, but
with us, and that he declares that the Fathers are the same meat as we eat.
The other, that he places the fullfilling of the old Sacraments, not in that
which is eaten with the mouth in the Eucharist, but in the incarnation and
apparition of Christ.

The same Father in the book of the utility of Penitence, Tomo 9. c. 1. Eundem
cibii spiritualem manducaverunt. Quid est eundem n^si quia eu^ quem etiam nos?
They ate the same spiritual meat. What is the same meat, but that which we
also eat? And again, Eundem non invenio quomodo intelligam nisi eum quem
manducamus and nos.
St. Paul says the same meat. I find not how this word the same can be
understood, but that meat which we also eat. And again, Quicunque in Manna
Christum intellexerunt, eundem quem nos cibum spiritualem manducaverunt.
All that understood Christ in Manna, ate the same spiritual meat as we do.

There it is clear, that Austin says not only that the Fathers ate the same
meat as we in figure or Sacrament, but also that they ate by faith the same
thing signified. For he adds, They drunk the same drink as we do, but
spiritual, which was taken by faith, but was not swallowed by the body.

In his second book of the Eucharist against M. du Plessis, p. 42.
The Cardinals answer is that which he uses upon all occasions, and his general
plaster for all sores; he says that some unbaptized persons were present,
before whom Austin durst not speak according to his belief. A shift which we
have showed to be not only vain, but injurious against the Fathers. Besides,
when Austin writ this, he writ alone and without witnesses. And if he was
afraid that the Catechumens should read his book, he might have had the same
fear in all his book, and so never have written according to his belief. The
Cardinal adds, that Austin compares the Sacraments of the Christian Church
with those of the Jewish in the instructive and doctrinal function, not in the
operative and exhibitive; meaning that they figured the same thing, but had not
the same virtue. In these dark terms, in effect he says nothing; For though
that which he says be granted, that which I affirm remains; that Austins
assertion is, that the Fathers ate the same meat as we do, not only in figure,
but also really by faith. It matters not if there was some difference in the
efficacy, or in the manner of the operation. Thus in all that he adds upon
that testimony of Austin, he defends himself where we assault him not.

Neither must he tell us, that this manner of eating Christ by faith is a
Metaphor, and a Metaphorical expression. For although there be a Metaphor in
the word eating for participating, yet this participation is so real, that
Austin acknowledges no other true manducation of the flesh of Christ, but the
spiritual, as we have proved. He says not only, that the only manducation by
faith is profitable or salutary, but he says Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 21. c.
25. Qui est in corporis ejus unitate, etc. ipse vere dicendus est manducare
co^pus Christi.
that who so is not in the body of Christ, eats not truly the body of Christ.
Non sacramento tenus, sed re vera corpus ejus manducare.
And that it is one thing to eat Christ sacramento tenus, only in Sacrament,
and another thing to eat him re vera, truly and in effect.

This may also be an answer to that the Cardinal says, that the Fathers of the
Old Testament ate the same meat, yet not in the same manner: for although the
Fathers ate not the flesh of Christ in the same manner as we, as for the
sacramental manducation; yet as for the real manducation of the flesh of
Christ, they ate it in the same manner, that is, with a real and true
manducation, although God put more evidence and efficacy in our Sacraments. For
Austin acknowledges no other manner of eating the flesh of Christ truly and
really, but to eat it by faith.

Wherefore when Austin says, that we eat the Lords flesh with the faithful
heart, and with the mouth, he understands that we eat it with the heart by
faith, and that we eat it sacramentally and in sign, with the mouth. But that
we eat really and truly the natural body of Christ with the mouth of the body,
is a thing which that good Doctor never said, and never believed. We heard
before how he personats Christ speaking thus to his Disciples, Aug. in Ps. 98.
You shall not eat this body which you see, and shall not drink the blood which
they that crucify me shall spill. I have recommended a sacred sign unto you,
which being spiritually taken, shall quicken you.

These things are so clear and express, that in the end they force the Cardinal
to dispute against Austin, under pretense of excusing him. Du Perron of the
Eucharist, against Du Plessis, p. 46. and 52.
We cannot omit (says he) to say that this meditation of Austin is not
litteral at all, that is, not conformable unto the litteral sense of the
Apostle; but Austin played here with his wit. He adds, that Austin alleging
the words of the Apostle to another purpose, boweth and turns them from their
direct intention, to apply them to his own. And that it is not a direct formal
and litteral exposition, but a curious and collateral meditation, and a game
some and Allegorical diversion, whereby Austin Allegorically inflecteth St.
Paul's words from their natural sense, etc. With such answers it were easy for
us to elude all the passages which are alleged against us out of the Fathers,
saying, that such a Father was playing with his wit when he spoke so, and
wrested the sense of Scripture to another sense to bring it to his purpose. So
Austin (in his account) is a mocker, that plays with Scripture, and gives a
wrong sense to it to serve his turn. Certainly since our adversaries to fence
themselves against Scripture have recourse to the Fathers, they should, in
policy, use them with more civility.

The same Austin in the 26. Treatise upon John speaks thus. Hunc panem
significavit Manna. Hunc panem significat altar Dei. Sacramenta illa fuerunt.
In signis diversa sunt, sed in re quae significatur paria sunt. Apostolum audi,
Nolo enim vos, inquit, ignorare fratres quia patres nostri omnes sub nube
fuerunt, etc. and omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducaverunt. Spiritualem
utique eandem, nam corporalem alteram, quia illi manna, nos aliud, spiritualem
vero quam nos.
Manna signified this bread. Gods Altar signifies this bread. They were
Sacraments. They are diverse in signs, but they are alike in the thing
signified. Here the Apostle saying, Brethren, I would not that ye should be
ignorant, that our Fathers, etc. did all eat the same spiritual meat; the same
spiritual meat indeed, but another bodily meat, because they ate Manna, we
another thing, but yet [they ate] the same spiritual meat as we eat.

Here the Cardinal answers again, that Austin in that popular Sermon, for fear
of the Catechumens then present, abstained from expressing the true direct and
immediate doctrine of the Church concerning the Sacrament. He says also that
these were diversions, accessory and collateral expositions to feed and stay
the curiosity of those that were not initiated. This Prelat makes Austin a
jugler, or a player that puts on several vizards. But it is certain that
disguizing his belief before the Catechumens was not the way to satisfy their
curiosity, but a trick to amuse them with deceitful words, and send them away
empty and possessed with a false belief, of which they needed to be dispossessed
after their baptism. At which time having learned the true belief of the
Church, they might have said to their Pastors, What goodly stuff did ye serve
to us? What tales did ye feed us with? And why did ye not speak to us in good
earnest? How do we know whether you have now told us all, and whether within a
few years you will make us alter our belief the second time?

Hereupon the Cardinal Page 60. Vir. Aeneid. 3 Hectoreum ad tumulum, viridi
quem cespite inanem, and geminas, causam lachrymis, sacraverat aras.
with a long discourse extenuates the efficacy of the Sacraments of the Old
Testament, which he calls in contempt Cenotaphia, that is, as he expounds it,
vain, hollow, and empty monuments, such as the tombs were, whose deceitful
inscription spoke as if the dead body had been enclosed within, though it was
in another place. This is indeed injurious language against the Sacraments of
the Old Testament, to call them vain monuments. For were not the Fathers saved
by those Sacraments? Shall we call that a vain monument which brings us to
salvation? Shall we call the Passover a vain monument, seeing that the grace
and salvation in Christ was presented in it?

Does not Austin say that the Fathers ate spiritually the flesh of Christ? Does
he not say that there is no true and real manducation, but the spiritual? Truly
it is like that the Cardinal set forth this discourse only show this fine word
of Cenotaphe, and make the world think that he is a jolly Grecian. Rather we
should say, that even under the Gospel, unto them that have no faith, the
Sacrament is a Cenotaphe, and that the Passover was a figure exhibitive of the
truth to them that did participate it with faith. Observe also the Cardinals
learning, when he calls the figures of future things monuments. For every
monument is a memorial of a thing past.

But who makes any doubt, but that Christ and the grace in Christ was presented
to the Fathers by the Sacraments of the Old Testament? as Cyrillus says upon
John; Cyril. Alex. in Joh. l. 3. c. 34. and 36. Verum Manna Christus est qui
per figuram manna priscis illis a Deo Patre dabatur.
The true Manna is Christ whom the Father gave to those ancient [Fathers] by
the figure of Manna. And Chrysostom upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
Hom. 23. Although the things which were done then were sensible, yet they were
spiritually given; not according to the consequence of nature, but according to
the gift of grace, and with the body they fed the soul also, and induced to
faith. (...).
They were not then vain monuments, nor Cenotaphes, or imaginary sepulchers, or
names without things.

CHAP. XVI. That the Fathers believed not that the body of Christ is really
present under the element of Bread, but that he is in heaven only, not in earth.
WE have showed by a multitude of allegations of the Fathers, that they speak
of three sorts of the body of Christ; His natural body, born of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, and crucified for us; his mystical body, which is the Church; and
his Sacramental body, which is made by the mouth of Priests, which is broken in
pieces, which feeds our bodies, which is made up of many grains, which is the
Sacrament of the natural body of Christ, in which Gods virtue is working, so
that by participating the Sacrament with faith, Christ dwells in us, and we
in him. Of the presence of that body in the Eucharist none doubts, and the
Fathers speak of it often.

But as for the Lords natural body, as the Fathers teach, that we do not eat it
with our mouth, and that the wicked cannot eat it; so they hold that it is in
heaven, not in earth; and that being ascended to heaven, he will return to us
no more, but on the day of judgment; and that the way to take him, is not to
lay hold on him with our hand, or to receive him into our mouth, but apprehend
him by faith.

Austin in the 50. Treatise upon John Pauperes semper habebitis vobiscum, me
autem semper non habebitis. Accipiant and hoc boni, sed non sint solliciti;
loquebatur enim de praesentia corporis sui. Nam secundum Majestatem suam,
secundum providentiam, secundum ineffabilem and invisibilem gratiam impletur,
quod ab eo dictum est, Ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus dicbus usque ad
consummationem saculi. Secundum carnem vero quam verbum assumpsi^, secundum id
quod de virgin natus est, etc. non semper habebitis me vobiscum, etc.
The Lord said, You shall have always the poor with you, but me you shall not
have always. Let the godly understand this, and not be troubled, for he spoke
of the presence of his body. For according to his Majesty, according to his
providence, according to his unspeakable and invisible grace, is fulfilled that
which he said, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. But
according to the flesh, which the Word has assumed, according as he was born
from the Virgin, according as he was taken by the Jews, etc. he says, Me you
have not always with you.

In the same Treatise, he speaks thus to them that ask how they may take and
hold Christ: Respondent, Quem tencho? Absentem? Quomodo in coelum manum mittam,
ut ibi sedentem teneam? Fidem mitte, and tenuisti. Parents tui tenuerunt
carne, tu tene cord, etc. Corpus suum intulit coelo, majestatem non abstulit
mundo.
They answer, Whom shall I hold? Him that is absent? How shall I put my hand in
heaven, that I may hold him that sits there? Send up thy faith thither, and
thou have laid hold of him. Thy Fathers held him in the flesh, but thou holdst
him with thy heart. He has carried up his body into heaven, but he has not
removed his Majesty from the world. And in the same place, We have Christ
always according to the presence of his Majesty; but according to the presence
of his flesh, it was well said to his Disciples, Me you have not always.

And in the first Treatise upon the first Epistle of John, Ipsum jam in coelo
sedentem manu contrectare non possumus, sed fide contingere.
We can no more hold him with our hand now that he is sitting in heaven; but we
may touch him with our Faith.

This Father by the Cardinals Doctrine was not well taught; for to them that
are in the Church, and ask, How shall I take Christ? Must I stretch my hand as
far as heaven, where he is, seeing that he is no more on earth? A Romish Doctor
would answer, What need thou to go seek him so far, seeing that he is near
thee, on the altar, and in the Priests hands? Instead of that, Austin
answers, Lay hold on Christ by faith, receive him in thy heart, and imagine
not that thou can lay hold on him with thy hand. No other way does he give,
as indeed there is no other way. Austin was not content to have said that
Christ is with us no more, and is no more present with us, as for his natural
body, but he added besides, that to hold him we must not stretch our hand, but
take hold on him by faith at the right hand of God. It seems that by saying, We
can hold him no more with our hand, he speaks to the Priests of the Roman
Church, who boast that they have Christ in their hand every day: So that if one
may believe them, they make the body of Christ, and have him in their power.

The same in the 57. Epistle to Dardanus speaks thus. Secundum hanc formam non
est putandus ubique dis^usus. Cavendum est enim ne ita divinitatem astruamus
hominis, ut veritatem carnis auseramus. Non est autem consequens ut quod in Deo
est ita sit ubique ut Deus.
According to this form [of manhood] we must not think that Christ is diffused
every where; for great heed must be taken that we do not so establish the
Godhead of this man, as to abolish the truth of his flesh. It follows not
that any thing that is in God is every where, as God is every where.

About this matter the 11th. chapter of the 20th. Book against Faustus Manichean is
employed: Where disputing against Faustus, who put Christ's body in infinite
places at the same time; he says that Christ Secundu^ praesentiam quippe
spiritualem nullo modo illa pati posset, secundum praesentiam vero corporalem
simul and in sole et in L^na et in cruce esse non posset.
according to his spiritual presence could not suffer these things [that is, to
be crucified:] But that according to his corporal presence he could not be at
the same time in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Cross.

And in the 78. Treatise upon John Vado et venio ad vos. Sed a quibus homo
abscedebat Deus non recedebat, et idem ipse Christus homo et Deus. Ergo ibat
per quod homo erat, et manebat per id quod Deus erat. Ibat per id quod uno in
loco erat.
The Lord Jesus said, I go and return to you again, but he did not depart as
God from those whom he left as man. The same Christ is both God and man. Then
he went as he was man, and remained as he was God. He went in as much as he was
in one place, but he stayed in as much as he is everywhere, that is, in his
Godhead. How does this agree with the Roman Church? Austin says, that Christ
ascending to heaven went from us as man, but the Roman Church says, that he
staid with us as man, and according to his humane nature; yea that Christ as
man is far more present with us then he was in the time of his living among
men; for then he was present but in one place, but now they make him present in
an hundred millions of places, in altars, in boxes, in stomachs, yea (if it
happens) in the bellies of Mice. Austin says, that Christ as man is but in one
place: Whereas the Roman Church puts him in many millions of places in the same
moment. It is very observable, that if Austin had believed transubstantiation,
he would not have said that Christ is gone and retired from us as for his
humane nature, but remains present as for the Divine; but he would have said
that he ceased indeed to be present with a visible presence, but that his body
remains invisibly present. This good Doctor did not know and never spoke of
any other way whereby God supplyeth the want of the visible and bodily presence
of Christ, but the presence of his Godhead. Besides it is an extravagant
nonsense, to say that the body of Christ is gone, but that it remained
invisibly present. As if one said that Philip is gone out of Paris, but that he
is in Paris still invisibly present; because, though he be gone, he lies hid
in Paris; Or that he has no soul, because his soul is invisible.

The same Father in the 30. Treatise upon John, Sursum est Dominus, sed etiam
hic est veritas Dominus. Corpus enim Domini in quo resurrexit uno loco esse
o^ortet, veritas autem ejus ubique diffusa est.
The Lord is above, but also the Lord who is the truth is here below. For the
body of Christ, in which he rose again from the dead, must be in one place
only, but his truth is diffused every where. I have translated uno loco, one
place only, as the French Bibles of our Adversaries translate Vnus Dominus, una
fides, unum Baptisma, unus Deus, Ephesians 4.5. and unius uxoris virum, 1 Timothy 3.2.
thus, There is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: And the Bishop must be the
husband of one wife only. For also the word unus in Latin imports unity; and
the opposition which Austin makes requires it, That the truth of the Lord is
everywhere, but his body is in one place only.

The corruptors of the new Editions, have wickedly falsified this place. For
instead of corpus Domini in uno loco esse oportet, that the body of the Lord
must be in one place only, they have put in uno loco esse potest, it may be in
one place. But all the old Editions have oportet. And that text is thus
alleged by Gratian in the 2. Distinction of the Consecration in the Canon
Prima. And by Yuo Carnutensis in the second part of his Decree, 18. chapter And by
Lombard in the 4. Book of the Sentences 10. Did. A. And by Thomas in the 3.
part of the Sum qu. 75. Art. 1. But though all the Copies and Editions had
potest, yet reason and the sense of the sentence show that it must be read
oportet: For it is altogether unreasonable to say that Christ's body can be in
one place. As if one said, that the Sun may be in some place; Possibility is
not mentioned, where there is necessity. If in this clause you read that the
Lords body may be in one place, you must read in the following clause, but his
truth may be diffused everywhere, to keep the Laws of the opposition. The same
Text is suspect of another falsification; for instead of veritas, it is like
there should be virtus.

The same Austin in the 60. Sermon de Verbis Domini, Christ is always with us
in his Godhead; Semper quidem divinitate nobiscum est, sed nisi corporaliter
abiret, a nobis semper eu^ carnaliter videremus, et nunquam spiritualiter
crederemus.
but had he not gone away bodily from us, we should always see him carnally,
and should never believe him spiritually. No doubt but that our Adversaries
reading this, could with all their heart fall out with Austin. For he says,
that if Christ's body were not gone, we should see him always. Whereas the
Church of Rome says, that Christ went from us bodily, and yet that he stayed
behind bodily, but that we see him not.

In the 140. Sermon de Tempore, Feria prima Pasc. Sermon. 1. Ideo Dominus noster
absentavit se corpore ab omni Ecclesia et ascendit in coelum, ut aedisicetur
fides.
The Lord absented himself in body from all the Church, and ascended into
heaven, that thy faith might be edified. I would know whether when one has the
body of Christ really in his mouth* or in his stomach, it may be said without
lying, or without jesting, that Christ has absented himself from him. For by
the same reason one might say, that the brains or liver of Philip is absent
from him, or remote from him, because he does not see it, and because the
inward parts of his body are invisible to him. He had said a little before,
Consolatur te fractio panis, absentia Domini nonest absens. Habeto fidem, et
tecum est quem non vides.
The fraction of bread comfort thee: The absence of the Lord is not absent:
Have faith, and he whom thou see not is with thee. Showing that he is not
with them that have not faith.

Cyrillus of Alexandria in the 9th. book upon John speaks to the same purpose.
The faithful people must believe, though he be absent in body from us, that
yet all things, and our selves are governed by his virtue. And in the 11. Book
3. chapter Etsi abest corpore patri pro nobis apparens, ac a dextris ejus sedent,
habitat tamen in Sanctis per Spiritum.
Though he be absent in body, appearing for us before his Father, and sitting
at his right hand, he dwells nevertheless in his Saints by his Spirit.

This Father here follows the command of Christ himself, who in the 14. and
15. of John having foretold his Apostles that he would shortly go from them,
and leave them, to go to his Father, gives them not that comfort that he would
go away only as for his visible presence, but that he would remain invisibly
present under the element of bread. Only he promises to send them the
Comforter, which is the Holy Spirit, to supply his absence.

Cyril. l. 9. in Joh. 7.21. Credere oportet fideles; quamvis a nobis corpore
absit, virtute tamen sua omnia et nos gubernari.
The Eutychians who forged unto Christ a body that was everywhere, gave occasion
to the Fathers of the 5. Age to maintain that the body of Christ is no more on
earth, and that he is nowhere present, but in one place only, where he is
sitting at the right hand of God. Vigilius writ five Books against Eutyches in
which he insisteth much upon that. In the 1. Book he speaks thus, Dei filius
secundum humanitatem suam recessit a nobis. Secundum divinitatem suam ait
nobis, Ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus usque ad consummationem saeculi.
The son of God according to his manhood departed from us, but according to his
Godhead he tells us, Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.
Had the Fathers believed the real presence under the elements of bread and
wine, the Eutychians might have stopped their mouth, saying, that Christ even
according to his manhood is always with us, unto the end of the world, since he
is always bodily present under the accidents of bread.

Vigilius adds, Per formam servi quam abstulit a nobis in coelum, absens est
nobis: per sormam Dei quae non recedit a nobis in terris praesens est nobis.
According to the form of servant which he carried from among us into heaven,
he is absent from us. According to the form of God which retireth not from us,
he is present unto us in earth. But his words are express, especially in the 4.
Book. Si verbi et carnis una natura est, quomodo cum verbum ubique sit, non
ubique invenitur et caro? Nam quando in terra fuit non erat utique in coelo, et
nunc quia in coelo est, non est utique in terra, et in tantum non est, ut
secundam ipsam Christum spectemns venturum de coelo quem secundum verbum
nobiscum esse credimus in terra.
If the Word and the Flesh have but one nature (as the Eutychians say) how
comes it to pass that the Word being everywhere, his flesh also is not found
every where? For when it was on earth it was not in heaven; And now because it
is in heaven it is not on earth.

To say that Vigilius understands that the flesh of Christ is no more in earth
visibly, but invisibly, is to make Vigilius an Eutychian; for such was the
belief of the Eutychians, against whom he disputes. Besides, Vigilius saying,
that when the flesh of Christ was on earth, it was not in heaven, understands
that it was neither visibly nor invisibly in heaven. Whence it follows, that
when he says, that being now in heaven, it is no more on earth, he understands
also that it is neither visibly or invisibly in earth any more.

For the question between Vigilius and the Eutychians was not of the
visibility, but of the real presence, which the Entychians affirmed, and
against which Vigilius disputes with all his might.

CHAP. XVII. That the Fathers acknowledge the same participation of the body
and blood of the Lord in Baptism, and in the preaching of the Word, as in the
Lords Supper.
THe ancient Doctors show enough how far they were from believing a real
manducation of the natural body of Christ with the mouth, in that they
acknowledge the same manducation and participation of the Lords body in Baptism
and in the preaching of the Word, as in the Lords Supper.

Thus Austin, August. Sermon. ad Infantes citante Beza in 1 Cor. 10. and
Hincmaro, p. 243. Nulli est aliquatenus ambigendum, tunc unumquemque fidelium
corporis sanguinisque Dominici fieri participem quando in baptismate membrum
Christi efficitur. Nec alienari ab illius panis calicisque consortio, etiamsi
antequam panem illum comedat and calicem bibat, de hoc saeculo in unitate
corporis Christi constitutus discedat.
None must make any doubt that then every believer is made participant of the
body and blood of the Lord, when he is made a member of Christ by Baptism. And
that he is not alienated from the communion of that bread and that cup,
although before he eat that bread and drink that cup, he go out of this world,
being in the unity of the body of Christ. This same passage is found in
Fulgentius toward the end of the Book concerning the Baptism of the Ethiopian
dying.

Hierom to Hedibia in the 2. question. Quotquot in Christo baptizamur, Christum
induimus, and panem comedimus Angelorum.
All we that are baptized in Christ, put on Christ, and eat the bread of Angels.

Theodoret upon Ephesians. 5. Cum eo in Baptismo consepelimur et una cum eo
resurgimus, et corpus ejus comedimus, et sanguinem bibimus.
By Baptism we are buried with Christ, and rise again with him, and eat his
body, and drink his blood.

Chrysostom in the 16th. Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews: (...).
Water and blood show here the same thing; for his Baptism is his passion.

We heard before Leo the 1. in the 14. Sermon, saying, that in Baptism, corpus
regenerati fit caro crucifixi, The body of the baptized person becomes the
flesh of [Christ] crucified.

Of the Word, Hierom speaks thus upon Eccles. 3. Hoc solum habemus in praesenti
saeculo bonum si vescamur carne ejus, cruoreque potemur, non solum in mysterio
sed etiam in Scripturarum lectione. Verus enim cibus et potus qui ex verbo Dei
sumitur, scientia scripturarum est.
This only good we have in this present world, if we eat his bread, and drink
his blood, not only in the Sacrament, but also in the reading of Scripture: For
the true meat, and the true drink which is taken, from the word of God, is the
Science of the Scriptures.

The same upon the 144. Psalm, if that Book be his, Quando dicit, qui comederit
carnam meam, et biberit sanguinem meum, licet et in mysterio possit intelligi,
tamen verius corpus Christi et sangius ejus sermo scripturarum est, doctrina
divina est.
When the Lord says, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, although it
may be also understood in mystery; yet to speak more truly, the body of Christ,
and his blood, is the word of the Scriptures, and the divine doctrine.

And a little after, Si quando audimus sermonem Dei, et sermo Dei, et caro
Christi, et sanguis ejus in auribus nostris funditur, etc.
When we hear the word of God; and the word of God, and the flesh of Christ,
and his blood is poured into our ears, etc.

Clemens Alexandrinus in the 1. Book of the Pedagogue 6. chapter by the flesh of
the Lord, which we eat, understands Faith, and the promises of the Gospel,
saying, (...).
That the Lord has represented by Allegory the evidence of faith, and the
drink of the Gospel.

Origin in the 16th. Homily upon Numbers. Bibere dicimur sanguinem non solum
Sacramentorum ritu, sed et cum sermones ejus recipimus.
We are said to drink the blood, not only in the Ceremony of the Sacraments,
but also when we receive his words.

As Ambrose in the Book of those that are initiated in mysteries, brings
examples of miracles to show how the bread is made the body of Christ; he
brings some also to prove the change, which happens in the water of Baptism.
Sicut in illum fontem Moses misit lignum, ita et in hunc fontem Sacerdos
dominicae crucis praedicationem mutit, et aqua sit dulcis ad gratiam.
As Moses (says he) cast wood into that fountain, so the Priest casts into
this fountain [of Baptism] the preaching of the Cross of the Lord, and the
water is made sweet for grace.

These considerations moved Cardinal Tolet to say in his Comment upon Joh. 6.
that Infantes in Baptismo aliquo modo participant corpus Christi, nempe quantum
ad rem significatam, et dici possunt carnem Christi manducare et bibere
sanguinem ejus.
Infants in Baptism participate in some sort the body of Christ, to wit,
according to the thing signified, and they may be said to eat the flesh of
Christ, and to drink his blood.

If then the Fathers find in Baptism, and in the preaching of the word the
fulfilling of these words, that he that eats the flesh of Christ has eternal
life, where nevertheless no transubstantion is made; why shall we not say also,
that in the Lords Supper we eat the flesh of Christ without any
transubstantiation of the bread?

CHAP. XVIII. After what manner the Christian Church of the first Ages
celebrated the Lords Supper. How the ancient customs show evidently, that they
believed not the real presence, nor transubstantiation.
IT will conduce much to the clearing of this matter, to view the Sea Dionysius
of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy 3. chapter And Clement in the 8. Book of
Apostolical Constitutions.
ancient customs, and the form of administering the Lords Supper in the ancient
Church; for thereby we shall see how far the Roman Church is gone from the
ancient customs. And of these customs the most part will serve for proofs of
the belief of the ancient Christians upon this controversy.

In Sacred places where the people met for the preaching of the word, and for
the administration of Sacraments, there was a wooden Table in the midst, which
was moveable, and might be removed. They called it a Table in the first Ages:
But by little and little the custom crept in to call it an Altar.

In every Temple or Church there was but one Table or Altar; for then so many
little Altars were not seen in several corners of the Church. Tha^ custom of
having many altars in a Temple was set up when they began to sing private
Masses, that is solitary Masses, without either communicants or assistants.

Upon that Table before they began the celebration of the Eucharist, the
Deacons brought the offerings of the people, that is, bread and wine, and
sometimes diverse fruits; Which offerings they called gifts, and presents, and
sacrifices. And the Pastor of the Church prayed in a tongue understood by all,
that God would accept of these gifts and offerings.

Of those offerings of bread and wine, the Pastor, and the Deacons that
assisted him, set a part as much as needed for all the brethren present to
communicate with the two kinds. For then round Hosts, and those thin wafers,
baked between two Irons, and stamped with a Crucifix, were not in fashion. But
they had ordinary bread and wine upon the Table, as much as would serve for
that holy action. The remnant of the offerings which were not used in the holy
Communion, was kept for the Agapes, or Love Feasts, and for the subvention of
the poor.

That bread and wine being thus laid upon the Table, were covered with a cloth.
And in many Churches there was a double curtain spread before the Table, which
hindered the people from seeing that which was set upon the sacred Table. Of
which the consecration was made by prayer, not by speaking to the bread. And
that prayer, as also the whole service, was done in a tongue which the people
understood.

But when the hour of admitting the people to the Communion was come, the
Deacon cried with a loud voice, that the Catechumens and Penitents, and all
that did not communicate, should go forth. So there remained none but the
Communicants: then they drew the curtains, and took off the linen cloth, and
the Sacred signs were uncovered and exposed to the peoples sight.

In some places the Bishop taking with both his hands the dish where the Sacred
signs were, lifted it up a little to make it seen better; And did all this with
his face turned toward the people. For then they spoke not of lifting up God,
and elevating the Host. The manner of these days for the Priest to turn his
back unto the people, and lift up the Host above his head, and at the ringing
of a little Bell to make the people adore that Host with the Sovereign Service
due unto God alone; All this I say would have been found strange and prodigious
by the Ancients, and no trace of it is found in Antiquity.

That being done, the Communicants gave the kiss of peace among themselves, and
kissed one another in sign of concord. The Priest washed his hands, and cried
out, Sancta Sanctis, that is, Holy things for holy persons. After that the
Clergy and the people went to the Communion. In some Churches the Deacons
brought the holy Communion in the two kinds to every one in his place, and
presenting the holy Sacrament to each Communicant, said in a known tongue, Lift
up your hearts, Sursum corda.
and the Communicants answered, Habemus ad Dominum.
We have them unto the Lord.

The Communicants both men and women received with their hand the Sacrament,
and with their hand put it in their mouth. Some men and women wrapped it in a
handkerchief, and carried it to their homes, and laid it up in some chest or
cupboard. But as scruples will multiply, and every Age brings always some new
thing; in the seventh Age it was permitted to men only to take the Sacrament
with their bare hand, but women took it with a white linen over their hands.

From the Table in the time of the Communion, the Sacrament was sent to the
absent, sick, and prisoners, and such as could not come to the Congregation.
And many times it was carried to them by some widow, or some little boy.

See the Oration of ^ Ambrose upon the death of his brother Satyrus.
Satyrus brother to Ambrose, being in danger of Shipwreck, demanded the holy
Sacrament, although he was not yet baptized. Which having taken he ate it not,
but hanged it at his neck, and threw himself into the Sea to swim for his life.

But because commonly there was more consecrated bread upon the Table then
needed for all the Communicants, the remnant of that bread, which was called
the hody of Christ, was burnt, or given to little School boys to eat it, or was
Constit. Clem. 1. 8. c. cap. 20. Postquam omnes sumserunt, accipiant Diaconi
reliquias and portent in pastophoris.
carried to the Priests house to eat it at home.

They made then a great scruple of conscience to let any part of the
consecrated bread to fall to the ground, but the cautelae Missae were not yet
extant, whereby a Priest vomiting the Host is commanded to eat it up again,
unless he can find one to do so much for him; or to burn that vomiting, and put
the ashes among the relics. Or if it happen that the chalice be spilt on the
floor, these cautelae Missae command that the floor be scraped, and that the
scraping be mingled with other consecrated wine, or put among the relics.

In old time, when the Sacrament fell to the ground, or if it happened to be
stolen away, the Christians were not so stupid as to say that God was fallen,
or that Christ was stolen.

Of Gods Feast, and of carrying God in procession, there was no speech then;
nor of kneeling in the street when the Host past by, nor of worshipping the
Priests box with no Host in, when the Priest returns from giving the Sacrament
to a sick person.

Of high and low Masses, or running, or dry, or private Masses; of Masses in
white, in green, and in violet; Masses of St. Antony, or Masses of the holy
Ghost, there was no speech in those days.

That old form of administering the holy Communion was very different from the
Mass of our days, as much as singing Mass differs from celebrating the Lords
Supper. So much does the belief of the Modern Roman Church differ from that of
the ancient Church. And most part of the customs which I have represented, are
so many proofs, that then they belived neither real presence, nor
transubstantiation.

For had the Ancients believed that the Sacrament is really the body of Christ,
they would never have put it in the hands of the people, there being always
diverse among the multitude, whose bodies and consciences are foully defiled, and
many Hypocrites. They would never have suffered that a woman should take
Christ's body in her hand, lap it up in a handkerchief, and thrusting it into
her pocket, or some other place about her, carry it home, and shut it up in a
Trunk or Drawer. Had such a thing been done in a place where the Pope reigns
absolutely, no pain could be found severe enough for the persons guilty of such
an horrible profanation. They would say that this was the Prodigy foretold by
the last Comet: Or if after that a ranging plague, or famine consumed the
people of the Land, those disasters would be taken for expiations of such an
abominable crime.

If the ancient Church had believed Transubstantiation, they would never have
given the consecrated bread to unbaptized persons; Neither would they have
suffered an unbaptized man to hang it at his neck, and cast it with himself
into the Sea. Much less would they have burnt Christ, or given the Lords body
to a company of boys coming from School, who commonly have more waggery then
devotion. Cyprian relates, that a little Girl carried in the arms, vomited the
Chalice which a Deacon had powered into her mouth: for then they received
Infants to the communion: That wine spilt was not taken up again; and the
chalice had never been exposed to that danger, if the Church had believed that
it was the true body of Christ. That example also shows, that the Deacons
carried to every one the Sacrament.

When the Eucharist was carried to them that were absent, the people that saw
it carried by, would have worshipped it, had they believed that it was Christ's
body. And how could the people have worshipped it in the street, since they did
not worship it in the Church?

Observe also how the custom is changed. In old time the sight of the Sacrament
was forbidden to the Catechumens and Penitents; whereas now the Host is carried
in procession through the streets in the sight of Pagans, Jews and Turks, if
there be any present, and of public harlots; and with all these sorts of
people Rome, Venice, Milan, etc. do abound.

For the proof of all this, I will bestow the following chapter.

CHAP. XIX. Proofs of the customs represented in the Chapter before.
I Said that in the first ages the sacred table was commonly made of wood. This
we learn of Athanasius, who complains that the Arians his enemies, Athenas.
ad solitariam vitam agentes, p. 656. (...).
had burnt before the Church Porch the seats, the chair, and the table which
was of wood, and the vails of the great Church of Alexandria.

Lignis altaris effractis immaniter ceciderunt.
Austin in the 50. Epistle makes the like complaint of the Donatists. By the
way, these vails wherewith the Churches were hung, were white linen: whence it
is evident, that then they had no Images in Churches. Of which custom a trace
remains in the Roman Church in Lent, for then Images are hid with white linen.

Optatus Milevitanus in the beginning of the first book against Parmenian. Quis
fidelium nescit in peragendis mysteriis ipsa ligna linteamine operiri? Inter
ipsa Sacramenta velamen potuit tangi, non lignum.
Which of the faithful ones knows not that in the celebration of the mysteries
the very wood is covered with linen? In the celebration of the Sacraments the
Tablecloth might be touched, not the wood. Altaria radi tantummodo aut removeri.
There also he speaks of removing the Altars from their place. Aug. quaest.
Vet. and Novi Test. qu. 101. Nam utique and altaria portarunt and vasa ejus,
etc.
The book of questions of the Old and New Testament ascribed to Austin, says
it was the Deacons office to carry the Altar.

It is true, that even in the time of Constantine the Great, under whom the
Christians began to build magnificent Temples, in some principal Churches they
began to erect Altars of stone.

There was then but one Altar in every Temple, not a multitude of petty Altars
in several corners of the Church, as it is seen now among the Romanists.
Ignatius in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, (...).
The whole Church has but one Altar. Non unu^ altar quod habet Ecclesia, sed
altaria haereticorum plurima.
Hierom upon the third of Amos, Not the only Altar which the Church has, but
the Altars of the heretics which are many. And Chrysostom in the 18. Homily
upon the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, (...).
There is one only Baptism, and one only Table. Alvarez in the Ethiopick
history chapter 3. says that the Ethiopick Churches have but one Altar. That
custom of having many Altars has a relish of Paganism. Virgil speaking of the
Goddess Venus, says that Ubi templum illi centumque Sabaeo Thure calent arae,
etc.
From hundred Altars in her Temple ascends
The smoke of odours that rich Saba sends.


Omnibus ante pedes posita est sua cuique vetusta Arula.
Prudentius in the first book against Symmachus obraideth the Pagans, that in
their Temples every god had his little Altar before him. And God obraideth the
Israelites with the like Idolatry, Hos. 8.11. saying, that Israel had made many
Altars to sin.

Upon the Sacred Table the Deacons brought not a round Host, but a quantity of
bread and wine, as much as would serve all the assistants to communicate under
the two kinds. For that there is an ancient order of the Roman Church
attributed to Clement the first in these words, Clem. 1. de Consecr. Did. 1.
Can. Tribus gradibus. Tanta in altari holocausta offerantur quanta populo
sufficere debeant. Quod remanserit in crastinum non reservetur, sed in timore
et tremore, clericorum diligentia consumatur.
Let so many sacrifices be presented upon the Altar as may suffice the people.
Let not the remnant be kept for the morrow, but with the fear and care of the
Clarks let it be consumed, that is eaten. For although these Decretals be
supposititious, yet they show, that when they were forged, the round Wafers and
the Masses where the Priest alone receives, were not yet in fashion. Also the
custom of burning the remnant of the Lords body, or giving it to little
school-boyes to eat, of which we shall speak hereafter, is a very clear proof
that there was a quantity of bread upon the Table, some part whereof always
remained after all the people had communicated. I have seen the representations
of the Eucharist set out by the Jesuit Richeome, where Christ is pictured
sitting at the Table with his Disciples, every one having his round Wafer upon
his Trencher. There wanted no more but a Crucifix stamped upon these Hosts.

For the linen clothes we have produced the testimony of Optatus. And as for
the double curtains spread before the table, which were drawn at the hour of
the Communion, Chrysostom in the third Homily upon the Epistle to the Ephesians
speaks thus of them, (...).
When thou see the double curtains drawn, think that heaven opens it self.

Of the custom of giving the Sacred bread in every Communicants hand, we have
proofs without number. Cyprian in the Sermon de Lapsis, Cypr. de Lapsis. 13. A
Diaboli aris revertentes ad sanctu^ Domini, sordidis et infectis nidore manibus
accedunt, etc. Domini corpus invadunt.
Returning from the Altars of Devils, they come unto the Holy of the Lord, with
their hands defiled and infected, etc. they lay hold on the Lords body.
Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 9. (...).
He had stretched forth his hands to apprehend this holy food. Ambrose rebuking
the Emperor Theodosius for the massacre committed at Thessalonica, said to
him, Theod. hist. lib. 5. c. 18. (...);
How shall thou stretch thy hands yet stilling with the blood of that unjust
murder? How shall thou with such hands receive the Lords Sacred body? And not
only men, but also women received the Sacrament with their hand, some put it up
in a linen cloth, and carried it home.

Cyprian in the Treatise of the Tombs, sect. 21. speaks of a woman that had
carried home the bread of the Eucharist, and had shut it up in a Trunk. We
alleged before the example of Gorgonia, of whom her brother Greg. Naz.
Epitaphico Gorgoniae.
Gregory Nazianzen says, that she would lay up some part of the signs of the
venerable body and blood of the Lord, and mingle it with her tears.

And Hierom, or rather Pelagius upon 1 Cor. 11. will have good care taken that
the linen where the Sacrament is put up, be not soul, etc. M. du Perron
alleges this passage against M. du Plessis, p. 851. and it is cited by
Anastasius Bishop of Nice, and translated by Vossius. (...).
Yea Basil in the Epistle to Cesaria Patritia speaks thus, One may in case of
necessity, in time of persecution, there being neither Priest nor Minister
present, take the Communion with his own hand. It is superfluous to show that
there is no inconvenience in it, seeing that long custom has approved it by
effect. And he adds, that in Alexandria and Egypt every Layman has very
often the Communion in his own house, and takes of it himself when he lists.
Against du Plassis, p. 852.
M. du Perron proves by Hierom, that the Romans took the Communion in their
houses when they thought good. In the sixth Universal Council assembled again in
the Palace of Constantinople, there is an express Canon (...).
(the 102.) forbiding to receive the Eucharist in a vessel, and injoyning that
it be received with the hand.

As for sending the Sacrament to an absent person by a boy or by a woman, we
have seen before how Eusebius in the sixth book of his history, chapter 38. relates
that Seraphion being on his deathbed desired the Eucharist, and that the
Priest sent it him by a little boy. Ambrose in the book of widows, tells us,
that in his time widows were employed to carry the Sacrament of Christ's body,
saying, Oportet eam carere variarum illecebris voluptatum ut corpus et
sanguinem Christi ministret.
She (meaning the widow) must be without the allurements of diverse pleasures,
that she may minister the body and blood of Christ.

Now as scruples will grow, and with the decay of piety, gestures and outward
observations will increase, in the sixth and seventh age, the custom was
introduced that men should receive the Sacrament with their bare hand, but the
women with a linen cloth over their hand, for fear of touching the Sacrament.
The 42. Canon of the Council of Auxerre held in the year 590. has these words,
Vnaquaeque mulier quando communicate, suum Dominicale habeat. Let every woman
when she communicates have her Dominical. Maximus of Constantinople, who writ
about the year 650. has these words, Omnes viri qui communicare desiderant,
prius lavent manus suas, ut mente pura and nitida conscientia Christi
Sacramenta suscipiant. Similiter and mulieres nitida exhibeant linteamina, ubi
Christi corpus accipiant pura mente and munda conscientia. Bar. an. 57. s. 148.
Let all men that will communicate, wash their hands first, that with a pure
spirit and a clean conscience they may receive Christ's Sacraments. Likewise let
women present clean linen, where they may receive the body of Christ with a
pure mind and a clean conscience.

As for the remnant of the Sacrament, the customs were diverse. Hesychius in
the second book upon Leviticus chapter 8. has these words, Moses commands that
the remnant of flesh and bread be burnt in the fire, Quod nunc videmus etiam
sensibiliter in Ecclesia fieri, ignique tradi quaecunque remanere contingerit
inconsumpta.
Which also we see now sensibly done in the Church, and that all things which
remain not consumed (that is, not eaten) are cast into the fire.

This custom of the Latin Church was altered, when the Priests began to
reserve the Sacrament. For then it was constituted that the Sacrament should
not be burnt, but when it began to grow moldy. Yuo Secunda Part de Sacramento
corporis, cap. 59. Omne sacrificium sordida vetustate perditum, igne
comburendum est, and cinis juxta altar sepeliendus.
Yuo's Decree alleges the fifth Canon of the Council of Arles, constituting,
that every sacrifice spoiled with foul old age be burnt in the fire, and the
ashes buried by the Altar. And Burchards Decree alleges the fourth Canon of a
Council of Orleans, Burchard. lib. 5. cap. 12. Oblationes quae in altari
offeruntur de Sabbalo in Sabbatum semper innoventur, quia panes propositionis
qui super mensam Domini poncbantur a sabbato in sabbatum semper mutabantur, ne
diu servati mucidi fiant, and ut quidam sentiunt igne concremari, etc.
Let the oblations which are offered upon the Altar be always renewed from one
Saturday to another (for the shewbread which was set upon the Lords table, was
changed from one Saturday to another, lest that being long kept they should
grow moldy) And as it is the opinion of some, they ought to be burnt with fire.

Out of all these it appears how far they were from believing
Transubstantiation. For it would have been a profane mad part to have cast the
natural body of Christ into the fire. Let our adversaries tell us, what the
Fathers of that Council of Arles understood by moldy sacrifices. Can one say
without blasphemy, that Christ's body is moldy? No more can it be said, that by
moldy sacrifices, the accidents of bread are understood, for these accidents
are not the Sacrifice; and length, whiteness and roundness are things which
grow not moldy.

Other Churches had other customs. That of Constantinople of giving the remnant
of the Communion bread to little School-boyes, we see in Evagrius in the fourth
book of his History, chapter 36. The whole Greek text we brought in before. They
would not have done so, if they had believed it to be Christ's natural body.

In Balsamon there is a constitution of Theophilus Edicta Theophili Can. 7.
(...).
Patriarch of Alexandria, which shows, that in Egypt they had another
custom. For it enjoins, that the remnant of the Sacrifices be eaten by the
Clarks and other faithful brethren that were not Catechumens. The like is found
in Clements Constitutions. Constable. Clem. 11. book. chapter 20. Postquam omnes
sumpserint, accipiant Diaconi reliquias and portent in pastophoria.
After all have communicated, let the Deacons take the residue and carry it to
the Pastophores, that is, to the houses of the Court about the Church where the
Priests dwelt.

All these customs show three things evidently. The one, that the old
Christians did not put around wafer upon the table, but a quantity of bread and
wine for the whole assembly to communicate. The second, that they believed not
then that the Sacrament was the natural body of Christ, for they would not have
burnt it, or given it to little boys; and it would have been against common
sense to speak of pieces and residue of the body of Christ. The third, that
they did not reserve the Sacrament, since it was a constitution, that the
remnant of the consecrated bread should be eaten: And this was practiced even
in the Apostles time, as Hierom or Pelagius testify (which of the two is
doubted) upon 1 Cor. 11. Post communionem quaecunque ea de sacrificiis
superfuissent, illic in Ecclesia communem coenam comedentes pariter consumebant.
After the Communion (says he) they that are the Supper together in the
Church, made an end together there of that which remained of the Sacrifices.
There Hierom speaks of the custom of the Corinthians, whom the Apostle
rebukes, not for the abuse which they committed in the Agapes as the Cardinal
holds, In his book against da Plessis, book 3. chapter 6.
but for the profanation of the Lords Supper. For St. Paul tells them, This is
not to eat the Lords Supper, declaring that by their abuse of the Lords Supper
they corrupted and altered the nature of the same.

Besides the customs here represented of eating or burning the residue of the
Sacrament, we have seen before the Constitution, which our adversaries
attribute unto Clement the first, that so many Sacrifices be laid upon the
Altar as are needful to suffice the people, and that the residue be not kept
till the next day. To which add Origens testimony in his fifth Homily upon
Leviticus, Nam and Dominus panem quem D^scipulis dabat, non distulit nec
servari jussit in crastinum.
The Lord did not put off his Disciples to eat afterward the bread which he
gave them, neither did he command that it should be kept for the next day.
Which Gabriel Biel freely acknowledges in the 36. Lesson upon the Canon of the
Mass, saying, Neque dedit Discipulis ut ipsum honorifice conservarent, sed
dedit in sui usum, dicens, Accipite, Manducate.
Christ gave not this Sacrament to his Disciples to keep it honorably in
store, but to put it in use, saying, Take eat.

In vain the Cardinal brings many authorities of the Fathers which approve the
reservation of the Sacrament for the time to come. For those places speak of
the reservation which private persons made of the bread they had received in
the Church, not of the reservation made by Bishops and Priests of the residue
of the sacred bread after the Communion. And though it were otherwise, the
customs of some private persons ought not to be balanced against public
Constitutions.

Something also must be said of the uncovering and elevation of the Sacrament.
In the ancient Church the bread and wine laid upon the table were covered with
a linen cloth until the hour of the Communion: then they took off the linen
to show the Sacrament unto the people. This Basil calls the demonstration or
exhibition, Basil c. 27. lib. de Sp. S. (...).
saying, Which of the Saints have left us in writing the words of the
Invocation, when the bread of the Eucharist is showed? For M. du Perron shall
not persuade us that (...) in this place signifies consecration. So there
should be a vain repetition in these words. For (...) invocatio, signifies the
consecration. The Cardinal then makes Basil to say, Which of the Saints have
left us in writing the words of the consecration when the bread is consecrated?
Pachymeres in c. 3. Eccl. Hier. (...).
Pachymetes who has commented upon Dionysius, whom they say to be the
Areopagite, speaks thus, After prayers the holy gifts are uncovered which had
remained covered until the time of the participation. This is that which
Dionysius, whom he expounds, calls (...), bring to evidence.

As for the elevation, as Christ made no elevation of the sacred bread and
wine, so we find not in the ancient Church that ever the Priest lift up a
wafer over his head (which is that they call lifting up God) to make the people
worship it. Only I find that in the sixth age the Bishop or Priest taking the
dish, where the sacred bread was, with both his hands did raise it a little
from the table, to let the people see it better. Anastasius Sinaita who writ in
the year 550. (if the books be his which bear his name) says that Postqua^
sacrificium illud tremendum sanctificavit, panem vitae sustulit, eumque omnibus
ostendit.
after he has sanctified that dread sacrifice, he lift up the bread of life
and showed it unto all. Yet that elevation was of the bread only, not of the
chalice. As it may be gathered out of German Patriarch of Constantinople in the
contemplation of Ecclesiastical things. (...).
The elevation (says he) of the venerable body represents the elevation in the
Cross and resurrection it self. And that the divine bread alone is lifted up,
shows that he is the King and Lord, and himself is the head according to the
Apostle. This passage is alleged and set down in Greek in the Cardinals
margent, but he falsifieth it in the interpretation, translating (...) the
elevation on high, adding these words on high, which are not in the Greek, to
make the Reader believe that the elevation was done very high, and above the
Priests head. This fraud appears evidently in that in the same line there is
(...), the elevation in Cross, where the Cardinal M. du Perron of the Eucharist
against du Plessis, book 3. p. 849.
translates the elevation, without on high: but he commits a greater
falsification in translating (...), to elevate the bread alone a part, which
words a part are his own, and are not in the Greek.

In the Liturgies falsely attributed to S. James and to S. Chrysostom, mention
is made of the elevation of the gift. But besides that these Liturgies are
false and sowed up with diverse pieces made in several ages, it is certain,
that the elevation mentioned in these Liturgies, is not that of the wafer above
the Priests head while the Priest turns his back to the people, but the
elevation of the dish where the bread was, which the Bishop or the Priest made
with his face turned toward the people.

Cardinal du Perron having found nothing in all the ancient Church until the
time of the fourth Universal Council, brings these Liturgies, and some new
obscure Authors, as one Nicolaus Pectoratus, and a piece of a Liturgy, whose
words he produces, (...), and expounds them thus, for he elevates not then the
holy bread. He was so raw in Greek that he esteemed that (...) signified then,
whereas it signifies altogether, or wholly. Sometimes (...) signifies lately
but very seldom, and that signification has nothing common with the sense of,
this place.

Francis Alvarez a Portughez Monk, who lived six years in Ethiopia and Damian
Goes, upon the relation of an Ethiopian Ambassador, say that the Ethiopian
Churches make no elevation of the Host. I will relate the very words of Alvarez
in the third chapter of his Ethiopian History. Having said, that in the Mass or
Liturgy of the Ethiopians, they make a great cake of fine flower, and that the
loaf is somewhat big and substantial because all communicate. Also that all
communicate in the two kinds; He adds, The Priest uncovereth the cake which
he held covered like a Sacrament; Then he takes it in his hands, and lifting up
his right hand leaves it upon the left, printing upon it with his thumb five
or six marks; One above, another in the midst, the third at the foot (so he
speaks) the others on the sides. Then he consecrates in his language, after our
manner, in proper sense, and with the same propriety of words; only he does not
elevate the Sacrament. He says also, that after that the Priest has taken the
Sacrament of the blood, the Deacon does administer it in spoons. That another
Priest gives water to drink, to them that have participated the cup, who wash
their mouth with it and then swallow it; And that the Priest drinks a draught
of water after he has celebrated the Mass; for that Monk calls that Mass,
although the Ethiopians call it otherwise. He adds that the Office of the Mass
is very short, and that it is hardly begun, but it is ended presently after.
For these Churches have not the Introits, nor the Graduals; Only they read the
institution of the Sacrament set down in the Gospel, adding to it a little
singing and some blessings.

Out of all this it appears how far the Abyssine Church (that contains
seventeen great Provinces which are so many Kingdoms) differs from the belief
of the Roman Church. There they make no elevation, and by consequent no
adoration. There every Communicant participates the two kinds. There the
Service is in a known tongue. And the water, which the Priest and the
Communicants drink after the Service is done, shows that they believe not
Transubstantiation. This mingling of water with the body and blood of Christ
newly taken (to speak after the style and belief of the Romanifts) would be
held an unwarrantable mixture. Neither do they speak of the Pope in that
Country, nor of obedience to the Roman Church. Neither can one say that they
have shaken off the yoke of the Pope: for they never were subject to him.
Neither did ever the Pope complain, that they had departed from his obedience,
or ever laid any claim of domination over them, although these Churches have
subsisted now aboe a thousand years.

CHAP. XX. Of the adoration of the Sacrament: weakness of the Cardinals proofs:
how he falsifieth Scripture. Examination of his allegations.
THE form after which the Lord Jesus celebrated his holy Supper among his
Disciples, shows evidently, that the Apostles did not worship the Sacrament;
for they were sitting [or rather leaning] at the table, and did not rise from
the table till the whole action of the Sacrament was done. For in all the
narratives of the institution of the Sacrament, there is no command for
worshipping the Sacrament, nor any trace of adoration, no more then of that
elevation whereby the people is invited to worship.

Against du Plessis of the Eucharist book 3. chapter 11
The Cardinal answers, that one may adore sitting; That the Virgin Mary
holding Christ in her bosom, did nevertheless worship him. That Numa had
commanded that adoration should be performed sitting. That Pibrac said in his
Moral verses, Quatrains de Pibrac. Adore affis comme le Grec ordonne.
Adore sitting as the Grecian prescribes.

To this I answer, that if the Virgin Mary holding the Lord Jesus in her bosom,
adored him, she did it with her heart and thought, not with the gesture of her
body, or with an outward adoration, the adoration which is here in question.
For in the sacrifices they were bound to prostrate their bodies; how much more
then in a sacrifice where the body of the eternal Son of God was sacrificed?
That which he says of Numa and Pibrac, is a boyish conceit; For the Apostles
were Jews, and were not ruled by Numa's Constitutions, nor by Pibrac's moral
verses. Their custom in the adoration was to kneel down, yea many times to
prostrate their whole body.

The Cardinal makes a doubt whether the Apostles received the Eucharist
sitting. Against du Plessis, book 3. chapter 11. p. 871.
For (says he) the gesture and posture of the Communicants is not expressed; as
likewise it is not expressed whether they stood up to eat the Passover according
to the institution of the Law. Had this Prelat read attentively the text of the
Gospel, he would not have doubted of a thing so clearly expressed in it. For in
the 13. chapter of S. John's Gospel, ver. 4. it is said, that Jesus arose from
Supper to wash his Apostles feet; and after he had washed their feet, we read
in verse 12. that he sat down again. In the same chapter S: John speaks of a
Disciple, which is S. John himself, who sitting at the table, was in the bosom
of Jesus, that is, he laid his head on his lap, which he could not have done if
Jesus had stood up. The tables of the Grecians and Romans were so disposed,
that they were half sitting, half lying down: and that he that was in the
second place sitting lower, could rest his head on him that was sitting above
him. This Cardinal ignorant in the good letters, knew nothing of these things,
or if he knew them, he purposely dissembled them. That custom of sitting at the
Lords Supper was yet in fashion in the Apostles time. This appears by the
Church of the Corinthians, which celebrated the Lords Supper in the form of a
feast, where excesses were committed. To which the word of (...) and Coena are
suitable, which all the ancient Churches used to express Christ's action
celebrating this Sacrament with his Disciples. For the word Coena signifies a
common supper, not an oblation importing adoration.

Others say, Du Perron against du Plessis of the Eucharist, p. 863.
and the Cardinal after them, that the Apostles did not worship the body of
Christ in the Eucharist, because they had Christ every day with them; wherein
they deceive themselves purposely; for they know, that before that action the
Apostles had never eaten Christ, and never been present at the sacrifice of his
body; and that such a manducation had deserved an extraordinary devotion; and
that there was never a sacrifice in the Church without adoration. Much less
then should the sacrifice of the natural body of the Son of God have wanted
adoration, especially the first institution of that sacrifice, which must be a
perpetual pattern and rule.

Upon our question to our adversaries, where they can show us, that ever God
commanded us to worship the Sacrament, and to yield to it a service of latria
(as they speak, which is the adoration due to God alone) we cannot fetch any
answer from them, nor one word to the purpose. M. du Perron Of Eucharist. lib.
3. chapter 8.
labors hard about that, and is put to his shifts: he says, that no more
have we any command to worship the Holy Ghost. I answer, that whosoever
worshippeth God, worshippeth the Holy Ghost, since the Holy Ghost is God, for
so he is called Act. 5.3. The Apostle 1 Cor. 6.19. says that our bodies are
the Temples of the Holy Ghost: now Temples must be consecrated to none but God.
And Jesus commanded that we should be baptized in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Now we are not baptized in the name of the
creature.

If the body of Christ which is given in the Eucharist were the natural body of
Christ, as our adversaries will have it, not the Sacramental body as we affirm,
the Apostles would have worshipped it. Especially in the first celebration of
this Sacrament, which must be a rule unto the Church; the command of
worshipping the Sacrament should have been clearly expressed, or at least the
practice.

Page 863.
He adds, that when the Father says, This is my son in whom I am well pleased,
hear ye him; he says not Worship ye him; but in that indicative proposition,
This is my Son, this imperative proposition, Worship ye him, was virtually and
implicitly contained. Likewise he will have these words, This is my body, to
contain implicitly the command of worshipping him.

I answer, that those words, This is my Son, are proper, not Sacramental or
typical words, like these, This is my body, as we have proved it. Now from
simple words one may draw consequences, but from Sacramental words no
consequence can be drawn, till they be reduced to simple and not typical words.
Besides, these words, This is my Son, contain indeed a command to worship
Christ, but not to worship him in such a place or in such an action. Whereas
from these words, This is my body, they will infer a consequence, that this
body must be worshipped under the species of bread, which is an inconsequent
consequence and without any color.

The Cardinal adds, Though the bread of the Eucharist should remain truly bread
in its inward and invisible substance, was there not a far greater distance
between the Ark and God, the Ark being but the simple legal and ceremonial sign
of his presence, then between the Eucharist and Christ? which Ark nevertheless
Joshuah and all the people of Israel worshipped; And David in his Psalms
exhorts every one to worship it.

I answer, that it is false that ever Joshuah or the people of Israel
worshipped the Ark. We find indeed, Josh. 7.6. That Joshuah rent his garments
and fell on his face to the ground before the Ark of the Lord. And that not
only according to the Hebrew, but according to the Vulgate version authorized
by the Council of Trent. The words in that version are these, Josue pronus
cecidit in terram coram Arca Domini usque ad vesperam, tam ipse quam seniores
Israel. The versions of Sanctes Pagninus and of Arias Montanus say the same.
The licenciousness of forgery is notorious in this Cardinal.

With the like depravation of Scripture, he says in the same place, that David
in his Psalms exhorts every one to worship the Ark, and he alleges, without
quoting, a text of the 98. Ps. which in the Hebrew Bible is the 99. where David
says, Exalt ye the Lord our God and worship at his footstool. But the vulgar
version says, Worship his footstool. Here the Cardinal will play the
Grammarian, but acts that part but poorly. All the good versions of our
adversaries translate as we do, that of Pagninus a Monk of Luca, and that of
Arias Montanus a Spaniard. So does also the Chaldean Paraphrast. The Septuagint
translate (...), not (...). But this removes all doubt, that in the same Psalm
after (...) Adorate ad scabellum, it is added (...) Adorate ad montem. If in
the first, we must translate Adore the footstool, we must translate in the
second, Adore the mountain, which the Cardinal would not like; for it would be
a mad idolatry to worship a mountain. It is not credible that David worshipped
before the Ark otherwise then Joshua; Now it is expressly said of Joshua, Joh.
7.6.
that he fell to the earth upon his face before the Ark of the Lord, not that
he worshipped the Ark. Who will believe that God, who in his Law did so
expressly prohibit worshipping any other but God, would allow the worshipping
of a wodden chest? I confess, that worshipping God, and worshipping before God,
are the same thing. But when it is question of inanimate things, worshipping
before the Temple, and worshipping the Temple, are things far different.

Two things deserve to be observed by the way. First, these words of the
Cardinal, Though the bread should remain in his inward and invisible substance,
etc. This is saying tacitly, that there is an outward substance, and putting
two substances in the bread, the one inward and invisible, the other outward
and visible, which is a mere abuse. By affecting subtility he betrayeth his
ignorance.

Secondly, observe to what excess Idolatry is grown in the Roman Church, in
which they worship not only the body of Christ which they affirm to be covered
with the species, but also the species, that is the signs and accidents.

Bellar. l. 4. de Euchar. c. 29. sect. Sed haec. Proprie Christum esse
adorandum, and eam adorationem etiam ad symbola panis and vini pertinere,
quatenus apprehenduntur ut quid unum cum ipso Christo quem continent.
Bellarmin teaches that doctrine, saying that the adoration belongs to the
signs of bread and wine, in as much as they are considered as the same thing
with Christ whom they contain; as when they worshipped, they worshipped his
garment also. So then Christians are brought to worship the color and the
figure of bread, and a whole object is worshipped, of which Christ makes but
the one half. Wherefore the Council of Trent commands that the Sacrament be
worshipped. Now the Sacrament of Christ is not Christ.

CHAP. XXI. That in the first ages of the Christian Church the Sacrament was
not worshipped. The Cardinals allegations and proofs are examined.
THE custom of sitting at the table when the Eucharist was celebrated, did not
continue long after the Apostles. For soon after their death another custom was
brought in, that the Deacons should bring the Sacrament to every communicant,
or that every communicant should come to the Pastor of the Church to receive
the communion in the two elements.

But as for the adoration, it is certain, that as they did not elevate the
Sacrament, so they did not worship it; and for that our adversaries bring no
proof that can serve their turn, nor any example, or testimony of ancient
writers of the time that In his book against M. du Plessis book 3. chapter 11
M. du Perron set for his limit, that is, till the fourth universal Council,
which was in the year of Christ 451. But in the 23. Canon of the third Council
of Carthage we have this constitution, Vt cum altari assistitur, semper ad
Patrem dirigatur oration. That when the Priest assists before the Altar, the
prayer be always directed unto God the Father. If it was then unlawful to make
the address of prayers unto Christ in the Eucharist, it was also unlawful to
worship his body; for in Christian Religion all adoration imports invocation:
yea the word adoratio comes from oration, which signifies prayer.

For the adoration of the Sacrament they allege Dionysius in chapter 3. of
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, saying, Dionys. de Hier. Eccl. cap. 3. (...).
O holy and Divine ceremony, removing the vails of the riddles wherewith thou
art symbolically environed, show they self clearly to us and fill our eyes with
thine only and unshadowed light. The Cardinal translateth (...) a Sacrament,
and by the Sacrament he understands Christ. A wilful abuse, to call Christ
(...), that is a mystery or mystical ceremony. So did Faber Stapulensis
translate it. O divinum penitus sanctumque mysterium! Who sees not that this is
an Apostrophe, a Rhetorical compellation, whereby many times things inanimate
are spoken to as if they understood, and persons absent as if they were
present? It was so that Ambrose spoke to the element of water; Ambros. in Luc.
lib. 10. c. 22. O aqua quae humano aspersum sanguine ut praesentium lavacrorum
figura praecederet, orhem terrarum lavasti, etc. O aqua quae Sacramentum
Christi esse meruisti, etc.
O water which have washed the globe of the earth stained with human blood,
etc. O water that have merited (that is obtained) to be a Sacrament of Christ,
etc. It was so, that the Prophets spoke many times to heaven and earth. But
what? That book is not of Dionysius Areopagita, but was made many ages since,
as we might easily prove.

Du Perron libro ante citato, cap. 1.
The Cardinal says, this Author is not the true Dionysius Areopagita, but that
it is enough that he is a Catholic Author above thirteen hundred years old,
that is, about three hundred years after Christ. And he proves it, because the
Council of Constantinople in Trullo, held in the year 681. and Gregory who writ
about the year of Christ 595. cite that Author. An ingenious proof, That a book
was written about the year 300. of Christ, because some Authors have spoken of
him about 700. years after Christ's birth! It is false that Gregorius
Nazianzenus did ever allege that book, as Budeus suspecteth. And if Nicolas
the Colossian says that he saw the Comments of Dionysius of Alexandria upon
that book, he is no credible witness. For who will believe that these Comments
were hid eight or nine hundred years, and that this Nicolas was the first that
saw them after so many ages? which I say, not to despise the book of the
Hierarchy ascribed to Dionysius Areopagita; a very useful book, and altogether
contrary to Transubstantiation, to Purgatory, and to the Popes primacy. Only I
say it cannot be of that Dionysius, and that it was written by some Christian
Platonician about 350. or 400. years after Christ's birth, in the time that
Monks began to spread, when the Churches were flourishing, and the time quiet.

Read all the Fathers of the first ages; not one word shall be found in them of
adoring the Sacrament, and deferring a divine worship unto it; no trace of that
is extant in Justin Martyr, nor in Ignatius, nor in Clemens Alexandrinus, nor
in Tertullian, nor in Origin, nor in Cyprian, nor in that book of the Lords
Supper which is falsely fathered upon him, as we have proved; nor in Arnobius,
nor in Lactantius, nor in Athanasius, nor in Eusebius, nor in Basilius, nor in
Gregorius Nyssenus, nor in Gregorius Nazianzenus. Neither do the Liturgies of
S. James and Basilius, though falsified and disguised with many additions,
speak a word of them.

The antientest Author alleged by the Cardinal, that seems to speak of the
adoration of the Sacrament, is Cyrillus of Jerusalem, who writ about the year
of Christ 380. he speaks thus in the fifth mystagogical Catechesis, After the
Communion of Christ's body, I draw near to the chalice of the blood, not
stretching forth my hands, but bowing in a form of adoration and veneration.
But these mystagogical Catecheses are a supposititious book; for they are quite
of another style, more concise then the precedent eighten Catecheses, which
ought also to be called Mystagogical, because they serve also for introductions
to mysteries. But the diversity of the Author, is the cause of the diversity
both of the title and style. That this work is spurious, it appears not only
by the diversity of the style, but also because in the first Mystagogical
Catecheses (...), etc.
the Author chideth his hearers for frequenting the hippodrom, that is, the
place appointed for horse races, and for freqenting the Amphitheater, where
Gladiatours were fighting against Tigers and Lions; and labors to dehort them
from such spectacles. Such admonitions could not be done at Jerusalem, where
there was neither Hippodrom, nor Amphitheater.

No Cities had those ornaments and spectacles, but the capital Cities of the
Empire, as Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, where the ordinary
residence of the Emperor was, or of his Lieutenants, in Asia and Egypt, and
some few towns where the Roman Legions wintered, as Nemansus in Gauls, and
some Towns in the East upon the borders of Persia. But as for Jerusalem, it was
subject to Cesarea the Metropolitan of Palestina, and was one of the least
Towns of the Empire as for the civil order. Herod the great had built an
Amphitheater at Cesarea, as Josephus testifies. But in the time of Cyrillus it
was no more frequented. Gesner in his Library, says, that these Catecheses are
found in the Library of Auspurg under the name of one John of Jerusalem.

As for the other eighteen Catecheses, although I think that most of them are
of Cyrillus, yet some of them are none of his, as the eighteenth. For that
Catechesis being made a few days before Easter, yet the Author speaks as if
they had been then in the depth of winter. (...).
Now (says he) is the time of winter, and the trees stand now as dead. Whereas
in Jerusalem at Easter, the corn begins to be in the ear. A fortnight after
Easter, at the latest, they offered in the Temple the new fruits and the new
sheaves. It is like that these Catecheses were pronounced at Constantinople
where winters are often hard and long, by reason of the neighborhood of Pontus
Euxinus.

The same eighteenth Catechesis makes us clearly see that the Mystagogical
which follow, are not of the same Author. For toward the end of that
eighteenth Catechesis, the Author promises more Catecheses to follow. And
says, that the first shall begin by these words (...), which are not found in
the first Mystagogical, and it begins otherwise.

Yet let us suppose that these Catecheses are of Cyrillus. What do they say for
the adoration of the Sacrament? The alleged passage says only, that we must
come to the Communion of the Sacrament with the gesture and countenance of a
man that worshippeth God and Christ sitting at the right hand of God; for of
worshipping the Sacrament he says never a word.

Thus Gregorius Nazianzenus in the oration upon his sister Gorgonia, says,
that at midnight she came and prostrated herself before the altar, and with a
loud cry called upon him that is honored upon the altar. It cannot be said
that she worshipped the Sacrament, seeing that the holy Eucharist was not
celebrated at midnight, and that she was alone in the Church.

The same I say of the passage of Ambrose in the third book of the Holy Ghost,
chapter 12. where expounding that footstool mentioned in the Psalm, he says,
Itaque per scabellum terra intelligitur; per terram autem caro Christi, quam
nunc in mysteriis adoramus, et qua^ Apostoli in Domino Jesu adorarunt.
By the footstool the earth is understood, and by the earth the flesh of
Christ, which now we worship in mysteries, and which the Apostles worshipped in
our Lord Jesus. And of the passage of Austin upon Psalm 98. Et quia in ipsa
carne hic ambulavit, et ipsam carnem manducandam nobis ad salutem dedit, nemo
illam carnem manducat nisi prius adoraverit.
He walked in the flesh, and gave us his flesh unto salvation. Now no body eats
that flesh unless he has first worshipped it. These passages speak not of
worshipping the flesh of Christ under the species of bread, but only of
worshipping the flesh of Christ in the fraction of the Sacrament. It is one
thing to worship Christ in the Lords Supper, and another thing to worship the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Thus in the Eucharist we worship the Father, yet
we worship him not under the elements, as if that Sacrament were God the
Father. The ancient Christians worshipped in the Eucharist the body of Christ
sitting at the right hand of God; and to that end were warned, that while they
received the holy bread, they should lift up their hearts on high; Sursum
corda. Austins words are most considerable, That none eats the flesh of the
Lord, unless he has worshipped it before. None can deny, that he speaks of the
true and serious worship, which is done as well with the heart as with the
body. Whence it appears, that he speaks not of a manducation with the mouth;
for many eat the Sacrament with the mouth, without such a serious worship of
Christ. Judas (as Austin says often) ate the Sacrament of Christ's body, yet
without worshipping Christ's body. And so Austins saying should be found false,
That none eats the flesh of the Lord except he has worshipped it before. But
this Father speaks most true, because he speaks of the spiritual manducation by
faith, which cannot be but in them that fear Christ and worship him.

Hierom upon the same Psalm, Quod autem adorari debeat, eo ascendente, Apostoli
docuerunt cum adorantes regressi sunt in Jerusalem; sed et ad crucem Dominicam
et ad animam sanctam haec referenda sunt.
The Apostles showed that the flesh of Christ must be worshipped, when he
ascending to heaven, they worshipping returned to Jerusalem. But these things
must be referred to the Cross of the Lord, and to his holy soul; not then to
the adoration of the Sacrament.

In the same manner must we understand the expressions of Chrysostom in the 7.
Homily upon Matthew, and in the 24. Homily upon the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, where he exhorts his hearers by the example of the Magi that
came out of Persia, who worshipped Christ in the manger, to worship him also in
the sacred mysteries; They are Rhetorical declamations, in which he exhorts
the people to worship Christ in the Eucharist, not to worship the Eucharist.

I cannot wonder enough how the Cardinal durst allege Theodoret, Book 3. c.
17. of the Eucharist against du Plessis.
who in the first Dialogue having said, that Christ (...), etc. (...), etc.
gave to the sign the name of his body, and that he honored the visible signs
with the name of his body, having not changed their nature, but adding grace
unto nature, in the second Dialogue speaks the same language, saying, (...).
After the consecration the mystical signs depart not from their proper nature,
for they remain in their former substance, figure and form, and are visible,
and to be handled as they were before.

Theodoret adds according to the Cardinals version, The signs are understood
to be the things which they are made, and are believed and worshipped, as being
that which they are believed to be. But there is according to the Greek, and
according to Theodorets intention, The signs are understood to be the things
that they were, and are believed and venerated, as being that which they are
believed to be. Theodoret says that (...), the signs are venerated, or as the
Cardinal translates, the signs are worshipped. Upon which we give the choice to
our adversaries, whether they will have Theodorets meaning to be, that the
signs are worshipped with the sovereign ^orship due unto God alone, or whether
they will have (...) according to the custom of the Grecians to signify only
venerating and reverencing. If they will have Theodorets meaning to be, that
the signs or figures of Christ are worshipped with a sovereign adoration, they
make Theodoret guilty of horrible idolatry, as deferring unto the signs or
figures of Christ a worship equal to the adoration due to the sovereign God;
for the signs are not God. Or if they will, that Theodoret by (...) understands
only venerating or reverencing, then they make him speak as we do; for we
honor and venerate these signs. But in that sense, this testimony of Theodoret
will avail nothing for the sovereign adoration deferred unto the Sacrament.

But though the Cardinals version were receivable, yet it is a weak proof in
the mouth of the Romanists; for they make two sorts of religious adoration, the
one sovereign, the other inferior; and by consequent when they hear Theodoret,
saying, that the signs of Christ's body are worshipped, reason obliges them to
take that of the inferior adoration which they defer unto Saints, to bones, and
to relics. When Tertullian against Hermogenes says, I adore the plenitude of
Scripture, he understood not that the Scriptures were God, or that they were to
be worshipped like God, but only that he did reverence them.

In the Liturgy attributed to Chrysostom these words are found: Liturg.
Chrysostom. edit. Marcelli, p. 85. (...), etc.
The Deacon having said Amen, and worshipped or venerated with reverence the
Holy Gospel, comes out by the Sacred doors. None, I think, is so grossly
idolatrous, as to gather hence that the book of the Gospel must be worshipped
with adoration of latria. In our days they worship the holy tear of Christ,
and the wood of the Cross, and the representation of our Saviors face on a
linen cloth; and yet no man of good sense would worship these things with the
same adoration as he worshippeth God; although Thomas, Cajetan, Biel, Azor,
Vasquez, and a multitude of Doctors stiffly maintain that the wood of the Cross
must be worshipped with adoration of latria.

Here I cannot pass by the ignorance or fraud of Cardinal du Perron, who
defends this adoration in the Mass with the example of Aaron and Moses, who
spoke by Gods command unto the stone whence the waters flowed: as though Moses
and Aaron by speaking to that stone had worshipped it. The words which they
spoke to the stone, were not words of adoration, but of command.

Such was the word of Christ speaking to Lazarus lying in the sepulcher,
Lazarus come forth. Such shall Gods command be, when in the last day he shall
command the earth and the sea to give up the dead.

Theodoret then meant, not that the inanimate signs of Christ's body and blood
must be worshipped with the adoration due to God, but that they must be
venerated, respected and honored as sacred things, and as the mystical and
sacramental body of Christ ought to be venerated. So speaks Austin 118.
Epistle; Neuter eorum exhonorat corpus and sanguinem Domini, si sal^berrimum
Sacramentum certatim honorare contendunt, etc. Ille honorando non audet
quotidie sumere, and ille honorando non audet illo die praetermittere non
captu^. Solum non vult cibus ille sicut m^ana sastidium. Inde enim and
Apostolus indigne dicit acceptu^ ab iis qui hoc non discernebant a caeteris
cibis veneratione singulariter debita.
Neither of them dishonors the Lords body and blood, if they strive with
emulation to honor the most salutary sacred sign, etc. The one out of respect
dares not take him every day, the other out of respect dares not let one day
pass without taking it. Only this meat will not be loathed as Manna was once.
Wherefore also the Apostle says, that it is received unworthily by those that
do not discern it from other meats by a veneration especially due. When it is
question of the dignity of the Sacrament, always this good Doctor speaks of
honoring and venerating, never of adoring the Sacrament.

The same Father in book 3. of Christian doctrine, chapter 9. Qui aut operatur aut
veneratur utique signum divinitus institutum, cujus vim significationemque
intelligit, non hoc veneratur quod videtur and transit, sed illud potius quo
talia cuncta referenda sunt.
He that makes or venerateth the sign divinely instituted, whose virtue and
signification he understands, does not venerate that which is seen and is
transitory, but that rather to which all such things ought to be referred.

And in the 164. Epistle, Baptismu^ Christi ubique veneramur.
We venerate everywhere the Baptism of Christ. Which is done without adoration.

But above all, the authority before alleged of Theophilus Patriarch of
Alexandria is pregnant, with the exposition which Hierom brings to it. This
Theophilus in the first Paschal Epistle disputing against Origin, had said,
Origin considers not that the mystical waters of Baptism are consecrated by the
coming of the Holy Ghost, and that the bread of the Lord, whereby the body of
our Savior is showed [or represented] and which we break for our
sanctification, and the sacred chalice which are set upon the table, and which
are indeed inanimate things, are sanctified by the invocation and coming of the
Holy Ghost. Excellent words, especially where Theophilus says that we break
the bread of the Lord, whereby the body of the Lord is showed; and that the
water of Baptism is sanctified by the invocation and coming of the Holy Ghost.
Showing thereby, that this sanctification is done by invocation or prayer, not
by pronouncing these words, This is my body. And that as this sanctification or
consecration does not transubstantiate the water of of Baptism, also the
consecration of the bread does not transubstaniate it into the body of the
Lord. For he acknowledges but one kind of consecration for Baptism and for the
Eucharist.

Hierom translator of these Epistles writes to the author of them Theophilus,
and speaks thus with a reflection to this passage: We have admired in thy book
the profit which all the Churches receive by it; that the ignorant being
instructed by the testimonies of holy letters, may learn with what veneration
they must receive holy things, and serve to the ministry of Christ's altar; and
that they may not think that the sacred chalices, and the holy vails, and other
things belonging to the service of Christ's passion, are deprived of holiness as
inanimate and senseless, but that they may know, that because they accompany
the body and blood of the Lord, they ought to be venerated with the same
Majesty as his body and blood. These words ought to be well weighed. Hierom
says, that the chalices and linen clothes, and other appurtenances of the
outward service of the Sacrament ought to be venerated with the same Majesty
and reverence as the body and blood of Christ. Now it is clear, that linen
clothes and chalices ought not to be worshipped with the sovereign adoration
due unto God alone. Whence it appears, that the body and blood of Christ, of
which Hierom speaks here, must not be worshipped with sovereign adoration, and
that the Lords body of which he speaks, is the mystical and Sacramental body of
Christ, not the natural. For would Hierom have been so profane or so ignorant,
as to prescribe that linen clothes and chalices should be worshipped with a
worship equal unto that which is due unto Christ himself? Wherefore also he
says not that the body and blood, or the chalices and vails must be
worshipped, but only that they must be venerated. And this is the same thing
that Hierom told us before (that we may return to our beginning) that there are
two sorts of body and blood of Christ. It was from him that the Canon
Dupliciter was taken in the second distinction of the Consecration, which
says, Duplicit^r intelligitur caro Christi; vel spiritualis illa atque divina
de qua ipse ait Ca^o mea vere est cibus; vel caro ea quae crucifixa est, and
sanguis qui militis effusus est lancea.
The flesh of Christ is understood two ways. It is either that spiritual and
divine flesh, of which himself says, My flesh is meat indeed; or that flesh
which was crucified, and that blood which was shed by the soldiers spear. And
the Canon De hac, in the same distinction, De hac quidem hostia quae in Christi
commemoratione mirabilit^r fit edere licet. De illa vero quam Christus in ara
cru^is obtulit, secundum se nulli edere licet.
It is indeed lawful to eat of that victim, which is done wonderfully in the
commemoration of Christ. But it is lawful to none to eat that victim in it
self which was offered in the altar of the Cross. Note these words in it self:
It is not lawful to eat in it self the Lords flesh offered in the Cross: For
thereby he declares, that it is lawful to eat it in Sacrament, or in
mystery, not in it self, so that it enter into our mouth or stomach. We heard
also Austin saying upon Ps. 98. as personating Christ, You shall not eat this
body which you see, and shall not drink the blood which they that crucify me
shall spill. Then another sort of Christ's body is eaten, even the mystical and
sacramental.

This distinction of the two sorts of body of Christ being the key of the
intelligence of the Fathers in this matter, it is no wonder that the Cardinal
is always wandering from his matter and accumulates texts of the Fathers to no
purpose, because he did not observe this distinction, and speaks not a word of
it in all his book of the Eucharist.

CHAP. XXII. The Cardinals allegations out of the Fathers are examined,
beginning at his allegations out of the Catecheses of Gregory of Nyssa.
TO darken the clear evidence of this truth, the Cardinal pours a thick mist
of allegations of Fathers, some false, some wrested, some to no purpose.

Among the last sort I put those which he brings from new Authors, or such as
lived long after the fourth universal Council, which is the limit which he had
set to himself. Such is Alger the Schoolman, who writ about the year of Christ
1130. Such is Theophilactus, who writ about the year 1075. Damascenus, who writ
about the year 750. And Euthymius, who is of the year 1120. Although the
Cardinal make all these men to speak against their intention; yet it would be
superfluous, and out of the limits of this dispute to examine them.

Book 4. chapter 8. p. 882.
In chapter 8. of which I have answered the most part, he brings a great list of the
most specious testimonies which he could gather out of all Christian Antiquity.
He sets in the front the Catechetical Oration of Gregorius Nyssenus, and fills
a page with it, forgeting his own verdict in the same chapter, and in many
other places, That one must not seek the belief of the Fathers in the books in
which they speak before the Catechumens, because before them they durst not say
plainly what they believed, nor speak according to their sense; and that Chapter 8.
p. 886, and 887.
whosoever published openly some part of the doctrine of the Church in the
point of the Eucharist before the Catechumens or Infidels, was accounted
anathema. Now this Catechetical Oration was made purposely for the Catechumens,
as the title shows it.

I could say also, that in this matter Gregorius Nyssenus had a particular
belief, which the Roman Church approves not. For in the first Oration of the
resurrection of Christ, to find the three days and three nights, the time
which holy Scripture says that Christ was in the womb of the earth, that is in
the Sepulcher, he begins those three days at the hour of the institution of
the Eucharist; and holds, that then Christ sacrificed himself, and that his
body became inanimate. (...).
For (says he) the body of the victime had not been fit to be eaten if it had
been animated. And that he adds, that from that time his soul was in the
heart of the earth. We should not wonder then, if a man that had such a strange
opinion as to believe that the body of the Lord Jesus was dead already, when he
was at the table with his Disciples, had also in this matter some unwarrantable
tenet.

I could say also, that in the same Catechesis there are some errors that
extenuate the authority of the same; (...). Et versio Gentiani Herveti. Illa
quidem (fides) sita in arbitrio liberae nostrae electionis. The same he says
chapter 31.
As when he says in chapter 36. that faith is in the power of our free will:
Whereas Paul, Ephesians. 2.8. says, You are saved by grace through faith, and that
not of your selves, it is the gift of God; Not of works, lest any man should
boast, teaching us, that neither salvation nor faith comes from us, but that
both are the gift of God. The same Gregory in the same book, chapter 35. teaches
that such as dye without baptism, whose affections were hardened, and that are
dead without purgation of their sins, without mystical water, without prayer,
without amendment of repentance, must necessarily be purged from their sins by
a convenient means, namely by the fire of the furnace that they may be
preserved pure for many ages. Then he adds, Because that in the fire and in the
water there is an abstersive virtue, they that were washed from the filth of
sin by the mystical water, have no need of the other kind of purgation. But
they that were not initiated by this purgation [of baptism] by necessity are
purged by fire: I pass by the exposition which he brings of Ephesians. 3.18. That you
might comprehend with all Saints, (...).
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, understanding by these
four dimensions the four ends of the Cross Greg. Orat. Cateches. cap. 32.
.

But passing by these things and many more which are found in that oration, Let
us consider this book and this passage with some care. This Catechetical
oration is not found in the ancient Editions, as in that of Basil. The Edition
of Paris of the year 1573. added that piece translated into Latin, as Bellarmin
Bellar. de Scriptor. Eccl. in Gregorio Nysseno.
observes. Suidas and Nicephorus in book 11. chapter 19. name several books of
Gregorius Nyssenus, but speak not of that Catechetical oration. But Theodoret
ancienter then they, in the second Dialogue intitulded the Inconfounded,
alleges four or five passages of that Oration, yet with such diversity of
words from our Editions, that it is easy to see that the book past since
through diverse hands, which have fowlly disfigured it. In the end of that
oration, mention is made of one Severus an heretic, that impugned the two
natures of Christ. But that Severus lived long after Gregorius Nyssenus, that
is, under the Emperor Anastasius about the year of the Lord 512. Of whose
perverseness Evagrius speaks in book 3. chapter 33. and Liberatus Diaconus chapter 19.
Which shows plainly, that to that Catechetical oration other pieces were
added written in diverse ages. For that Severus was of the Sect of the Acephali
Eutychians, which is the heresy taxed in the end of the oration.

As for that passage, it is easy to know that it is none of Gregorius
Nyssenus, but thrust in by some Eutychian; for there Eutychianism is plainly
taught. We have seen before and proved by Theodoret, that the Eutychians had
two errors, the one serving to maintain the other. They confounded the two
natures of Christ by a mixture of the humane nature with a divine, teaching
that the humane nature by the union with the divine was deified or changed into
God. To defend that error, they taught the Transubstantiation of bread into
the body of Christ in the Eucharist, saying, that as after the consecration the
bread is turned into the substance of the body of Christ, so by the incarnation
the body of Christ was converted into the substance of the Godhead. This is the
language of the Eutychian heretic in the second Dialogue of Theodoret. In the
same manner as the signs of the body and blood of the Lord are others before
the invocation of the Priest, but after the invocation they are changed and
made others. Likewise the Lords body after the assumption, was changed into the
divine substance.

This is the very doctrine contained in chapter 37. which the Cardinal alleges,
and in diverse other places of this Catechetical oration, where it is said
diverse times, that a mixture or commutation was made of humane nature with the
Godhead. As in chapter 11. (...).
The Godhead is blended or mingled with the manhood. In the same place he
speaks, (...).
of the manner of the mixture or contemperature of the Godhead with the
manhood. And in chapter 16. (...).
He has mingled the intellectual nature with the sensible. The same he says
in the 26, and 32. chapters, using the grossest terms that he is able to find
to express that mixture of the natures. And in chapter 37. whence this passage is
taken, he says, that by that union, humane nature (...), was changed into the
excellency of the Godhead, and as he says a little after, it was (...).
condeified, made God, which is rank Eutychianism. And he makes that mingling
of natures to prove the Eutychian Transubstantiation. And thus he builds his
discourse. The proper food of man's body is bread, so that a man's body is in
some sort made of bread, and bread before it be eaten is man's body in potentia.
Christ while he had his conversation in earth, ate bread, and his body was in
some sort made of bread, because the bread which he ate was changed into
Christ's body, and that body mingled with the Godhead and deified, entering into
our bodies by the Eucharist, changes our bodies into his nature, and
quickens them; and thence comes resurrection. And as the bread which Christ
ate was changed into his body, so the bread of the Eucharist is changed into
the body of Christ mingled with his Godhead: These are his own words: We asked
how the body of Christ which is in him quickens the whole nature of men in
whom faith is, being distributed to all without suffering any diminution.
Perhaps we are not far from the probable reason; for if the subsistence of each
body is compounded with food which is meat and drink, and that meat is bread,
and that drink is water tempered with wine; the Word of God according as it was
defined before, which is God and Word, is mingled with humane nature; And when
it was in our body, it did not innovate some other constitution of humane
nature, but gave subsistence to his body by the things that are usual and
convenient, sustaining his subsistence with meat and drink, and that meat was
bread. As then in us (as I said often) he that sees bread, sees the humane
body in some sort, because when it is within the body it becomes the body; So
in this place (...).
the body [of Christ] which received God, having received the food of bread,
was in some sort the same thing as bread, the food (as it was said) passing
into the nature of the body. For that which is proper to all, is also without
question in that flesh, namely, that this body is contained in the bread. Now
the body by the inhabitation of the Word God, was (...).
changed into the dignity of God. Wherefore also now I believe with just
reason, that the bread sanctified by the Word of God, is changed into the body
of God the Word: for that bread was this body in potentia, etc. With such wild
conceits and intricate words the Author of chapter 37. of that Oration goes about
to prove, that as the bread which Christ ate was changed into the body of
Christ, and as Christ's humane nature was changed into the divine nature, also
the bread of the Lords Supper is Transubstantiated into the flesh of Christ.
Shall we be so unjust to Gregorius Nyssenus, a man so famous in his time, as to
father upon him such a galimaufry of absurdities and doctrines contrary to the
faith? Wherefore the result of this examination is, that either this Oration is
none of that Gregory's works, or rather that this Catechetical Oration was
corrupted by the Eutychians, and that though it were his, yet Cardinal du
Perron can make no use of it, since he will not have us to believe the writings
of the Fathers wherein they speak to the Catechumens, before whom they
dissembled their sense, and disguised the belief of the Church.

CHAP. XXIII. Answer to the other allegations of the same Chapter.
TO Gregorius Nyssenus the Cardinal joins Ambrose, who in the book of those
that are initiated in mysteries, inquireth how it is possible that the
Eucharist should be the body of Christ, and answers, that it is done by the
change of the bread into the body of Christ. To which I have already answered,
that Ambrose's belief was, that the bread is so changed into the body of
Christ, that nevertheless it remains bread always. To show that, he employeth
chapter 4. of book 4. of the Sacraments, where he declares, that this end is to
prove that bread is the body of Christ: Haecigitur astruamus, quomodo potest
qui panis est, esse corpus Christi.
Let us demonstrate this (says he) how that which is bread, can be the body of
Christ. And upon that he brings some works of God, whereby God made that which
is not to be. Whence he infers, that much more God can make things that have
been to be again, and to be changed into other things. Si ergo tanta vis est in
sermon Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae non erant, quanto magis operaturus
est ut sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur?
If (says he) there is such virtue in the word of the Lord Jesus, that things
that were not, begun to be; how much more shall he make things that were, to
be, and to be changed into other things? This passage is found thus set down in
all the ancient Editions, and in the Decret. Great. Did. 2. de Consecrat. Can.
Panis.
Roman Decree, and in the Decree Yuo Carn. Secund. Part. de Sacr. Corporis,
cap. 7.
of Yuo Carnutensis. And for that which the Cardinal beats over so often, that
Ambrose says, that this is done by the Almighty power of God, and that to make
the bread to be only the sign and figure of the body of Christ, there was no
need to make the Almighty power of God to intervene; I have said already, that
Ambrose believed no more then we do, that bread was only the sign of Christ's
body. He believed that the bread remaining bread becomes so the mystical body
of Christ, that by the manducation of that bread, through the unspeakable
virtue of God Christ is made ours, and remains in us, and we in him. Yet the
same Ambrose celebrating the Eucharist, said, Fac nobis hanc oblationem
ascripta^ rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis and sanguinis
Domini.
Make this offering to be accounted unto us reasonable, acceptable, which is
the figure of the body and blood of the Lord. Words which cannot be applied
unto bread not consecrated; for bread not consecrated cannot be the acceptable
offering, and cannot be laid to our account before God for our sins.

The same Ambrose was saying, Lib. de iis qui initiantur myster. cap. 9. Ante
benedictionem alia species nominatur, post benedictionem corpus significatur.
Before the blessing of the heavenly words, another kind is named. After the
blessing, the body is signified. Again, Non est iste panis qui in corpus vadit.
lib. 4 de Sacr. c. 4, and 5.
This bread is not that which enters into the body. Again, Thou drinkest the
likeness of his blood.

Page 877.
The Cardinal alleges Cyprian next. Who sees not (says he) that when Cyprian
says [The bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, changed, not in shape,
but in nature, by the Almighty power of the Word, is made flesh] he cannot
understand any change there by the change of nature, but the change of
substance? In the beginning of the same chapter the Cardinal In chapter 13. p.
1009, and 1010.
had spoken of that very book as doubting whether it was of Cyprian; Now he
speaks of it with an absolute certainty as believing that it is Cyprians. We
have showed before by many evident proofs that the book is spurious, none of
Cyprians but of a late Author, whose barbarous style and doctrine are very far
from the elegance and solidity of Cyprian.

Yet let us see what use the Cardinal makes of that allegation. Cyprian (says
he) cannot by the change of nature understand but the change of substance. For
Aristotle teaches us that the word nature signifies nothing but either the
substance or the accidents which originally stick to the substance, that is the
natural and original proprieties and conditions. Wherefore no change
intervening in the outward nature of bread, it must needs be that the change is
made in the substance.

I could answer, that besides the outward nature and substance, there are
inward proprieties in which the change can be made. But I choose rather to beat
the Cardinal with his own weapons. The Reader may remember how the Cardinal to
escape from the hands of Theodoret (who says in the first Dialogue, that in the
Lords Supper (...).
Christ had altered the nature of the signs, And in the second (...).
that the sacred signs after the consecration change not their own nature) will
have nature in those passages to signify the accidents, not the substance. But
in this place, which he says to be Cyprians, where it is said, that the bread
changes nature, the Cardinal maintains that nature signifies substance, and
can signify nothing else. And he proves it by Aristotle, whom he makes to say
(without quoting the place) that nature signifies nothing but either the
substance or the proprieties. He proves a false doctrine by a false passage.
That of Aristotle of which he had heard, is in the first chapter of the second
book of his Physics, where he thus defines nature, (...).
Nature is the principle and the cause of motion and of rest, which principle
is in the thing first, and of it self, and not by accident. And a little after
he adds, that all things that have that nature or inward principle of motion,
are substances. Aristotle says not that nature is a substance, but that (...).
the things that have this nature, are substances.

The Cardinal alleges next the fourth Mystagogical Catechesis of Cyrillus of
Jerusalem; A place which we need not examine for that book is spurious, and of
another Author then the 18. precedent Catecheses, as we proved before by
evident and undoubted proofs. No kind of books is more subject to be
supposititious and to have false titles then Catecheses. For, because every
Bishop made Catecheses in his own Bishopric, nothing was more easy, among
such a multitude of Catecheses of uncertain Authors, then to put an old title
to a new book.

Again he returns to Ambrose, which I have answered.

To him he adds Gaudentius who was his contemporanean, and speaks thus,
Gaudent. de rat. Sacra^. Tract. 2.
The Lord and Creator of natures, who out of earth made bread, out of bread
again, (because he both can do it and promised it) makes his own body. And in
the same work; He said, This is my body, This is my blood, Let us believe him
whom we have believed. Truth knows not untruth. And again, Let us believe all
things as they were delivered unto us, not breaking this most solid bone. This
is my body.

The works of this Gaudentius are found in Bibliotheca Patrum, in the second
Tome. This Bibliotheca Patrum is a collection of false pieces for the most
part, and of small Authors whom our adversaries hide in the crowd, fetched out
of the Popes Library, or some Manuscripts of Monasteries. In that collection
they put whatsoever they list, and have fair opportunity for that.

But what is in those passages, that we say not? Do we not say, that by the
consecration the bread is made the body of Christ? and that the bread is the
body of Christ? But the question is, whether the consecrated bread is naturally
or sacramentally the body of Christ; or whether Gaudentius means the
sacramental body of Christ or no; or whether he believed that the bread was
Transubstantiated: of these nothing appears by his expressions. Besides
Gaudentius in this matter delights to use Allegorical terms: as when he says
in the same Treatise, For this cause we are enjoined to eat the head of his
Godhead, with the feet of his incarnation, and with the inward mysteries, that
we may equally believe all things as they were said to us, not breaking that
most solid bone, This is my body. And if any thing of it remain in every man's
sense, which he has not comprehended by this exposition, let it be burnt and
consumed by faith.

Chrysostom comes next, who in the 83. Homily says, These things are no work
of humane virtue. He that did them in that Supper, does them still. We only
hold the place of Ministers; but he that sanctifies them and changes them, is
the same. This passage concludes nothing, and is to no purpose; Chrysostom
speaks of change, not of Transubstantiation. There is a change in the use, in
the end, in the efficacy, without change of substance.

Finally he alleges Eusebius, ill entitled Emesinus in a Paschal Homily, but
says not how the book should be entitled. In the margent he puts Eucherius
and Bertramus as Authors to whom these Homilies are attributed by some.
Bellarmin says, Bellar. lib. de Scriptor. Eccles. in Eusebio Emesino. Sub
nomine supposititio Homiliae istae sunt editae cu^ verus Author ignoraretur: Et
in Eucherio. Tribuuntur Eucherio libri Explanationu^ in Genesin, and in librum
Regum. Sed Eucherii esse non possunt, cum author saepe S. Gregorium citet.
that the Homilies fathered upon Eusebius Emesinus, were set out under a false
name because the true Author was not known. And as for Eucherius to whom our
Cardinal seems to ascribe these Homilies, Bellarmin observes that among the
writings fathered upon Eucherius, there are some in which Gregory the first is
alleged, who writ in the year 595. And it is like enough that he lived many
ages after Gregory. It is abusing the Reader to muster up passages of unknown,
new and uncertain Authors, whom we have only from the hands of our adversaries,
who published them such as they would have them, and had an especial interest
to corrupt them.

CHAP. XXIV. Answer to the authorities and reasons brought by Cardinal du
Perron Book 4. p. 896, and 898.
in the 14, 15, and 16. chapters.
Whosoever will take the pains to read a multitude of allegations to no purpose,
let him read the fourteenth chapter of M. du Perron's treatise of the real
presence: There he collecteth great number of passages of Fathers that speak of
eating Gods head, and the feet of the incarnation, and of boiling the flesh
before the doors of the Tabernacle, and of burning with the fire of the Spirit
the remnant of things not to be eaten, etc. things quite besides the question,
which do him no good, and do us no harm.

In chapter 15. with a million of intricate words according to his custom he says
very little. The summary is, That when the Greek Fathers speak of eating
spiritually the Lords body in the Eucharist, they mean not to exclude the
corporeity (for so he speaks) neither of the thing received nor of the organ:
that is, that they intend not to deny that the Lords body is really received
with the mouth of the body, but they mean, that it is by the spirit of God that
the body of Christ is miraculously under the species, and that it is by the
Spirit only that we perceive the body of Christ which is set before us. He
says that Scripture calls those things spiritual which are corporal, when they
are done by the miraculous operation of Gods Spirit, as when S. Paul says to
the Galatians that Isaac was born according to the Spirit.

I answer, that by that doctrine the creation of the world may be called
spiritual; for it was done by the incomprehensible virtue of the Spirit of God,
and is a thing which we comprehend not but by the Spirit and by Faith, as the
Apostle to the Hebrews says, Heb. 11.3. Through faith we understand that the
worlds were framed by the Word of God. As for Isaac, S. Paul says indeed that
he was born according to the Spirit, but says not therefore that Isaac was
spiritual, or that his birth was spiritual. But by being born according to the
Spirit, his birth according to Gods promise is understood, as the Apostle
himself declares it; for that which he says Gal. 4.29. that he that was born
after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, is the same
thing which he had said ver. 23. that he who was born of the bondwoman was born
after the flesh, but he of the free woman was by promise.

Now that which the Cardinal says, that the Fathers when they speak of eating
the flesh of Christ spiritually in the Eucharist, intend not to exclude the
corporeity, that is, the real manducation of the body with the mouth, is
confuted by the passages of the Fathers, wherein comparing the oral manducation
which is done in the Sacrament with the spiritual manducation, they say that
the only true manducation is the spiritual; and that the wicked eating the
Sacrament, eat not truly the body of Christ, though they eat the sacred sign
thereof. As Austin says in book 21. of the City of God, chapter 25. Ostendit quid
sit non sacramento tenus, sed re vera corpus Christi manducare.
The Lord shows what it is to eat the body of Christ, not only in Sacrament,
but also in truth. And in the same place, Non solo sacramento sed re ipsa
manducaverunt corpus Christi.
They have eaten the Lords body, not only in Sacrament, but also in truth. And
in the second Sermon of the words of the Apostle. Si quod in Sacramento
visibiliter sumitur in ipsa veritate spiritualiter manducetur, spiritualiter
bibatur. Audivimus enim ipsum Dominum dicentem Spiritus est qui vivificat, caro
autem non potest quicquam, etc.
If that which is taken visibly in the Sacrament, is eaten spiritually in the
very truth, and drunk spiritually. For we have heard the Lord himself saying,
It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing, etc. And in the
book of Sentences collected by Prosper. Qui discordat cum Christo, non carnem
ejus manducat, nec sanguinem ejus bibit, etiamsi tantae rei Sacramentum ad
judicium suae praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter accipiat.
Whosoever is in discord with Christ, eats not his flesh, and drinks not his
blood; although he take the sacred sign of such a great thing indifferently
every day to the condemnation of his presumption.

This also serves for an answer to that the Cardinal adds, that 15. chapter p.
899.
the spiritual participation is not real; for (says he) all the actions
brought forth out of the soul by the faculties are not real, because the
actions of the soul come not out of the body, etc. Thus toward the end of the
16. chap. he says, p. 908.
that the manducation of which the Fathers say, that in the Eucharist we eat
the body of Christ's, is not a bare mental manducation, and by faith; but is a
true, real, oral, and corporal manducation. For as for the manducation by
faith, he calls, it p. 905.
an intellectual thought and meditation, as if it were a mere imagination.

The sum of all his Discourse overburdened with superfluous words, is this,
that the spiritual manducation is not real nor effectual, because, it is an
action which is done out of the soul, but that the manducation with the mouth
is the only real and effectual.

To which I answer, that the Cardinal commits here four notable faults: The
first is his ignorance, that the Fathers hold that there is no other real and
true manducation of the body of Christ but the spiritual. They say not only
that the corporal or Sacramental manducation avails nothing without the
spiritual: but they say also, that the spiritual manducation; and by faith, is
the only real and true, as we have lately proved.

Secondly, the Cardinal saying, that the spiritual manducation is an action of
the soul, brought forth out of the soul, shows that he never understood nor
felt, nor comprehended any thing in this spiritual manducation, nor in the
grace of God. For this word manducation is a Metaphorical word, which
signifies not only apprehending Christ, or thinking of him, but also fetching
life and spiritual food from him. To say that this spiritual life and food is a
thing out of the soul, is to have no taste of piety, no experience of Gods
grace in himself, and it is extenuating the work of God in the hearts of the
godly to a bare imagination, seeking spiritual life, and sanctification, and
the spiritual joy of the faithful soul out of the soul, so that the soul may
have no sense of it, and receive no comfort by it. This Prelate has showed
before his insensibility in that point, when treating of the mark and seal of
the Spirit wherewith God marks his elect, 1. Book 9. chapter 37. page
he said, that this mark was in God, and in his eternal thought, not in the
hearts of the faithful.

Thirdly, the Cardinal speaking thus, trespasseth not only against the doctrine
of the soul, but even against common sense. For both teach, that all the mental
actions are in the soul, and in the understanding, not without. The Science and
intelligence of the Stars or Geometry is in the understanding, not without. And
although the object which is known, be out of the soul, yet the knowledge is in
the soul, not without. It is the same of the senses, which receive the images
or operations of the objects that are within us, but act not without us. It is
this Prelates custom to sublimate his wit to bring forth high conceits, and big
words, which being thoroughly examined are found to want common sense. Yet such
things read by ignorant persons, are admired as things beyond the reach of
humane wit. Of that strain is his saying in the 8. chapter, Page 885.
that this word money is the name of a thing, not real but intentional, and
consisting in the institution of the intellect. Yet in my opinion he that
pays ready money, pays really; and that money is real, not intentional. He
that is so paid, believes that he is really paid, not in thought or intention
only.

To these faults the Cardinal joins a fourth, that he opposes intentional
things to real things; and by intentional things understands those that are
done in the understanding, as if the habits and operations of the mind were not
real, or as if nothing were real that has not a body. Who doubts that the
Sciences and virtues that are in men's minds are real and effectual? and how
much more the infused graces of God, and the effects of his Spirit? Which yet
are so real, that all other things vanish, and are but vanity in comparison,
seeing that they abide for ever, and are a beginning of eternal life which we
shall enjoy in heaven. All that is acting really, is real and in effect: Now
the virtues of the soul act really, and bring forth effects; then they are
real. Wherefore also the Saints are really rewarded for real good things.

So it is in vain that the Cardinal heaps up many passages of Fathers, to prove
that the true and real manducation of Christ's body is something done within us,
not without us; for that we believe and maintain. And as for the passages which
he alleges out of Chrysostom, Hom. 24. in 1 Cor. and lib. 2. de Sacerdotio.
God shows us that which is most ^xcellent in heaven, seated upon earth:
Also, That Angels worshipped Christ seeing him in a manger, and that we see him
on the altar; they are sallies of oratory, to ravish the hearers minds with
Hyperbolical expressions. For the Romanists themselves believe not these words
literally taken. They believe not that Christ's body in the Eucharist has any
situation, or that we see him upon the altar; but they hold that he is there
without situation, and without being in any place; that he is there invisibly,
and that no eye perceives him there. And when Cyrillus says, that we take
Christ bodily, he understands that we take bodily the Sacramental body of
Christ: Or by bodily he means really, and so that the body of Christ is ours.
Whosoever will examine all the passages that the Cardinal alleges in the 15. and
16. chapter shall find that without offering any violence to them, they may be so
understood.

Had the Cardinal rightly conceived how, and in what manner Christ is
apprehended by the faith of the believer in the Lords Supper, he had not
insisted so much upon an Argument which he frames in the 16. chap. and upon
which he bestows six pages. If (says he) the Fathers had understood that the
manducation of Christ's body, which is done in the Eucharist, had been a bare
manducation by faith, why should they have excluded the Godhead from the object
of that manducation, and said that the Godhead cannot be eaten, but only the
body of Christ, seeing that of the spiritual and analogical manducation which
is done by faith, the Godhead is the chief object; the body of Christ being not
the object of our faith, but because it is joined with the Godhead?

Besides that, the Cardinal makes us speak against our belief, making us say
that in the Eucharist we eat Christ only spiritually and by faith, whereas we
teach that he is also eaten Sacramentally and in mystery; he shows by that
discourse that he never comprehended how the body of Christ is apprehended by
the faith of the believer in the Lords Supper; for had he known that, he had
known also why the Fathers speaking of the manducation of Christ's body in the
Eucharist, speak only of eating the body of Christ, not of eating his Godhead.
We say then that Christ is presented to us in the Lords Supper as dead for us,
and that faith apprehends him as bruised for us in the Cross, bearing the curse
which we had deserved. Now it is in his humane nature only, that he suffered
death and passion. The Fathers then considering Christ in the Lords Supper, as
dead for us, do wisely apply their words to the nature of the Lords Supper,
when they speak not of eating the Godhead, but only of eating (that is)
apprehending by faith, Christ dead and crucified for our sins. That Christ is
so considered and apprehended in the holy Communion, the institution shows
it, where Christ says, 1 Cor. 11.
This is my body which is broken for you: This cup is the New Testament in my
blood which is shed for you. To which the Apostle adds, As often as you eat
this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death. Which if the Cardinal
had well understood, he would not have spent so much ink Page 903, 904, 905,
and 906.
to amplify that argument.

In vain then he alleges Cyrillus, saying, Cyril. contra Nestorium l. 4. c.
5. (...).
We eat not, consuming the Godhead; away with that ill thought or will; but the
very flesh of the word made quickening. Wherein Cyrillus says true; for by the
spiritual manducation we apprehend the true flesh of Christ. I know not who was
the Cardinals Interpreter for this Greek passage, but he did not do his part.
Cyrillus says, (...). The Cardinal translates, We swallow the Godhead it self.
Away with that impiety. The word it self, is not in the Geeek; (...) signifies
not swallowing, but consuming: And (...) signifies ill counsel, or ill
thought, not impiety.

He shuts up this proof in these words, Whence it follows, since personally
separating the Godhead of Christ is making the Eucharist an Anthropophagia,
that in the Eucharist the flesh of Christ is truly, really and corporally
eaten, that is, with the organ of the body. I seek in this argument some spark
of reason, and find none, neither is it possible to form an Argument with that
reasoning. This is the conceit.

Whosoever separates the Godhead of Christ from the Manhood, makes of the Eucharist
an Anthropophagia.

Now Nestorius separated the Godhead from the Manhood.

Ergo the flesh of Christ is truly and corporally eaten in the Eucharist.

A gallant argument, and well brancht! What remote Pilgrimage was this Prelates
wit gone to? By the same reason one might prove the virtue of blessed beads, or
the Popes Primacy. In every good argument the two parts of the conclusion are
found in the two Propositions, which is not to be found in this argument.

Finally, Page 907.
he alleges a testimony of Cyrillus, which is found in the defense of the
eleventh Anathematismus of Cyrillus against the reprehensions of Theodoret.
These are the words, This passage is found in the first Tome of the Councils
Printed at Collen in the year 1567. at Gervin Calen, page 683. in these words;
Number hominis comestionem nostram hoc Sacramentum pronuncias? and irreligiose ad
crassas cogitationes urges eorum qui crediderunt mentem? and attentas humanis
cogitationibus tractare quae sola pura et inexquisita fide accipiuntur?
as they are found in the first Tome of the Councils published by our
Adversaries; Do thou pronounce that in our Sacrament we eat a man? and do
thou irreligiously press the understanding of those that have believed into
gross thoughts? and do thou attempt to treat with humane thoughts those
things which are received with the only, and not far fetched faith? Note these
words, that the things which are received in the Eucharist (for of these
Cyrillus speaks) are not taken but by faith only. The Cardinal toward the end
of the last chapter alleges this text, and puts (...).
the Greek words in the Margent, which he corrupts in his traduction; for he
translateth (...) deceitful reasonings. But (...) is not a reasoning but a
thought. And (...) signifies not deceitful, but vain and easily blotted out.
Then he translateth (...), a faith not inquisitive, whereas it signifies a
faith not far-fetcht. And the word (...) in the page before, he translateth,
are presupposed, borrowed for a ground, whereas it signifies are taken; for
that is the true sense. As Act. 27.33. (...), having taken nothing, that is,
eaten nothing: And ver. 36. (...), they took meat. And so Acts 16.33. The
connection of the text, and that which follows, requires it also. For faith
presupposes not the things presented to the believer in the Lords Supper, but
takes them and receives them with confidence. With passages thus corrupted his
whole book is stuffed.

I must not omit a place of Hilary which the Cardinal alleges often, but
gives a false interpretation to it Hilary says in the 8. Book of the Trinity,
De veritate carnis et sanguinis non relictus est ambigendi locus. Nunc enim
ipsius Domini professione et fide nostra vere caro est, et vere sanguis est, et
haec accepta atque hausta id efficient ut et nos in Christo, et Christus in
nobis sit.
There remains no place for doubt of the truth of the flesh and blood [of
Christ] for now both by the profession of the Lord himself, and by our faith,
it is truly flesh and truly blood: And these things being taken and swallowed,
work that effect that we are in Christ, and Christ is in us. The Cardinal in
the 6. chapter out of this place, gathers that the substance of the flesh, and
blood of Christ is truly in the Sacrament, because Hilary says, that we must
not doubt of the truth of the flesh of Christ. But that is not Hilary's
intention, but only to say that Christ has a true flesh, and a true blood, and
has a true humane nature, which is true as well out of the Sacrament as in the
Sacrament. He says also, that this true body, and this true blood taken in the
Eucharist; make us to be in Christ, and Christ in us. This shows, that he
speaks not of the oral manducation of which the wicked also are partakers, and
which makes not the wicked to be in Christ, howsoever any man say that by that
manducation Christ is in them. The word haurire, to swallow, which Hilary
uses, may as well be applied to the mind as to the body; Virg. 3. Georg.
Exultantiaque haurit corda pavor pulsans. Et alibi Vocemque his auribus hausi.
For the Latin Authors speak so.

CHAP. XXV. How the Cardinal sends the Reader to a larger Book of his of the
Eucharist; That the beginning of that Book shows what one should think of the
rest.
THe Cardinal for the conclusion of his Treatise of the real presence sends
back the Reader to a larger work, promising to treat in it more fully of the
Eucharist. That promised work, is his Book of the Eucharist against Monsieur du
Plessis, upon which Book I have already made many observations. That is the
Book wherein he translates, 3. Book. 14. chapter p. 866.
Fescennina carmina, Verses to avert witchcraft, Catullus in nuptias Juliae and
Manlii, carm. 60. Nec diu taceat procax Fescennina locutio.
whereas he should have translated, lascivious verses. Which appears by that
which follows in the passage he alleges, where unchaste and profane verses
are opposed to Sacred Songs and Angelical praises. But passing by many the like
observations, I will but represent the entry of that so long expected Book,
that by the Frontispiece the Reader may judge of the body of the building.

M. du Plessis to show that the Roman Church by the doctrine of
Transubstantiation makes the Lords Supper to be no more a Sacrament, says that
every Sacrament is a sign, which is different from the thing signified. But by
the Transubstantiation the sign, which is the bread, is abolisht, and becomes
the thing signified. Upon that M. du Perron triumphs, and in big words which
fill three pages, he rateth M. du Plessis like a poor Scholar. Where is (says
he) the Scholar that knows not that the definition of the gender, is far more
lean, scant and hungry then that of the kind? etc. Do not the rudiments of
Logic teach us, that from the gender to the kind, one may argue affirmatively,
not negatively? But I maintain the contrary, that the rudiments of Logic teach
us, that from the gender to the kind the argument is always made negatively,
never affirmatively. One may and ought to argue thus, Non est animal, ergo non
est homo. Not as the Cardinal will have it, Est animal, ergo est homo.
According to the Cardinals Logic one might Argue thus, A frog is an animal,
Ergo, it is a man. Is not that want of natural Logic? Should not a Schoolboy
be snibbed over the fingers with the Ferule that should argue so? Where is now
that deep learning of our Prelate? Should he have puffed up a discourse of
three pages with a high flown style to set up such a gross absurdity? M. du
Plessis reasoned thus: Every Sacrament is a sign; The Lords Supper is a
Sacrament: Ergo, the Lords Supper is a sign; Whence he inferred very well that
the Roman Church abolishing the sign by the transubstantiation, abolished the
Sacrament. There being no fault to be found in that form of Argument: yet M. du
Perron swells the sayls of his eloquence, and shows by many examples, that
the definition of the gender contains not all the perfections of the kinds:
making the world believe that M. du Plessis affirmed, that the definition of
the Sacrament (which is the gender) expresses the whole nature of the
Eucharist, which is a kind of Sacrament. A thing which M. du Plessis neither
said nor thought. So that M. du Perron adds calumny to ignorance.

Twelfth Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. OF The Communion under one kind.
And of the Power which Cardinal Du Perron ascribes unto the Church, that is to
the Pope, to dispense from the Commandment of Christ.
THE last Question which Cardinal du Perron treats in his Book against the King
of Great Britain, is the question about the interdiction of the Chalice.

He begins by a remonstrance to his Majesty, saying, His Majesty might have
dispensed himself (if it had pleased him) to touch that objection, which brings
no obstacle to the reunion of the Church: since Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 11.
the Council of Trent refers to the Pope that shall sit when some Nation or
Kingdom shall demand the use of the Chalice for them that do not celebrate
(that is for Lay People and inferior Clerks) to provide for that.

To which I answer, That the Council indeed refers to the Popes power to
judge of that business, whether it may be expedient to grant the use of the
Chalice to some Nation or Kingdom that should require it, but gives not any
hope of it. For the same Council in the 2x. Session, in the 1. and 2. chap.
declares, Cap. 1. Sancta Synodus declarat and docet nullo divino praecepto
laicos et Clericos non conficientes obligari ad Eucharistiae Sacramentum sub
utraque specie sumendum.
That although Christ has constituted and given the Eucharist under the two
kinds, yet the Laity and the Clerks that celebrate not, are not thereby obliged
to receive the two kinds.

And in the 2. chap. it is declared Cap. 2. Major Ecclesia progressu temporis
latissime jam mutata illa consuetudine gravibus and justis de causis adducta
hanc consuetudinem sub altera specie communicandi approbavit, et pro lege
habendam decrevit.
that the custom of communicating under one kind was approved for just and
great causes, and must be held for a Law. Besides, the experience of so many
years since, that Council has made it known, that in vain any change in that
point is hoped for from the Pope. And it is a very small comfort to those among
the French that desire that the communion of the Chalice be restored unto them,
that this Council gives them hope that some kingdom may one day require that
privilege, and that the Pope then shall consider whether the request may be
granted. For the Council refers not the judgment of that point to the Pope,
but in case that a Nation or a whole Kingdom demand the restoring of the
Chalice, leaving it to the Popes discretion to judge whether it shall be
expedient to grant the use of the Cup, not to Christians in general, but only
to some people or kingdom, that should be urgent for it: for as for the general
of the Christians, they give no hope at all of that restitution. As indeed, if
any of the people in our days asked for the privilege of participating the
cup, he should become suspect of Heresy, as one that would pick a quarrel, and
control the Laws of the Church.

But in that obscure hope given by the Council there is a lurking impiety. For
if the Pope had given to some man a permission to have the use of the cup (as
it was given to the Bohemians in the Council of Basil) it would be an impious
permission; for thereby he should permit the man to obey Gods commandment, and
grant him out of grace and special privilege leave to do that which God has
commanded, as if God could not be obeyed without the Popes leave. So that if
God get some servants, he shall be obliged for it to his Holiness, which might
by an express prohibition hinder him from being obeyed, declaring (as that
Council does) that Christ's institution is not binding, and that Christians are
not obliged to subject themselves to it.

The Cardinal goes on, and says in sum that participating the two kinds
serves indeed for the integrity of the signification, which is more express
and entire when the two kinds are received, btcause (says he) every one of
them that take the body and blood of Christ under the two kinds, is more
expressly and particularly admonisht that his body was divided from the blood in
the sufferings of the Cross. But he says, that this serves not for the
integrity of the Communion; because whole Christ is received as well with one
kind as with two.

The Reader is desired to observe this with care; for this is a great
concession, that in the Roman Church the signification of the Eucharist is
diminisht, and is not in its integrity. For when a Christian takes the Cup, it
represents to him, and assures him that the blood of Christ was shed for him.
And the receiving of the two kinds, represents and signifies to us, that in
Christ dead for us our souls find a most entire food. Since then the word
Sacrament is as much as a Sacred sign, when the signification of the Sacrament
is diminisht, the Sacrament also is diminisht, and becomes less a Sacrament,
since it is less signifying. For the Sacrament as a Sacrament is signifying,
and was instituted by Christ to be the remembrance or commemoration of him. So
by the Cardinals confession the Sacrament is mutilated, and the integrity of
the same diminisht in that very thing for which Christ did institute it. And
these words of Cardinal du Perron ought to be graven in brass for a memorial to
posterity Page 1108.
that Christ's institution that we should take the Sacrament distinctly under
the two kinds, belongs to the integrity of the signification. A Prelate so
famous freely acknowledges that Christ has instituted that we should take the
Sacrament distinctly under the two kinds. What can we ask more? For who can
dispense us from the command of the Son of God? Why shall not the command of
Christ remain firm about the integrity of the signification as well as about
the integrity of the Communion, seeing that the integrity of the signification
serves for the integrity of the Spiritual communion by faith, which is the
only saving communion? For the instruction of the understanding serves to
strengthen the faith by which Christ is apprehended unto salvation.

Here then the Cardinal puts two commandments of Christ, the one concerning the
signification, the other concerning the Communion; and says, that the first
commandment injoyneth all Christians to communicate under the two kinds, but
that the second which concerns the Communion, obliges not all Christians to
take the two kinds. Wherefore he says, that of those two precepts of Christ
the one is dispensable, the other indispensable; And that unto the Church to
which the dispensation of the mysteries of Christ does belong, it belongs also
to judge which mysteries of Christ are dispensable. Upon which I say first,
that it is a fault against common sense to find in these words, Drink ye all of
this, two commandments, seeing that it is but one single commandment; one and
the same commandment may serve for many ends. If this precept, Thou shall not
kill, serves to preserve the life of our neighbor, and to maintain humane
society, and to honor the Image of God shining in our neighbors, it follows
not that therefore they are three precepts.

But that doctrine which gives unto the Church (that is, to the Pope) the
power of dispensing with Christ's commandments, is the highest degree of impiety
and of the spirit of pride, which spits against heaven, and attempts to pull
Christ down from his Throne. Whosoever has lawful power and authority to
dispense the French from the Kings command, is greater then the King. He that
can say unto Christians, Christ has commanded you that, but I dispense you
from it, and make a contrary Law, must be greater and of more authority then
Christ.

Is not that Church which the Cardinal speaks of, subject to Christ's
commandment? And if she be subject to him, does it belong to subjects to
dispense themselves, or others, from Gods commandments? What obedience can a
King hope from his Subjects, if the Subjects have power to tell him, Thou have
indeed made us such a commandment, but we are judges of the sense, and of the
strength of thy commandments? It belongs to us to judge which of thy
commandments are dispensable.

But yet what is that Church but the Pope alone, to whom the Council refers
that power, to constitute what he shall think good concerning that point? And
why shall the Roman Church have the power alone of dispensing with Gods
commandments, rather then the Greek and the Syrian, more ancient then the
Roman? These Churches as well as the Ethiopian hold themselves tied by the
Commandment of Christ, and give the Communion unto the people under the two
kinds. When we ask where, and when, and upon what terms, God gave to the Roman
Church the power of dispensing with Gods Commandment, and to judge what
Commandments of God are dispensable; they bring nothing to the purpose. Joh. 14.
They allege some text where Christ promises to his Apostles, to lead them
into all truth; and where it is said to Peter, Luke 22.
I have prayed that thy faith fail not: But there it is not spoken of the Pope,
nor of the Roman Church, nor of dispensing from Gods Commandments.

Hence the Cardinal passes to the Fathers. Page 1109.
He says that the primitive Church admitted in many cases the Communion under
one of the two kinds, namely in them that carried the Eucharist upon the Sea;
And in them that kept it at home, or sent it into a foreign Land; a custom
condemned by the Council of Laodicea 14. chapter (...).
He adds sick persons: But this Prelate does according to his custom, which
is never to answer directly, and to baulk the question, spending words upon
that which is not in dispute. When we dispute of this point by the Fathers, the
question is, whether in the Church, or in the Assembly of Christians, the
Eucharist was celebrated without administering the Cup to the Christians that
are present; Or if ever the Cup was denied to any of the people that asked it,
and presented himself to receive it; Or if in the assembly of Christians met
together to celebrate the Eucharist, the Priest drunk alone, the people looking
on without participating the Cup; Of that the Cardinal brings no example of
Antiquity, but some extraordinary actions, made without the celebration of the
Eucharist in the Church, which actions the Roman Church has rejected, and
approves them not; And yet after all, that which he says is false. For why
could they not participate the two kinds in a Ship? Why could not those men and
women that carried the Sacrament from the Church to their home, bring wine to
their houses as well as bread? The passage of Gregorius Nazianzenus alleged
before, shows it. If she had (says he) laid up somewhere as a treasure some
part of the venerable body and blood, she mingled it with her tears.

That it was the ancient custom everywhere, and without exception to receive
the people to the participation of the Cup, it is undeniable. The Apostle, 1
Cor. 1.28. speaking to the people of Corinth, Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat this bread, and drink this cup. And 1 Cor. 10.17. the version of
the Roman Church has these words, Omnes qui de uno pane et uno calice
participamus.
We all participate the same bread, and the same cup. Ignatius in the Epistle
to the Philadelphians. (...).
The same bread was broken to all, and the same cup was distributed to all.
Justin Martyr in his second Apologetick; (...).
They that among us are called Deacons, distribute to every one that is present
the bread, over which thanks were given, and the wine with water. Cyprian in
the 63. Epistle chideth those, Qui in calice Domini sanctificando and plebi
ministrando, who in consecrating the cup, and administering it unto the people,
do not that which Christ did. Cum frangitur hostia, cum sanguis de calice in
ora fidelium infunditur.
The Canon Cum frangitur in the 2. Distinction of the Consecration; When the
host is broken, when the blood is poured out of the cup into the mouth of the
faithful, etc. Ibi vos estis in mensa, et in calice nobiscum vos estis; simul
enim sumimus; simul bibimus, quia simul vivimus.
And in the Canon Quia passus, Austin speaks thus unto the people, You are at
the table, and are with us in the cup; for we take together, we drink together,
because we live together. Paschas. lib. de corpore Christi, cap. 15. Tam
Ministri quam alii credentes.
Paschasinus, Drink ye all of this, that is, both the Ministers and other
believers. Many testimonies of Fathers to this purpose might be heaped up. I
will add but one of Pope Gelasius, who writ in the year 496. of Christ. Did.
2. de Consecr. Can. Comperimus. Comperimus quod quidam sumpta tantummodo
corporis sacri portione a calice sacrati cruoris abstineant. Qui procul dubio
(quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur astringi) aut integra Sacramenta
percipiant, aut integris arceantur. Quia divisio unius ejusdem que mysterii
sine grandi sacrilegio non potest provenire.
We have been informed that some having taken some part only of the sacred
body, abstain from the cup of the consecrated blood. Who without doubt (because
they are said to be retained by some superstition) must either receive the
whole Sacraments, or be altogether excluded from them, because the division of
the same mystery cannot happen without a great sacrilege. Baron. An. 496.
Sect. 20. 21. At revera nullo ibi de sacerdote sacrificante mentio habetur, ut
plane quod generaliter esse dictum apparet, ad sacerdotes minime restringi
debere satis intelligi-possit. Rejicimus igitur frigidam ejus modi solutionem,
Cardinal Baronius maintains with us that this Ordinance of Pope Gelasius is
made as well for the people as for the Clergy, and says that by this mark the
Manicheans were discerned from the Orthodox: For the Manicheans abstained from
wine; they fell into the same abuse as the Roman Church of these days, though
upon another ground. And truly the word arceantur, which signifies, let them
be put by, shows that Gelasius speaks of the people that present themselves
to the Communion. Had that Ordinance of Gelasius been made only for the
Priests, it had been useless: For Antiquity speaks not that ever any Priest
made a scruple of drinking the cup. Let our Adversaries shift as much as they
can, yet this remains that giving the bread without the cup, is a sacrilege
and a division of the Sacrament, and that by the judgment of one of the most
famous Popes. Aquinas in the seventh Lesson upon Ioh. 6. makes here a free
Confession; According to the custom of the ancient Church, as all communicated
to the body, so all did communicate to the blood, which is kept still in some
Churches.

Cardinal du Perron himself pleads here guilty; for he says, that the first
place where this custom already past into use by the Catholic Church (meaning
the Roman) was turned into a Law, was the Council of Constance. Now that
Council sat in the year of Chtist, 1414. So well nigh 1400. years past before
the Roman Church had that Law. Of that Council, the impiety goes so far as to
declare those Heretics that would follow the example of Christ, and confessing
that Christ has instituted that the faithful should receive the Communion in
the two kinds, and that the ancient Church did so practice it, yet constituteth
that the contrary be held for a Law, and that all that contradict it be punished
by the secular arm. These are the words of the Council. Conc. Constable. Sess. 13.
Quod licet Christus post coenam instituerit et suis discipulis administraverit
sub utraque specie panis et vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum, etc. Licet in
primitiva Ecclesia hoc Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie,
etc.
That although Christ instituted and administered this venerable Sacrament under
the two kinds unto his Disciples, etc. And although in the Primitive Church
this Sacrament was received by the faithful people in both the kinds, etc. Yet
the Council says, that in some parts of the world some persons rashly presume
that the Christian people ought to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist in
the two kinds. And constituteth that Consuetudo rationabiliter introd^cta
habenda est pro lege, Pertinaciter asserentes oppositum, tanquam haeretici
arcendi sunt et graviter puniendi, etc. invocato etiam auxilio brachii
secula^is.
the custom of communicating in one kind, brought in with good reason be held
for a Law, and that such as maintain the contrary be expelled as heretics, and
grievously punished, etc. so far as to call the help of the secular arm. Whether
these Fathers were led by the Spirit of God, or by the spirit of blasphemy, and
whether they put not Christ in the rank of Heretics, that deserve to be
punished, let the Reader judge.

Our difference then with the Romanists, is not, whether Christ has instituted
that Christians, both Pastors and People, receive the communion in the two
kinds, nor whether the ancient Church did so practice it; for our adversaries
confess both; But whether the Roman Church might, or ought to have changed
Christ's institution; or (to speak with the Cardinal) whether that commandment
of Christ be dispensable, and whether the Roman Church can dispense with it,
and exempt the Christian people from it. The Cardinal goes about to prove that
the Church has that power, and proves it by examples.

He says that Christ instituted the holy Eucharist after Supper. That Baptism
in the beginning was done by immersion and dipping, not by aspersion, and
sprinkling. Whence he gathers that if in those points the Church had the
authority to alter Christ's institution; the same Church might also alter his
commandment concerning the cup, by not giving it to the people.

I answer, that we have the Lords commandment, both clear and express, which
says, Drink ye all of it, and that of the Apostle, who speaking to the people
of Corinth, will have them to examine themselves, and so to eat that bread and
drink that cup. But we have no command for celebrating the Communion after
Supper. Christ celebrated the Eucharist after Supper upon occasion, because he
did substitute it unto the Passover, which at the same time he ate for the
last time. But for the hour of that celebration he gave no command: Had he
given any, we should have been bound to obey it, and to tie our selves to the
hour prescribed by him, as Austin says, Epist. 118. Nam si hoc ille monuisset
ut post cibos alios semper acciperetur, credo quod eum nemo variasset.
Had Christ given us that order that the Sacrament should be always taken after
other meats, I believe that no man would have altered that custom. Herein then
the Church has not changed Christ's institution, because this is not of his
institution: By the same reason one might say, that the Church celebrating the
holy Communion in a Temple, changed the Lords institution; for he instituted
this holy Sacrament in an upper room.

It is certain that when the Apostle Paul, Act. 20. celebrated the holy
communion in an upper room Act. 20.9. (...).
on the third loft: he did it not to follow Christ's institution, nor to conform
himself to his example, but because such was the convenience of the place. The
like we may say of the hour; since there is no hour appointed by Christ's
institution for this holy celebration; no wonder that the Church used the
Liberty of choosing such an hour as was judged most convenient.

Neither is either the hour or the place part of the Sacrament, or essential to
it. But the participation of the cup is part, yea the just half of the
Sacrament, and of the essence of the same. And by consequence one cannot
deprive the people of the cup, without depriving them of the half of the
Sacrament, and without diminishing the signification thereof, as the Cardinal
himself acknowledges.

The same we say of Baptism. No command can be ^ound for dipping the whole
bodies of baptized persons ^o more then for h^ ^prinkling them. In vain it is
alleged that baptizing signifies dipping, not b^ ^prinkling; for that word
signifies washing also, as Mark 7.4. it is spoken o^ the washing of pots there
is in the Greek, the baptizing of pots. And in the sa^e place it is said, that
the (...).
Pharisees when they come from the Market, e^^^ot, (...), except they wash; for
it is not credible that every time that a Pharisee had past through the Market,
or through the crowd of the people, he thought himself obliged to dip himself
whole in water before he ate. For this cause baptism is also called washing,
(...).
Tit. 2.5. And Scripture affords us examples of persons baptized without
dipping. For it is more like that the Eunuch of Queen Candace, Act. 8. was
baptized by Philip in a brook where he could not be dipped; for in the road where
he was traveling, which was from Jerusalem to Gaza, there is no River. The
same may be said of St. Paul's baptism, who was baptized by Ananias. It is not
credible that Ananias brought him out of the house to the River, or had
prepared a Bath to baptize him. In the ancient Church many would receive
Baptism Clin^ci.
on their deathbed; among others, the Emperor Constantine, who being in that
case, would not have suffered himself to be dipped whole in water. And hardly can
we believe that in cold Countries, as Pontus and Bulgaria, they ever dipped whole
children in the Winter time to baptize them.

Observe also, that the Apostle Peter calls the purgation of our sins in
Christ's blood 1 Pet. 1.2. (...).
an aspersion, alluding to the custom of making an aspersion of water in
baptism.

Here the Cardinal must not be pardoned a gross fault: 1. Book in the 2.
Instance. p. 961
He says, that St. Paul, Tit. 3. calls Baptism the Bath, or Laver of
regeneration: This Prelate confounds (...) with (...). The first signifies
washing, the other, a laver, or bathing tub: The first signifies in Latin,
Lotio seu ablutio, the other labrum, balneum: St. Paul calls Baptism a washing,
not a laver, as the Cardinal thinks.

But although the Church in the Apostles time had made some alteration in the
institution made by Christ (which yet we do not grant at all) it would not
follow that the Pope and the Roman Church of this time have the like authority.
If the ancient Church in the first Ages tied her self as much as she could to
the dipping of the whole person, after the example of John the Baptist, who
dipped in Jordan those whom he baptized; yet Christ gave no command that bind the
Christians to that custom: Which if he had done, that command ought to be kept
inviolably. But as for the communion under the two kinds, both for the Pastors
and the people, the Cardinal acknowledges that Christ has commanded it; but
he maintains that the Church, that is the Pope, can dispense from that command.

To the foresaid reasons the Cardinal adds some inconveniences and
difficulties, which moved the Roman Church to make that alteration. Namely,
that they feared that the cup should spill: Then the length and difficulty to
give the communion to a great multitude in one only cup. And the loathing of
drinking after so many persons, especially in the time of contagion. And the
difficulty of getting wine in some countries, as at Calecut and Goa, where a
Hogs-head of wine costs eight hundred or a thousand crowns. Others add that the
cup was taken from the people, because men dipped the hair of their upper lip in
the cup; whence it happened that Christ remained whole, hanging on every hairs
end of so many beards. Others that this was done to honor the Clergy, and give
them a privilege above the people.

To all these I answer, that when Christ and his apostles commanded that the
people should drink the cup, they knew all these inconveniences, and had at the
least as much foresight as the Roman Church.

If it be a^ evil to let the wine fall, it is a worse evil to fall from the
obedience due unto Christ's ^^mmand. In the time of the four first Councils,
when the Christian Church was infin^^^ly populous in great Cities, as Rome,
Alexandria, Antioch, and Constantinople, the ^^ltitude of the people did not
hinder them from participating the cup. They di^ ^ot hold it necessary that
there should be but one cup, it being sufficient that the pe^^le should drink
of the same wine; for it is not the cup that we participate, but t^^t which is
within.

We read, Act. 6. that Deacons ^ere created to serve the Tables; if there were
many tables, there were many cups. ^^r the Agapes were made at the same Tables,
upon which the holy Communion was a^^inistred.

As for the loathing, and the contagion, experience shows the contrary. For
in our Churches, where many thousands of persons participate the cup together,
we never saw or heard of any inconvenience, no more then in the ancient Church.

As for Countries where there is no wine, it were better to follow the example
of the Churches of Ethiopia, who make use of another drink used in that
Country, then to want the cup in the Lords Supper. As in Countries where there
is no bread, we doubt not but that the Church might use that which is used for
bread. For the essence of the Sacrament consists in the relation between the
signs and the thing signified. Now the end and essence of the Sacrament is to
assure us, that the body and blood of Christ are the whole food of our souls,
To signify that the most common food is the most proper.

As for dipping so many beards in the blood of Christ, if there be profanation
in it, we must say, that the Church of the Apostles, and that of the first ages
was profane; for the people drunk in the cup without shaving their upper lip.
They were not so stupid as to think that when the beard was dipped in the cup,
the body of Christ remained hanging at every hair. The opinion of the
Transubstantiation is employed to breed that vain fear, and one error serves
to propagate another. To which I add that it were better to be without a beard
on the upper-lip, then to violate Christ's institution.

But these are not the true reasons that moved the Pope and his Prelates to
make that alteration, but the pride of the Clergy to exalt themselves above the
people. This appears in that the Pope admits Kings to the Chalice, and yet
obliges them not to shave their upper lip. For by that means Priests are
become Kings fellows. As also the Pope to exalt himself above the Clergy, and
above Kings, Lib. 2. Sacram. Cerem. cap. 14. Episcopus Cardinalis porrigit
Papae calamum quem Papa ponit in calice, in manibus Diaconi existente, et
sanguinis partem sugit.
has reserved to himself that custom, which in old time was practiced in
diverse places, to drink out of a covered Chalice, held by a Cardinal Bishop on
his knees, sucking part of the drink with a small reed or pipe.

Here then, as in all things, we must return to Christ's commandment, who
administering the cup said, Drink ye all of this, and, Do this in remembrance of
me, commanding his Disciples to do to others, what he had done unto them, and
by consequent to administer the two kinds unto others. It is observable, that
Christ said not, Eat ye all of this, but speaks more expressly of the cup, as
foreseeing the abuse that should follow. And if these words, Drink ye all of
this, are not a command, to the obedience whereof the people be obliged; the
same must be said of these words, Take eat. So there will be nothing in the
institution of this Sacrament that obliges the people to take either the bread
or the cup.

Or if these words, Drink ye all of this, are addressed only unto Pastors,
because they to whom Christ spoke were Pastors and Apostles, I will say the
same of these words, Take eat; for both the Commandments are made to the same
persons: yet it is certain, that the Disciples hearing the words of the Lord,
and receiving the Sacrament from his hand, did not keep the rank of Pastors,
but of sheep, and were to be considered as Disciples.

That which the Cardinal says, is most false, that Christ did not say, Eat ye
all of this; because he gave to each of his Disciples the bread separate and
divided. For they being thirteen persons at the table, his arms could not reach
to the other end of the table, and it was necessary that the dish where the
bread was, should be given from hand to hand.

But we have Paul's express words, 1 Cor. 11.
who contents not himself to say to the people of Corinth, As often you eat
this bread, and drink this cup; but adds a pregnant injunction, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat this bread, and drink this cup. As the
examining of ones self before receiving the Sacrament, so the receiving of the
cup is equally commanded to all.

Also we ask the Romanists, whether Christ's speaks of the Eucharist, when he
says, Joh. 6. Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
you have no life in you? If the Eucharist be not meant there, why do they use
that text to prove transubstantiation? If the Eucharist is meant in that Text,
why do they deprive the people of life, by denying them the cup? The Cardinal
answers, Page 1118.
that he that takes the body, drinks his blood, as for the effect, not as for
the manner; for tht blood is not severed from the body. This answer, that to
take bread is drinking, expresses either a desperate cause, or an abusive
mind. If that be true, the Priest drinks twice in the Mass, once when he takes
the Host, another time when he takes the cup: And to speak with this Prelate,
once as for the manner, twice as for the effect. Besides drinking is the manner
of participating: Christ then saying, Except ye drink, prescribes to us the
manner of participating; and thus the Priest transgresses the commandment of
Christ, who by saying, Drink, instituted the manner of the Sacramental
Communion.

The Cardinal uses another shift, saying that when Christ said, Except you eat
my flesh, and drink my blood, he meant, Except you eat my flesh, Or drink my
blood: But that being an alteration of Christ's words, and a depravation of
Scripture, deserves no answer. By the same reason one might abstain from the
bread, and participate the cup only.

It is to be noted, that 1 Cor. 10.17. the Vulgar version, the only approved
and authorized by the Council of Trent, has these words, We all are partakers
of the same bread, and of the same cup; which words should be false, if the
people of Corinth had not participated the cup.

Thirteenth Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK OF Private Masses.
CHAP. I. Of Private Masses; And the shameful Traffic of the same.
CArdinal Du Perron going about to defend private Masses, made a full point at
the first line; God having cut off the thread of his labor, and that of his
life. Having said in the Chapter of the Communion in the two kinds that the
Roman Church can dispense of Christ's Commandments, and that it belongs to her
to judge what commandments of God are dispensable: God suffered him not to go
further, or to enter upon another Controversy, where it should be necessary
for him to use that abominable Maxim. This only he says, It is wrongfully
that Masses without Communicants are called private; and there he ends.

He says that after others, who maintain that all Masses are public, because
in them the Priest prays for the Church in general. By that reason a woman's
prayer that prays in her closet for the general good of the Church, is a
public prayer. We call those public actions which are done for the public
good; for one may labor in private for the good of the Commonwealth, and a
public person in a a public place can make private actions, as when a Pastor
of the Church prays alone in a corner of the Temple. Eman. Sa. Aphor. in
verbo Missa.. 43. Missa plus illis prodest pro quibus particulariter offertur.
Our adversaries themselves call those particular Masses, that are in
particular offered for some person. Now I see not why the word of private Mass
should be more odious then that of particular Mass.

But what? this dispute whether Masses without Communicants and without
assistants, sung in a corner of the Church, to the intention of some particular
person that pays for them, ought to be called public or private, is but a
contention about a word, leaving the matter untoucht. For still the question
remains, whether Masses without Communicants and without assistants, said for
a private man, ought to be approved? and whether they be conformable unto the
Word of God, and to Christ's institution? And whether that custom of the Roman
Church, that began a few ages since, (to dispatch so many small Masses in one
morning in several corners of the Church) be receivable?

When I lived in Paris I did often consider that with compassion I saw in the
place of Greve, before S. John's Church a multitude of poor Priests that get
their livelihood by those private Masses. They stand there waiting a whole
morning till some come to hire them to sing a Mass to his intention: Some one
going to travel, or having a sick horse, or fearing the frost to his vineyard,
or the death of a friend, calls for one of these Priests, and for a small hire
makes him sing a Mass, upon one of those petty Altars which are in great number
in several corners of that Church, for the success of his journey, or the
healing of his horse; And that solitary Mass is hudled up in great haste. He
for whom it is said needs not to be present or to think of it; For they hold
that the Mass is profitable for him for whom it is sung, although he be absent
or sleeping, if only he make no resistance against it. And this is the canting
of their Doctors that the Mass has efficacy ex opere operato, that is, by the
bare action, for which the attention of the person for whom the Mass is said is
not necessarily requisite. It is enough with them that he that celebrates the
Mass, has an intention to do that which the Church does, and yet it is not
necessary for him to have an actual intention, or to think of it, or to have
any attention to it when he celebrates it; but if he thought of it before, and
had an inclination to think of it, it is enough. This is that which Sophisters
call an habitual or virtual intention, which is an intention without intention,
and may be in a Priest when he is drunk or asleep. And as for him for whom the
Mass is sung, neither his attention, nor his presence is necessary; no more is
necessary for his part but that he resist not the action or intention, and set
not himself purposely to put an obstacle against it.

Covetousness and filthy lucre have brought in this abuse, For a man for whom
in particular a Mass is said, pays also in particular. And they that will
have annual Masses said for them, will also found annual rents for that use.
Never was a private Mass sung for a man that had given nothing. Were the
Eucharist celebrated nowhere but in Ecclesiastical congregations, it were a
hard matter to fetch money from so many purses at once, and to fit the general
Masses to the profit and intention of each particular man. Hence these base
Maxims maintained by our adversaries, That the Mass does most good to them for
whom it is offered in particular. Loco citato. Quod si pro multis offertur, non
tantundem singulis prodesse, acsi pro illis solis offerretur, docent Sylvester,
Navarrus, Soto, Tolet, Suarez, Scotus.
And that if it be offered for many, it does not so much good to the several
persons, as if it were offered for one alone, as the Jesuit Emanuel Sa
affirms. Tolet de Inst. Sacerd. l. 2. c. 8. Si ego jejurem pro quatuor, minus
prodest ad satisfactionem singulis quam uni prodesset si pro uno tantum
jejunassem.
And Cardinal Tolet clears that by an example; saying, that a Mass said for
many persons profits not so much to every one, as if it were applied to one
alone. As if I fast for four men, that fast avails not so much to satisfy
for every one, as if I had fasted for one only. They hold then, that a Mass
said for two souls in Purgatory, does not ease them so much, as if every one
had his several Mass. And it is thriftily done of them to speak so. For if a
Mass said for two souls eased them as much as if each of them had his own Mass,
the same might be said of three souls, and of six, and of twenty, and so on,
till it were found that one Mass does as much good as a hundred. Thus instead
of paying for a hundred Masses, the buyer would pay for one only: Whereby many
Priests should want their dinner, for want of being hired to sing a Mass in the
morning.

The same Jesuit adds, Eman. Sa loco citato. sect 44. Illud certum est
sacerdotem si uni debet unam missam, and alteri alteram, non satisfacere si
unam ^^cat pro utroque simul. Iidem Doctores qui supra.
It is certain that a Priest if he owes a Mass to one, and another Mass to
another, makes no satisfaction if he says one Mass for both together, as the
forecited Doctors affirm. The Jesuit Gregorious de Valentia says the same in
the first book of the sacrifice of the Mass in the last Chapter.

Nevertheless many Doctors say that a Priest may be twice paid for one Mass,
as the same Emanuel Sa affirms, and calls that which the Priest receives to
sing a private Mass Ibid. Duas eleemosynas pro unica Missa accipi posse ait
Soto.
an alms; Tolet. de Instr. Sac. l. 2. cap. 8. Soto tenet quod pauper potest
saltem duas pittancias recipere pro una Missa ad sustentationem.
Tolet calls it pitantia, saying that a poor Priest may receive two pittances
at least for a Mass to sustain himself. The same Cardinal says Tolet eodem
libro, cap. 6. Nisi mortui dum vixerunt ad Missas sibi celebrandas pecunias
erogarunt: Tunc enim per modum satisfactionis and justitiae conferunt.
that to them who in their lifetime have furnished money to celebrate Masses
for them, the same Masses profit by way of satisfaction and justice. This is
the rule of justice by which these Gentlemen will tie God and oblige him to
show grace to him that has paid for particular Masses; for why should the poor
man lose his money? If the same man had wanted money, and had bought no Masses,
God had not been bound to show him the same grace. From the same bank comes the
custom that Masses are sold more or less according to the ornaments and the
splendor wherewith they are d^est.

But this exceeds all impudence, and is of the same Jesuit Emanuel Sa Loco
citato. Cui datur certa summa pecuniae pro Missis a se dicendis, potest alios
pro minore pretio conducere qui adjuvent, et reliquum sibi retinere.
The Priest to whom a certain sum of money is given to say Masses, may hire
others that help him for a less price, and keep the residue of the money. Was
there ever a more sordid traffic? By this means a Priest having received ten
pence to sing a Mass, shall provide one that shall sing it for six pence, so
he shall get four pence clear. And why are private Masses used against frost,
against the murrain of cattle, and for the success of a journey, but to draw
money from all sides? Whereas Christ instituted the holy Communion for the
remission of sins, and to announce his death till he come? 1 Cor. 11. When a
Priest makes Christ in the corner of a Church for six pence or two groats; if
there be no Communicants, he sells Christ and delivers him not. Or if there
be some Communicants, he may speak as Judas, who said, What will ye give me and
I will deliver him unto you? Had it not been a goodly sight, if the Apostle
having administered the Communion to a multitude of Christians, as Act. 20. had
withdrawn himself into a corner, to sing a Lords Supper, in favor of a private
man, for a piece of money? Doubtless such a gain might have exempted him from
sowing tents to relieve his necessity.

CHAP. II. That Masses without Communicants and assistants, said to the
intention of a private man that pays for them, are repugnant unto the Word of
God.
THis strange and odious abuse seems to be brought in purposely to overthrow
the institution of the Lord Jesus, and to contradict his Word. 1. For what
likeness is there between Christ sitting at the table communicating with all
his Disciples in the two kinds, and the Priest making in the corner of a Church
a sacrifice without Communicants, without assistants, for a private man absent,
who pays for that sacrifice? Where is in that solitary Mass the least trace
of the Lords Supper which the Apostles did celebrate by the fraction and
distribution of bread among Christians! Act. 2.46. and 20.7. And of that
participation which S. Paul spoke of, 1 Cor. 10.17. saying, We are all
partakers of that one bread. 3. The same Apostle in the same place calls the
Lords Supper the Communion of the body of Christ, saying, The bread which we
eat, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? Now where is that Communion
where none Communicates? For all Communion is of necessity among many. 4.
Wherefore the Apostle declares in the same place that this Communion is among
many, and that it is a testimony of concord among the faithful, and of the
union of the Church in one body. 1 Cor. 11.16, and 17.
The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? For
we being many are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that one
bread. Nothing of all that is found in private Masses. No Communion there, no
breaking of bread among many, no testimony of the union of the Church in one
body, no participation of the same bread. 5. No wonder then that the word Coena
displeases our adversaries, because the word signifies a common supper, and by
consequent imports Communion. Why then did they not blot out of their Bibles
the word Coena? Why is the language of Scripture become odious unto them? How
comes it to pass that the word Mass which is barbarous and unknown to the
Churches of Greece, Syria, Armenia, Ethiopia, etc. has taken the place of
Coena or Supper of the Lord? For even in the Bible of the Roman Church these
are the very words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.20. where chiding the Corinthians for
the abuse which they committed in the holy Sacrament, Convenientibus ergo vobis
in unu^, jam non est dominicam coenam manducare.
When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Coena or
Supper. 6. But that which is most important, and which we must especially stand
upon, is the institution of Jesus Christ our Lord, who said when he instituted
his holy Supper, Take eat, drink ye all of this, and to oblige us to follow him
he said Do this, as also the Apostles followed that example. Can the Priest say
Take eat, when no body is present to take or to eat? Can he say Drink ye all of
this, when he drinks alone? 7. And upon that it is good to hear the excuse of
Innocent the third in the 25. chapter of the mysteries of the Mass. He makes a
question to himself how the Priest can say in solitary Masses, Orate pro me
frates, Pray for me brethren, seeing that he is alone, and without assistants:
and who are these brethren to whom the Priest is speaking? his answer is, Pie
credendum est quod Angeli Dei comites assistant orantibus, secundu^ illud
propheticum, In conspectu Angelorum psallam tibi.
We must piously believe that the Angels keep company with those that pray,
according to that sentence of the Prophets, I will sing praises unto thee in
the presence of Angels. By an ill translated text of Psalm. 138. he proves that
the Priest is never alone: but he does not untye the knot and solve the main
difficulty. For suppose that the Angels are assistant there as praying, yet
they assist not there as eating and drinking, and as Communicants. Wherefore it
is not to the Angels that the Priest speaks, saying, Accipite and manducate ex
hoc omnes, Take and eat all of this, unless they will say that the Angels
being come from far have taken exercise enough to have good appetite. They
should indeed have put out of private Masses these words that condemn them. 8.
Here to allege the peoples want of devotion for an excuse, and that the people
ought to present themselves to these Masses to Communicate, is a confession
that in these private Masses there is much abuse, which they are forced to
tolerate because they can bring no remedy to it. But if that abuse so lucrative
unto Priests had diminished their profits, they would soon have found how to
mend it. And if it be an abuse, they ought to labor to correct it by exhorting
the people to come to the great and public Masses where all the people might
Communicate, rather then to buy private Masses. An exhortation which is never
used. We have reason to believe that if the people were taught that Masses said
for many, are as profitable to every one as if every one bought his own Mass
apart, the people would choose rather to go to public Masses then to put
themselves to useless cost. It is certain that if the Mass was as good and
holy as it is full of abuse, the multitude of those to whom it should be
administered would not diminish the benefit of every particular person. For the
saving grace of God in Christ (which is or ought to be presented in it unto
all) is offered to every one to be possessed by every one whole and undivided,
and is not cut into pieces; being like the light of the Sun which every one
that has eyes enjoys full and whole, and if there were ten times more men in
the world each of them should have never the less light.

But that which I represented in the first chapter, shows evidently that the
Clergy is purposely laboring to entertain that abuse. For the Council of Trent
says not that Masses without Communicants ought to be tolerated, but
establishes them by an express command. Sess. 22. cap. 6. Nec tamen si id non
semper fiat, propterea missas illas in quibus sacerdos solus sacramentaliter
communicate, ut privatas et illicitas damnat, sed probat atque adeo commendat.
The holy Council (say these Prelates) condemns not the Masses in which the
Priest alone sacramentally communicates, but approves and recommendeth them.
And how should the solitude of the Priest in a Mass be imputed to the peoples
indevotion, seeing that the people knows not when it is done? Neither is
warning given abroad when a Priest is hired with a piece of money to sing a
Mass presently in some corner of a Church. How could the people attend private
Masses, seeing that many are sung together in one Church at the same time, so
that the most devout cannot be present at the fourth part of them. It is not
the peoples want of devotion, but the covetousness of the Priests that causes
that multitude of solitary Masses.

It is then with small reason that this excuse is alleged, that in a feast the
invited cannot be constrained to eat against their will. For in private Masses
no ghest is invited. And if there were some commandment of God to oblige the
invited to eat (as in the Lords Supper this commandment is laid upon us Take
eat, and let a man examine himself, and so let him eat this bread) and ghests
ought to be constrained to eat.

In vain do they bring some sacrifices of the Law, where the people did not
eat. It is a great abuse to take the ceremonies of the Law for rules in a point
where we have Christ's institution, and his express command, and the examples
of Christ and his Apostles. Besides, they hold that Christians communicate to
the Eucharist, not as it is a Sacrifice, but as it is a Sacrament. A Sacrament
and a Sacrifice differ as much as taking and giving. For by a Sacrifice we
offer unto God, but in Sacraments we receive of God, and God imparts his graces
unto us. Wherefore in this question about the Communion to the Sacrament, the
example should be to some purpose if it were taken from the Passover, which
was a Sacrament of Communion, that never was celebrated without many
Communicants, and to which every person of Israel, of a competent age, and not
unclean, was obliged to participate. But the example taken from Sacrifices
considered as Sacrifices, is improper.

The ancient Church in the fourth and fifth ages took no notice of such
considerations. They wanted not profane and indevout members. The writings of
Fathers are full of lamentations about that. And yet no constitution is found
in the whole antiquity that recommended the Eucharist without either
Communicants or assistants, nor any example that ever the holy Communion was
celebrated without assistants, to the intention and at the cost of some
particular person, as we will show in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. That the Ancient Church did not know private or particular Masses,
and did not celebrate the holy Sacrament without Communicants and assistants to
the intention of a particular person.
CArdinal Bellarmin in the second book of the Mass chap. 9. does acknowledge
so much, saying, Nusquam express legitur a veteribus oblatum sacrificium sine
communione alicujus vel aliquorum praeter ipsum sacerdotem.
that no express testimony is found among the ancient writers, that ever they
offered any Sacrifice without the Communion of one person or more besides the
Priest.

If sometimes by the indevotion of the people the action of the Lords Supper
was ill frequented, the Pastors did complain of it; Chrysostom above others
thunders about that, Chrysostom. hom. 3. in ep. ad Ephesians. (...), etc. (...), etc.
O custom! (says he) O presumption! In vain is the every day Sacrifice done.
In vain do we assist at the Altar, since none Communicates, etc. The Lord said
these things to us all who assist here impudently and rashly. For every man
that participates not to mysteries, is impudent and rash in that he is present.
He adds, Tell me, if any invited to the feast washes his hands, and sits,
and is disposed and ready at the table, and yet eats not, does he not wrong him
that invited him? Were it not better that such a man should not be present?
Likewise thou also art present; Thou have sung the hymn, and in that thou did
not withdraw with the unworthy, thou made profession to be of the number of
those that are worthy; how then did thou remain and did not participate at
the table? Thou say, I am unworthy of it; Thou art then unworthy also of the
Communion of prayers. Bellar. l. 2. d^ Missa c. 10. sect. Ad illud.
Upon which Bellarmin in the second book of the Mass fears not to say, that
Chrysostom speaking thus exceeded measure as in other things.

(...).
Ignatius in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, One bread was broken to all.
And we heard before Justin Martyr in the second Apologetick saying that the
Deacons distributed to every one of the assistants the bread, etc.

Hierom upon 1 Cor. 11. says that Dominica Coena omnibus debet esse communis.
the Lords Supper ought to be common unto all. Let the attentive reader compare
coena communis with Missa privata, a common supper with a private Mass.

The ancient Constitution of the Roman Church, attributed to Pope Anacletus,
which is found also under the name of Calixtus, is such; Canone Peract. 2.
Did. de Consecratione. Peracta Consecratione, omnes communicent qui noluerint
Ecclesiasticis carere liminibus. Sic enim and Apostoli statuerunt, and sancta
Romana tenet Ecclesia.
The consecration being done, let all communicate that will not be put out of
the Church dor^. For so the Apostles have constituted it, and so the holy Roman
Church observes it. Again, Canone Tribus gradibus. Tanta in altari holocausta
offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debeant.
Let as many Sacrifices be offered upon the Altar as will serve for the people.
If any thing remain, let it not be kept for the next day.

It was the custom in the ancient Church when the hour of the Communion was
come, that the Deacon cried with a loud voice, that all that did not
Communicate should go forth. And that sending away was at the first called
Missa which signified a dimission. At that voice the Penitents, the
Catechumens, and the Energumens (that is those that are vexed or possessed by
devils) went out, and none remained but the Communicants. Austin in the two
hundred and thirty seventh Sermon de tempore speaks thus, Ecce post Sermonem
missa fit Catechumenis, manebunt fideles. Behold after Sermon the Catechumens
were dismissed, but the faithful shall remain. Greg. 1. Dialog. l. 2. cap. 23.
Cum ex more Diaconus clamaret, Si quis non communicate, det locum.
And Gregory the first, when the Deacon cried according to the custom, If any
do not Communicate let him give room. Certainly if such a custom had been kept
by the Roman Church of the last ages, it would have prevented the introduction
of Masses without either Communicants or assistants; for it would have been a
laughing matter and a ridiculous absurdity to say, Go out when there was none
with the Priest; and let all that do not Communicate, go forth, when there had
been none to Communicate.

The same is confirmed by the old custom of having but one Altar in a Temple:
Eusebius in the tenth book of his history, cap. 4. describes exactly the form
both inward and outward of the Temple of Tyr and all the ornaments of the same,
and speaks of one table only enclosed with rails in the midst of the Temple. In
2 Cor. hom. 18. in moralitate, (...).
Chrysostom says, We have one Baptism only, and one table only. Basil. in Ps.
115. sub finem.
Basil says the same. Vide Franc. Alvarez. hist. cap. 3.
The Abyssine Churches have but one Altar in each Church. Of so many petty
Altars in the corners of Churches, upon which so many little Masses are huddled
up, no trace is found in all antiquity. When the Fathers speak of Tables or
Altars in the plural, that must be understood of many Churches.

The very text of the Mass is express for that, in which the Priest says, Ut
quotquot ex hac altaris participatione sumpserimus, etc.
That all we that shall take of the participation of this Altar, etc. And in
another place, Sacramenta quae sumpsimus.
The Sacraments which we have taken: And Orate pro me fratres.
Pray for me brethren. All these plural expressions ought to be razed out of
the Canon of the Mass; for in most Masses of the Roman Church they are become
ridiculous.

In the third book of Burchard. Decret. l. 3. c. 64. et Decret. Great. Did. 1.
de Consecrat. Can. Hoc quoque. Nullus Presbyterorum Missarum solemnia celebrare
praesumat nisi duobus praesentibus, sibique respondentibus, et ipse tertius
habeatur. Quia quum pluraliter ab eo dicitur Dominus vobiscum, et illud in
secretis, Orate pro me, aptissimt convenit ut et ipsius respondeatur
salutationi.
Burchards Decree there is a Canon attributed to Pope Soter, in these words,
Let no Priest presume to celebrate the solemnities of the Mass, unless there
be two persons present that answer one another, and let the Priest be the
third. Because when he says in the plural, the Lord be with you, and that
which is said in the Secrets, Pray you for me, it is very convenient that this
salutation be answered.

And chapter 43. of the Council of Mentz held in the time of Charlemagne, Nullus
Presbyter, ut nobis videtur, solus Missam cantare valet recte. Quomodo enim
dicet, Dominus vobiscum, vel Sursum corda admonebit habere, et alia mill his
similia, cum alius nemo cum eo sit?
No Priest, as it seems to us, can well sing the Mass alone; For how shall he
say, The Lord be with you, or exhort them to lift up their hearts, and many
other the like things, when there is no body with him? This was in the year
813. Whence it is evident, that Masses without either Communicants or
assistants are of very late date.

Fourteenth Controversy, OF THE SEVENTH BOOK. THE ANTIBARBAROVS, OR, Of
unknown Language, both in the Prayers of private persons, and in the public
Service. Where also the principal Clauses of the Mass are represented, which
might offend the people if they understood them. To my dear Nephew Monsieur
BOCHART, Pastor of the Church of LAEN.
Dear Nephew,
IF the Church of God receive some benefit by this labor of mine, she may
thank you for it; for in my answer to Cardinal Du Perron, having unawares
omitted his Chapter about the use of unknown language in Gods service, you have
given me advice of that defect, and exhorted me to supply it. I have followed
your counsel, and made this Treatise, which I here present unto you, beseeching
you to receive it as a testimony of my hearty love, and of the joy I receive
seeing you serve in the work of the Lord with so much praise. It is no small
consolation to me among so many desolations, to see that God is raising lights
to shine in the darkness which grows thicker every day. For since God sends
us good laborers, he shows that he will leave us yet some harvest. Having
endowed you with his fear from your infancy, and now set you apart for his
service, he will arm you with strength and courage, that you may not sink under
the burden. For you are enrolled in this sacred Militia in a time when you
shall have need of double provision of zeal and holy magnanimity. It will be a
great honor to you to be set upon the breach, and in the hottest conflict, and
to be a burning and shining lamp in the dismal night of our Age. In this great
work you shall have a blessed experience of the help that God promises to them
that love him, and hold it a great gain to lose their lives and estates for his
service. As he has given stronger roots unto trees that stand in the top of
rocks, because they are more exposed to the impetuosity of winds, he will also
proportion your strength to the measure of the combats unto which he will
expose you. Indeed the match between us and our Adversaries seems to be very
unequal, and the enterprise on our side no less hard and unlikely then if we
went about to undermine a rock with pins. But we ought to remember that we
fight Gods cause, who uses commonly weak Instruments for admirable works, that
the glory of his success may not be attributed unto man's virtue. We must also
put on this confidence, that the heavenly truth, though it were cast into the
deepest bottom of the sea, will rise and come up to the top again: And that the
Church stands faster then the world, since the world was made for the Church:
To which may be applied that which is written of the City of Jericho, that he
that founded it, laid the foundations thereof upon his first born. This same
God, who with the sound of Joshuah's trumpets made the walls of the enemy to
fall, will one day make the wall of Babylon to fall down at the sound of the
trumpets of the Gospel. And if God for the ungratefulness of this hard age
defers that excellent work unto another time, we that have sowed in earth with
little success, shall nevertheless reap a plentiful harvest in heaven. We carry
this light like Gideons soldiers, in earthen vessels, that is, in frail
bodies; the breaking whereof shall be happy and honorable, if it may serve to
make the light of the Gospel to appear. For should we that preach the cross of
Christ be exempted from it? Should not we that bear this Ark enter the first
into this Jordan, being patterns to Gods people that follows, not only in
doctrine, but also in zeal and all virtue? As for me, having almost ended my
race, and aspiring with all my soul to the rest which God has promised unto
them that fear him, I rejoice to leave after me persons endowed with a greater
measure of his graces, and especially mine own Nephew, whom I have loved with a
fatherly affection; one who treading upon the steps of a virtuous Father, whose
memory is blessed in Gods Church, will go beyond his predecessors* and shall
leave an example unto posterity. But while I remain yet in this earthly house,
you owe me the help of your prayers, as I for my part beseech God that he
strengthen you with his grace to be his faithful servant, to fight the good
fight, and to be fruitful to his glory. I rest

Your best Uncle, and very humble brother and servant, P. DU MOULIN.
At Sedan, August 6. 1629.
A TREATISE OF The use of an unknown Tongue in Prayers and Gods Service.
CHAP. I. That false Religions love obscurity; but true Religion brings her
doctrine to light, and keeps nothing hidden.
IT is a received opinion that ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. In matter
of Gods service men admire that most which they least understand, and obscurity
increases reverence. And as the world goes, it is with Religions as with
Beauties, which when they are but obscurely seen, are more desired.

Negligence and profanity contribute to that evil. For man having no natural
inclination to be instructed in Gods knowledge, is easily persuaded to put that
care of knowing God to them that profess to teach. Rather then he will take the
pains to learn, he will choose to believe without knowing, and follow without
enquiring. And that affected ignorance puts on the title of respect to the
Church and Catholic docility. If it be question for one to place his money, he
will look for good security, and men in that point are very cautious and
difficult. But in the business of their salvation they will refer themselves to
the faith of another, and blindfold themselves with a wilful ignorance.

Satan, who will take hold of men by the natural handles, makes use of that
inclination to seduce them: And it is easy for him to make men that fly from
the light, to lose their way. It was he that taught Magicians to mingle
barbarous and unintelligible words among their conjurations. It was he that
taught Pagan Priests to cover mysteries with a religious silence, and to keep
off from them the profane, which now are called the Laity. Thus the Hetrusca
disciplina.
Toscan discipline, wherein the ancient Religion of the Romans was contained,
and the Quintilian. lib. 1. Carmina Saliorum vix Sacerdotibus suis satis
intellecta, sed quae mutari vetai religio.
Saliar verses sung by the Priests of Mars, consisted of rude and barbarons
terms, not understood by the people. Epiphanius in the heresy of the Ossenians
(...).
says, that those Heretics taught their Disciples to pray in obscure words,
forbidding them to seek the interpretation of them. Austin in the 16 Chapter to
Quod vult Deus, says the same of the Heracleonites. And Clemens Alexandrinus
says Clem. 1 Strom. (...).
that men hold that prayers pronounced in a barbarous tongue are more
effectual. Hierome in the Epitaph of Lucinius Andalusian Barbaro simplices
quosque terrent sono, ut quod non intelligunt plus mirentur.
They fright simple people with a barbarous sound, so that they admire that
most which they understand least. The Mahumetans, both Turks and Persians, have
their service in the Arabic Tongue, which the people understand not. And the
Jews, whom God has delivered unto a reprobate sense, read in their Synagogues
the Law and the Prophets in Hebrew, which the most part of their people
understand very little, or not at all.

They that have the charge of conducting and teaching the people, have been
careful to foment and increase that evil: For they labor to retain the people
in ignorance, keeping to themselves the key of knowledge, as Christ says, (f)
and keeping others from entering. By this means they get themselves respected as
the only capable to understand divine things, and having alone a familiar
communication with God. By this means they hide their game, and suffer none to
look into their affairs, and get the liberty to shape Religion to their profit;
doing like thieves, that blow out the candles that they may not be seen: For
they fear lest that things that are admired afar off, become contemptible being
looked upon near hand; like painted women, that will not be seen but at a
distance. And they have learned by experience, that ignorant persons are more
easy to be ruled; that it is easy to pick a blind man's purse, and that a man
that will know the reason and origin of things, is hardly persuaded.

Hence it is that the people are dissuaded from reading Scripture, and that the
traduction of the same into vulgar tongues is hindered. Hence it is that so much
labor is taken to make Scripture suspected unto the people as a dangerous
book, the reading whereof is the cause of Heresies. Hence came Images, which
serve to amuse the eyes, while the minds are blindfolded, and to give
recreation, while instruction is withheld. Hence that great heap of Ceremonies,
which are shadows that grow when the night of ignorance draws nigh. Hence
that implicit faith, which commits the business of salvation to the faith of
another, and believes that which the Church of the Land believes, without
knowing what the Church ought to believe, serving God out of custom, following
the crowd, and going with the great stream. Hence Liturgy in a barbarous
tongue, and not understood, as if our Mother Tongue were too low and trivial
for the Divine Service. Hence the custom of praying to God without knowing
what is asked of him, as if a man were afraid to understand himself. Whence it
comes to pass, that as in the public reading of Scripture God is made
barbarous unto men, so in public prayers the Priest is barbarous unto the
assistants, and in the prayers of particular persons every one is barbarous to
himself.

Occasions and alterations of times and businesses have often contributed to
that. For the vulgar tongue of a Country being corrupted by the lapse of time,
or being suddenly changed by the mixture and inundation of strange Nations, the
Pastors and Leaders of the people were not careful to fit the public service
to the intelligence of the new inhabitants, and to the usual language. So that
the Liturgy in less then fifty years is become unintelligible unto the people.
This happened in Italy, where Latin was vulgar in the time of the Apostles, and
many Ages since; but Latin being corrupted by the inundation of the Goths,
Lombards, and Franks, and by the extinction of good letters, Bishops retained
the service in the ancient tongue, and suffered the people to lose the
intelligence of it. The like happened in Gauls and in Spain, as we shall see
hereafter.

True Religion takes a quite contrary course: It resists that natural
inclination of man to fly from instruction, and to fear to learn the will of
God, for fear of being obliged to obey it. Truth dissipateth the Kingdom of the
Prince of darkness with the light of the Gospel. For the people ought to be
clearly instructed in the doctrine of salvation, since they have as much part
in salvation as their Pastors, who shall not answer for the people in the day
of judgment. If a blind man lead another blind man, Matthew. 15.14
both shall fall into the ditch. Habakkuk teaches us, that the just shall live
by his faith, not by the faith of another. He that believes in God by
Attorney, Hab. 2.4.
deserves that another be saved for him, as another believed for him. Between
the true and the false Religion, there is the same difference as between two
Temples, the one without windows, the other receiving light on all sides. In
the one the people professes a blind obedience, in the other the people calls
for instruction. The one rejoices in the Sunshine of Gods word, the other
suppressing that spiritual light, sets up candles at noon. Act. 12.
As the light that smote Peter's side when he slept in prison, made the chains
to fall from his hands, and opened him the prison; so the light of true
doctrine breaks the bonds of superstition, and sets a man at liberty; as Christ
teaches us, Joh. 8. You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free. Wherefore God was saying, Isa. 5.13. Therefore my people are gone into
captivity because they have no knowledge. And Christ, Matthew. 22.29. says, Ye
do err, not knowing the Scriptures. Joh. 5.30.
Wherefore he commanded the Jews to search the Scriptures; A command which the
Pastors of the Roman Church never recommend to their people. And God himself by
his Prophet Jeremy, 31. chap. ver. 34. promises a happy time when they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know
the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest.
God rejects a zeal without knowledge, Romans 10.2. And the apostle prays,
Phil. 1.9.
that the love of the Philippians may abound in knowledge, and in all
judgment. For this is the condemnation of the world (says the Lord Jesus)
that light is come into the world, Ioh. 3.19.
but men have loved darkness better then light. God indeed will have us to be
simple, but he will have us also to be prudent. He forbids a curious search of
things which he has hidden from us. But hence it follows not that we must be
ignorant of things necessary and manifested by himself in his word.

For these reasons we have removed Images out of our Churches, and in the place
of Images that speak not, we have put the holy Scriptures in which God speaks
to us. These Images are fallen before the doctrine of the Gospel, as Dagon
before the Ark of the Covenant. And we have translated Scripture into our
vulgar tongue, and bestowed intelligible words upon Gods service. For since we
teach no other doctrine, but that which is contained in the holy Scriptures, we
are not ashamed of our Religion, and desire that our doctrine be known unto all
and examined by Scripture, having learned of holy Scripture that faith
consists in knowledge, Ioh. 10.18. Ioh. 17.8. Romans 10.17.
That Christ will have us to know before we believe, and that faith is of
hearing the word of God. Whence it follows that we must hear the word of God,
and be instructed in it, before we can have faith. We reject the counsel of our
Adversaries who will have us to believe brfore we choose the way of salvation,
whereas we ought to know that we may choose well. Can there be any stronger
abuse then to make the faith of Christians to consist in ignorance, as Cardinal
Bellarmine Bell. l. 1. de Iustificatione, c. 7. Sect. Iudicium. Fides
distinguitur contra scientiam, and melius per ignorantiam quam per notitiam
definitur.
does, who says, that faith is distinguished (not from, but) against Science,
and is better defined by ignorance then by knowledge? Wherefore also Cardinal
Du Perron holds 6. Book, 1. chapter page 1089 1 Cor. 1.5.
that the greater the ignorance is, the greater is the merit of faith, saying,
that when one understands not the public service, because the Priest speaks in
an unknown language, that defect is recompensed by the merit of the endeavor
and greater exercise of faith; a new kind of merit to study to know nothing! a
strange endeavor of faith consisting in negligence! if we may call that faith
which consists in having no faith, since faith proceeds from the hearing of
Gods word; for it is not hearing Gods word to hear a sound, and not to
understand it. By the Cardinals doctrine the Apostle was destitute of reason
when he gave God thanks because the Corinthians were enriched in all knowledge:
And his wish that the Philippians might abound in knowledge and all judgment,
was an inofficious wish, because by that knowledge the effect of their faith
relented, and their merit was diminished. Upon that we have an excellent
passage of Chrysostom, Hom. 61. upon John: There, having with many words
upbraided the people with their ignorance and incapacity to defend Gods cause,
and to give reason of their faith; and having represented the Apostles command,
Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; he makes
this question (...).
What do these men more idle then droans answer to that? They say that the soul
that is simple is blessed, and that the man that walks in simplicty walks
in faith. For this is the cause of all evils, that among the people there are
very few that can allege at need testimonies of Scripture. The complaint of
that good Doctor would be ridiculous in our days. For the people would answer
him, How could we allege Scripture which we are forbidden to read? No approved
translation of it is extant in vulgar tongues. It is now a mark of Heresy to
be a careful reader of Scripture, and to allege it.

CHAP. II. Two differences between us and the Roman Church about unknown
Language.
ABout unknown Language when we speak to God, and when God speaks to us, we
have two sorts of differences with the Roman Church; the one about the prayers
of particular persons, the other about public service. For in the Roman Church
the people is used to pray without understanding what they say, and to speak
unto God and the Saints in a Language unknown to them that pray, as if a man
was suspect unto himself, and afraid to understand his own prayer, esteeming
that Latin has something more holy; that barbarous words have more virtue;
and that a prayer in French or English is less acceptable to God. The same
abuse crept into the public service; for it is performed in Latin, which the
common people of France, Germany and Spain understand not. Wherefore the common
people that say, Let us go hear a Mass, ought rather to say, Let us go see the
Mass; for they go to it as to a spectacle, not as to an instruction. And as if
it were not a sufficient abuse of the peoples devotion that the Mass is said in
Latin, part of it is said with a low voice, and with a deep silence, the rest
is delivered in a confused tone, and in a shaking inarticulate voice. Of which
the Doctors give this reason, Durand. Rat. l. 4. c. 35. Cum quidam Pastores
Canonem in agro cantarent and panem super lapidem posuissent, ad verborum
ipsorum prolationem panis in carnem conversus est; ipsi tamen divino judicio
igne coelitus miss percussi sunt, propter quod sancti Patres statuerunt verba
ista sub silentio di^i.
that some shepherds hearing Mass, learned the words of consecration, and once
pronounced them in the field over the bread of their dinner, which presently
was transubstantiated lnto flesh; Upon which they were smitten with fire from
heaven: This History is related by Durandus, and by Pope Innocent the third, in
the third Book of the Mysteries of the Mass, 1. chapter

CHAP. III. Of prayers of particular persons in a tongue unknown to the very
persons that pray.
I. PRayer is a request or supplication which man presents unto God,
suggested by the sense of our want and need. It is begging alms at Gods hands.
Hence it follows, that he that prays, must do it according to his sense,
and fit his prayers to his need. This cannot be done by him that prays, not
understanding himself. Many times it comes to pass, that he who has an
intention to ask something at Gods hands, says in his Latin prayer things
remote from his intention. Thus Gallants and Ladies that understand Latin as
well as Greek, say their seven Psalms in Latin, in which David being sick,
complains that his wounds stink and are corrupt, Ps. 38. and 143.
and that his loins are filled with a loathsome disease, or being persecuted by
Saul, complains that he is confined to a dark Cave. It is like that poor
woman pronouncing these things in Latin thinks that she asks salvation, or
the remission of her sins.

II. The Apostle James chap. 1. will have him that asks something of God, to
ask it in faith, nothing doubting. Now it is not possible to ask any thing at
Gods hands in faith, and with a full certainty, when a man does not know what
he asks of God; for Faith implies knowledge. Wherefore also the Lord Jesus
commonly joyneth knowledge with faith; As Joh. 10.38. That you may know and
believe that the Father is in me; And 17. chap. ver. 8. They have known and
believed that thou have sent me. Isa. 53.11.
Wherefore whereas St. Paul says so often, that we are justified by Faith,
Isaih says that we are justified by knowledge.

III. One cannot call a man an idiot in clearer terms then by saying to him,
You know not what you say. But all things which in the civil conversation
should be held absurd, pass for good in the Roman Religion; As if Religion were
made to overthrow common sense, and to be a receptacle of absurdities; And that
which in other cases is folly, is here devotion. God then shall do justly to
grant nothing to him that knows not what he asks, and by consequent knows
not what God grants or denies him.

IV. Here experience and necessity correct men whether they will or no. For a
man that has made his prayers in Latin all his Life, not understanding what
he said, will alter his Language in sudden afflictions, and in sharp pains.
Then he will send up fervent prayers unto God in his ordinary tongue. A man in
the last agony or tied already to the gallows, will not (unless he be
altogether brutish) say the Beati quorum, or the Pater noster in Latin.

V. Is it not a pretty Pageant, when a woman says a Latin prayer which she
understands not to St. Mary the Egyptian, or to Mary Magdalen, which never
understood Latin? And though they had learned Latin in Paradise, yet it is
nothing to understand the voice without knowing the heart. He that is prayed
to, must know the faith and the repentance of the person that prays, else he
may grant the prayer of an hypocrite. Now the word of God teaches us that God
alone knows the hearts of men, 2 Chronicles. 6.30.

VI. What an object of compassion is a woman, or a mean tradesman who prays
to St. Vrsula, or St. Margaret, or St. Katherine, or St. Christopher, or St.
Martial, or St. Longinus, or St. Lazarus, Patron of the Lepers, or the eleven
thousand Virgins, which are Saints, that never were men or women, and are put
in heaven, having never lived on earth? By this means he that prays speaks to
a Saint that is not, in a tongue which the man that prays understands not,
which is the superlative degree of absurdity. Hi non sunt vituli labiorum, sed
labia vitulorum.

VII. If to a man that prays in Latin, not knowing what he says, one had
given a Fable of Esope, persuading him that it is a Prayer to the Virgin Mary;
such a man pronouncing that Fable with fervent affection, should pray in Faith
according to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and should not lose the merit of
his Prayer.

VIII. If a Frenchman that understands not High Dutch, came to petition his
King in that Language, the King, though himself understood High Dutch, would
either think himself abused by that discourse, or would think the man to be out
of his senses.

IX. In this point Christ's example ought to be our rule; For when he prescribed
a Form of Prayer to his Disciples, he gave them one in their mother Tongue,
saying, when you pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. He gave them
not that Prayer in Welsh or in Arabic, for he would have them to know what
they asked of God in their Prayer, and what the things were of which they stood
in need.

X. That Prayer is made with such an excellent Art, that the Christian speaking
to God speaks also to himself, and that every Petition is a Precept. For as
Gods Commandments are the matter of our Prayers, and teach us what we ought to
ask of God, so the questions which God has prescribed unto us contain
Commandments. By asking of God that his Kingdom come, we oblige our selves to
labor for the advancement of that Kingdom. By asking that the name of God be
hallowed or sanctified, we are taught to sanctify it. And we are instructed by
that Prayer not to covet the bread of another; to pardon those that have
offended us, and to fly the temptations of the evil one. Which instructions
cannot be apprehended by him that understands not himself, and prays in a
Tongue which he understands not.

XI. It is true that God understands all Languages, but he requires also that
he that speaks to him know what he says, and speak as a man and a reasonable
creature, that is, with reason and understanding. God indeed understands thy
Latin, but he understands also that thou understandest not thy self. It is a
great abuse to think that we speak unto God that he may understand our
Language; for before we open our mouth he knows our thoughts; and it is he
that puts Prayer in the heart of those that fear him. Now it is the heart that
must move the lips, and suggest unto our mouth things conformable unto our
thought.

XII. Thus did the Prophets pray. David prayed in his own Tongue, and left to
the Israelites Psalms in a Language which they understood. And they reading
David's Psalms had that holy comfort, of which the Roman Church has deprived
herself; for what comfort is there in reading David's Psalms privately, or
hearing them read publicly, when they are in an unknown Language? Luke 15.21.


XIII. The Prodigal Son returning to his Father, and saying, Father, I have
sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son, understood himself. And so did the poor Publican beating his breast and
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18.13.


XIV. Thus did the ancient Christians pray. For the Apostle, Col. 3.16. had
taught them to admonish one another in Psalms and Hymns. So prayed Paul being
at Philippi, by a river side where Prayer was wont to be made. For Lydia the
Seller of Purple had not had her heart touched, neither with his prayers, Acts
16.13.
nor with his exhortations, if he had prayed or preached in a Language which
she understood not. And none hitherto has doubted that the Church of Jerusalem
in the Apostles time prayed in their vulgar tongue, when they prayed for the
deliverance of the Apostle Peter out of prison; and that Fathers praying in
their Family were understood by their children.

XV. The Apostle Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, bestows a
whole Chapter upon this matter. It is the fourteenth, where he condemns
prayers in unknown Language. If (says he) I know not the meaning of the voice,
Verse. 11.
I shall be unto him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a
Barbabarian unto me. If he forbid Christians to be Barbarians to others, how
much more to be Barbarians to themselves? And in the 15. verse, I will pray
with the Spirit, but I will pray with understanding also. But of that Text we
shall treat more ar large, when we speak of public Prayers.

XVI. Thomas Harding an English Doctor of Lovain, and a buckler of Popery in
England, in his Treatise of Prayers in a strange Tongue, in the 33 Question, is
forced by the evidence of truth, and makes a self-condemning confession,
saying, Est optabilius ut populus preces publicas vernacula sua lingua
recitaret.
It were to be wished, that the people should say public prayers in their
vulgar tongue. And in the 29 Section he acknowledges Non potest populus fatcor
dicere Amen, ad benedictionem Sacerdotis aeque ac si Latinam linguam perfect
calleret.
that the people cannot so easily say Amen to the Priests blessing as if they
understood Latin perfectly.

CHAP. IV. That in the Ancient Church every one prayed in his own Tongue.
WE have already alleged in the first Chapter, many Ancients that deride the
Superstition of those, who think that prayers in a Barbarous tongue have more
virtue.

Origin in the 1 Book against Celsus (...).
The Grecians in their prayers use Greek words, and the Romans Roman words, and
so every one prays to God according to his own Language, and praises him as
he can. Observe, that he says, not only his own opinion, but represents the
custom of the Christian Church.

Chrysostom Hom. 35. upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians (...).
If one speak only in the Persian Language, or some other strange Language, not
knowing what he says, he shall be barbarous unto himself, and not to another
only.

Hierom in the 18 Epistle to Marcella In tota Christi villa tota rusticitas
est, extra Psalmos silentium est. Quocunque te verteris, arator stivam tenens
alleluja decantat. Sudans messor Psalmis se avocat; et curvi attendens vites
falce vinitor aliquid Davidicum canit.
In the whole village of Christ there is none but country people. But for
Psalms there is a silence among them. Which way soever thou turn thy self, the
Labourer holding the plow sings Praise ye the Lord; and the Reaper sweating
caseth his labor with Psalms; and the Husbandman with his crooked pruning hook
pruning his Vine, sings something of David.

That neither is done nor can be done among the common people of the Roman
Church. As for singing Latin Psalms at their Plough or in their Shop, how can
they since they understand them not? And to sing them in French or another
common Language, is in their Church a mark of Heresy.

The same Father in the Epitaph of Paula says, that in the Funeral of Paula,
Hebraeo, Graeco, Latino, Syroque sermon Psalmi in ordine personabant; One
might hear Psalms sung in order in Hebrew, in Greek, in Latin and in Syriack;
each singing according to the tongue of his Country.

And that I may not tire the Reader about such an evident thing, Thomas himself
the Angelick Doctor, whom the Pope has Sainted, in his Comment upon 1. Cor.
14. in the fourth Lesson has these words, Constat quod plus lucratur qui orat
et intelligit quam qui tantum lingua orat, scilicet qui non intelligit quae
dicit. Nam ille qui intelligit resicitur, et quantum ad intellectum, et quantum
ad affectum; sed men's ejus qui non intelligit, est sine fructu refectionis.
It is certain, that he that prays and understands what he says, profits
more then he that prays only with his tongue, that is, he that understands
not what he says. For he that understands is fed both in his mind and
affection; but the mind of him that understands not, is without fruit of
refection. In the same Lesson he acknowledges that the ancient Church prayed
in the vulgar Tongue, but that it was altered since.

It would be a recreative conceit to imagine the Virgin Mary or her Cosen
Elizabeth, saying their hours in a Barbarous and unknown Language, turning
their beads or Rosary, according to the custom of the Roman Church, where the
people say their hours, turning the grains of consecrated beads. Good wives
will rub these beads against the feet of an Image. Chest-fulls of blessed
grains, consecrated by the Pope are brought from Rome, and they are sold
dearer, as having more virtue. Cardinal du Perron returning from Rome, brought
a cloak-bag full of such superlative blessed grains, that one of them being put
among beads got a hundred years of pardon every time it was kissed. But that
privilege was for the French only. It is ordinary to see women say their Pater
Noster in Latin going to market. The Spaniards speaking of businesses, turn the
grains of their beads gently, saying upon every grain a Latin Prayer, which is
fifty times repeated, mingling Pater's with Ave's, and saying five Ave's for
one Pater. For in our days the virtue of the Prayer consists in an iterated
number of the same words not understood; And the simple people saying the Ave,
think that they pray to the Virgin Mary, whereas they pray for her. All this
practice is defended with saying It is the Church, and It is an Apostolical
Tradition. For this word Church is become a cloak to cover a multitude of
errors.

CHAP. V. That the Public Service in a Language not understood, is contrary to
the Word of God, and to Reason.
I. THe abuse in the public Service is more pernicious then in private
devotions, because they make use of God himself to help the abuse; for they
make him Barbarous unto men, and his Word not intelligible, as if they would
frustrate God of his intention, which is to speak to us to instruct us; As if
Christ had descended from Heaven purposely to speak unto men, so that he may
not be understood. For in the Mass you have not only prayers unto God, but
Texts of Scripture in which God speaks to men.

For Prayers in an unknown Tongue they use this impertinent excuse, That God
understands all Languages, as if we spoke with our mouth that we might be
understood of God. But here where it is question of God speaking to us, that
excuse can have no place. For when God speaks unto men, he will be hearkened
unto and understood. And indeed when they bring that excuse, that God
understands all Languages, they presuppose that he to whom they speak, must
understand that which is said to him.

II. Wherefore Scripture tells us, that when God is angry with a people, he
makes their ears heavy that they may not hear, and that their heart may not
understand; as God himself says by his Prophet Isa. 6.10.

III. And it is one of Gods curses whereby he punishes men's unthankfulness,
and the contempt of his Word, when he speaks unto a people in a Language which
they understand not, as the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 14.21. where he alleged
God speaking thus by his Prophet Isaiah, With men of other tongues and other
lips will I speak unto this people, and thus they shall not hear me says the
Lord. Isa. 25.11.
Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not for them that believe not, but for them
which believe. This threatening is fulfilled in the Roman Church, in which God
punishes the hardness of men, by speaking to them in a tongue which they
understand not.

IV. In this matter this Maxim taken from the nature of man, and the intention
of the Creator, must be laid for a ground, that the tongue was given unto man
to be the interpreter of his thoughts, and the messenger of his conceits.
Whence it follows, that to use the tongue for a contrary end, and to speak that
one may not be understood, is overthrowing nature, and as far as in us lies,
frustrating the Creator of his intention, changing man's speech into an useless
sound, and a voice beating the air. And if that be true in him that speaks to
others in a Tongue which they understand not, it is yet more true in him who is
neither understood by himself nor by others.

V. From the same Maxim it follows, that when the Priest speaks Latin in the
Church, he ought to speak to be understood of some. Let our Adversaries tell us
whether he speaks to be understood by the assistants, or by himself, or by God;
for there is no fourth. He speaks not to be understood by the assistants, since
he speaks low and in a Language which the people understand not; and in private
Masses he speaks alone and without assistants. Neither does he speak to be
understood by God; for God understands us without our speaking, and before we
open our mouth. It cannot be said also, that the Priest in the Mass speaks that
he may understand himself, for he knew his own thought before he spoke. Speech
was given unto man, not to make him know his own thought, but to make it known
unto others. That man is altogether senseless, who speaks to himself that he
may understand himself.

VI. To this add, that in many places of the Mass the Priest speaks unto the
people, saying Oremus, and Orate pro me fratres, etc. and many the like
passages, in which the Priest commands the people to ask of God such and such
things, and to join their prayers with his. But the people is far from obeying
that command, not knowing what the Priest commands them. The people might say
to him with good reason, Make thy self understood to us, if thou will be obeyed.

VII. Wherefore in the Church of the Old Testament all the public Service was
done in the vulgar tongue; and the Prayers which Aaron and his Successors made
for the Hebrew people were in Hebrew, which tongue being altered since the
Captivity of Babylon, yet was understood by the people, as we will show
hereafter.

VIII. The Lord Jesus instituted and celebrated the holy Communion among his
Disciples in the vulgar tongue, 1 Cor. 11.26.
intelligible to the assistants. He commanded them that as often as they eat
this bread and drink this cup, they should announce the Lords death till he
come. To obey that command, they must so speak that they may be understood when
they announce the Lords death; for a thing is not announced when it is
propounded in an unintelligible tongue.

IX. To the same end he gave to his Apostles the gift of diverse Languages, that
in all Nations they might establish the Service of God in the Language of the
Country, and that in every tongue God might be served. So that the diversity of
Tongues, which in the building of Babel was a curse, in the building of the
Church became a blessing.

X. The Apostles followed their Masters example; For St. Paul writing to the
Corinthians, who were Grecians, gives them in their Tongue the Form of the
celebration of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.

XI. Is it like that Christ who is the light of the World, came to pour
darkness upon the World? And since God spoke to his People by Moses in an
intelligible tongue, would he now delight to propound his Word, and give his
Sacraments in a barbarous and strange Tongue?

XII. But the strongest weapon in this combat, and the sword that cuts the
knot, is the Apostles Authority, who imployeth the 14. Chap. of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians wholly almost upon this matter, even to condemn the
use of strange Languages not understood in the Church. If (says he v. 8.) the
trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? So
likewise you, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how
shall it be known what is spoken? but ye shall speak into the air. And v. 11.
If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaks a
Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me. And v. 16. When
thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing be understands not what
thou say? For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified.
Whence he concludes, v. 19. In the Church I had rather speak five words with
my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand
words in an unknown Tongue.

6. Book. 1. chapter page 109.
Cardinal Du Perron answers, that St. Paul speaks not of an unknown tongue
ordinarily used in the Church, but of infused and miraculous tongues; and that
St. Paul by tongues, signifies unknown tongues. This I readily grant, for it
increases the strength of the Text, against the ordinary service in an unknown
tongue; for these miraculous gifts of tongues were rare, and given unto some
Christians for a short time, to make Gods virtue to appear: And by consequent
the use of them in the Church brought a benefit, which the Mass in Latin
cannot yield. Yet the Apostle forbids them to use that miraculous gift in the
Church, without expounding presently, because he will have nothing said in the
Church that is not understood. How much more does he condemn strange Language
in the ordinary Service, where that extraordinary evil, which the Apostle will
avoid, becomes ordinary? The Apostle forbids not the use of an unknown tongue
in the Church, because it is miraculous, but because it is not understood, and
because he that speaks becomes barbarous unto him that hears, and because
that which is said is not understood; and because speaking thus is beating the
air, and because the people cannot say Amen to a thanksgiving which they
understand not, and because the hearers are not edified: Which are true
reasons, whether he that speaks an unknown language in the Church, has learned
that language by miracle or study. Here the question is not of the manner, how
a man has learned a tongue, but of the instruction of the people. St. Paul had
learned Hebrew without miracle, yet he would not have celebrated the Lords
Supper at Corinth, or at Rome, among the Gentiles in the Hebrew Tongue. Upon
the whole matter he gives two general rules without exception; the one, that
it is better to say five intelligible words in the Church, then ten thousand
unintelligible: The other, that it is a curse of God, when he speaks to a
people in a language which they understand not.

XIV. Others try another way to escape. They say, that St. Paul speaks not of
the ordinary service which was said in the Church, but of certain hymns and
spiritual songs. By speaking thus they will persuade us that such hymns were to
be pronounced in a tongue understood of all, but that the rest of the service
was spoken in a language not understood by the Corinthians; which they know to
be most false; for it is a thing known that in Greece the public Service was
always done in Greek, and so is done to this day. If those hymns and spiritual
songs were to be pronounced in a known tongue, much more the ordinary prayers,
and the reading of Gods word, from which the people receives more edification.

XV. But it is easy for us to prove that the Apostle in this Text speaks of
other things then hymns and spiritual songs: for when he says that strange
tongues are for a sign, not to believers, but to Infidels, and puts this among
the threatenings and curses of God, when God threatens to speak to a people in
a strange language that he may not be understood, it is clear, that he speaks
not of hymns and songs in which men speak to God, but of the word of God
directed unto men.

XVI. And when the Apostle says, that he had rather speak five intelligible
words in the Church to instruct others, then ten thousand in an unknown
language, it is evident that he speaks of all that is pronounced in the Church.

XVII. And these words, If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto
him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me,
are as true, no doubt in respect of him that reads Scripture in public, as of
him that pronounces hymns; for all those are held barbarians whose language is
not understood: Which is that which Ovid says of himself, exiled among the
Getes: Ovid. Trist. l. 5. Eleg. 10.
Barbarus hic ego sum quia non intelligor ulli,
Et rident stolidi verba Latina Getae.


XVIII. Also when the Priest pronounces prayers in the Mass, where the people
understands nere a word, may we not, and indeed ought we not to apply unto him
the sentence of the Apostle, How shall the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of
thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say?

Chrysostom expounding this Text, understands it as we do; for he personates
the Apostle speaking thus, Chrysostom. Hom. 35. in 1 Cor. (...)?
Unless I say that which may be intelligible to you, and that may be evident,
but show you only that I have the gift of tongues, you shall go away without
any benefit from that you have heard of unknown tongues. For what benefit do
you get by a voice which you understand not?

Si utique ad aedificandam Ecclesiam conveneritis, ea debent dici quae
intelligant audientes. Nam quid prodest ut quis loquatur lingua quam solus
scit, ut qui audit nihil proficiat? etc.
Ambrose in his Comment upon this place understands it so. If (says he) you
assemble your selves to edify the Church, such things must be said as the
hearers may understand. For what good does it when a man speaks a tongue
which he alone understands, that they that hear may get no good by it? And a
little after, The Apostle says, In Ecclesia velo quinque verba loqui per
legem, ut and alios aedificem, quam prolixam orationem habere in obscuro.
I choose rather to speak five words in the Church according to the Law, that I
may edify others also, then to make a long speech with obscurity.

Hierom in his Comment upon the same place Omnis sermo qui non intelligitur
barbarus judicatur.
Every discourse which is not understood, is judged barbarous. And in the same
place, Si quis incognitis aliis linguis loquatur, men's ejus non ipsi efficitur
sine fructu, sed audientis; quicquid enim dicitur ignorant.
If any speak to others in unknown tongues, his mind is made unfruitful, not
to himself, but to the hearer; for he understands nothing of that which is said.

Basil in his Asketicks is very express upon that, in the 278. answer of his
brief definitions; He asks, How is it that the Spirit of a man prays, but
his understanding is without fruit? Then he answers, (...), etc. (...).
This was said (by the Apostle) concerning those that make their prayers in a
tongue unknown unto them that hear: For, he says, If I pray in a tongue, my
spirit prays, but my understanding is fruitless: for when the words of the
prayer are unknown to the assistants, the mind of him that prays is
unfruitful, doing no good. But when the assistants understand the prayer,
which may profit them that hear it, then he that prays has this fruit, the
bettering of those that have got profit thereby. The same is in all
declarations of the word of God: for it is written, if there be some good words
for the edification of faith. This holy man understands this Text, not only of
the hymns and songs, but of any prayer, and of any reading or pronouncing of
the word of God.

Upon that, we have a Law of the Emperor Justinian, in the 123. Novel, in the
Greek Editions, in these words, Ad haec jubemus ut omnes Episcopi pariter et
Presbyteri non tacito modo sed clara voce quae a fideli populo exaudiatur,
sacram oblationem and preces in sancto baptismate adhibitas celebrent, quo
majore exinde devotione in depromendis Dei laudibus audientium animi
efferantur: Ita enim and Divus Apostolus docet prima ad Corinthios Epistola.
We command that all Bishops and Priests celebrate the holy oblation, and the
Prayers added to the holy Baptism, not with a low, but with a clear voice,
which may be understood by the faithful People, that thereby the minds of the
hearers be raised with a greater devotion to set forth the praises of the Lord
God. For thus the Apostle teaches in the first Epistle to the Corinthians.
This Imperial Law is found in the Greek exemplaries of Haloander, and is
alleged at large by Cassander a Divine of Collen, and is acknowledged by
Cardinal Bellarmine in the 2. Book of the Mass 12. chap. Wherefore the fraud
and perversity of those that have rased it out of the Latin versions of the
Novels of Justinian, is to be detested.

To this Law Bellarmine answers, that it belongs not to an Emperor to give
Laws concerning sacred things. But if that Novel is not received for a Law, at
least it is a witness of the custom of the Church in the Roman Empire, until
the time of that Emperor, who died about the year of Christ, 565.

Bellarmine says also, that this commandment was made only to the Greek
Churches: but Bellarmine could not be ignorant that the City of Rome, and the
Bishop of the same were at that time under the subjection of the Emperor
Justinian: which appears in the same Novel, in which the Bishop of Rome is
taxed by the Emperor in four thousand crowns for the entry of his charge, and
the other Patriarchs in three thousand; for in those days the Bishops of the
principal Sees paid the Annuat unto the Emperor: And the same Emperor created
two Bishops of Rome, Sylverius and Vigilius.

Truly this text of St. Paul of 1 Cor. 14. whereby he condemns the use of
strange languages in the Church, does so vex our adversaries, that some of the
most conscionable among them freely condemn their cause in this point.

Nicholas de Lyra in his Notes upon this chapter speaks thus, Hic consequenter
idem ostendit in oratione publica, quia si populus intelligat orationem sen
benedictionem Sacerdotis, melius reducitur in Deam, et devotius respondet Amen.
Here consequently the Apostle shows the same of public prayer, because if
the people understand the prayer or blessing of the Priest, he is the better
brought unto God, and answers Amen more devoutly. Again, If the Priest
blesses in Spirit, that is, not being understood by the people, what good does
that to the simple people that understand not?

Anselmus whom the Pope has Sainted, in his Exposition upon this chapter,
Bonum est quod loqucris, sed alter non aedificatur in verbis tuis quae non
intelligit. Ideo cum ad Ecclesiam propter aedificationem conveniatis, ea d^bent
in Ecclesia dici quae in^elligantur hominibus, et praestent aedificationem
audientibus.
That which thou say is good; but another is not edified by thy words which
he understands not. Wherefore since you meet in the Church for edification,
things must be said in the Church which may be understood by men, and that
bring edification to the hearers.

Thomas, the Prince of Schoolmen, in his Comment upon this first Chapter of the
Apostle, in the fourth Lesson is brought to such a perplexity about this Text,
that in the end he is brought to say, that this command of the Apostle was good
for the Primitive Church, but that now it is practiced no more, because the
faithful are better instructed: Sed quare non dantur benedictiones in vulgari,
ut intell gantur a populo et conforment se magis eis? R. Dicendum est quod hoc
forte fuit in Ecclesia primitiva, sed postquam fideles instructi sunt et sciunt
quae audiunt in communi officio, fiunt benedictiones in Latino.
Why (says he) are not the blessings given in the vulgar tongue, that the
people may understand them, and conform themselves better unto them? His answer
is, that perhaps it was done so in the Primitive Church; but after that the
faithful have been instructed, and know the things which they hear in the
ordinary Service, the blessings are done in Latin. In the fifth Lesson he
says, that in the Ancient Church it would have been a folly to pray in a
Language not understood, because then men were rude, but that now all are
instructed. Wherein he is very wide of the truth; for never was the people more
ignorant then it was in the Age of Thomas, and the two following Ages. Even in
our Age, in which Scripture is brought to the sight of the world, and humane
Letters are flourishing, scarce of a hundred men in the Roman Church ten are to
be found that know what is contained in the Mass, or that do so much as to
enquire about it. Harding in the 3. Article of his Dispute against Jewel in the
30. Section, has followed the impiety of Thomas, speaking thus, Quod autem
Divus Paulus morem precandi lingua in Ecclesia tanquam fructus et
aedificationis expertem improbare videtur, et quinque verba aut sententias
intellectas et perceptas ex quibus reliquus populus instituatur, december millibus
peregrino et incognito sermon pronuntiatis anteponere; ista omnia ad illorum
temporum conditionem referenda sunt, quae hodierno Ecclesiae statui long
dissimilis est.
As for that it seems that St. Paul condemns the custom of praying in
[unknown] Language in the Church, as being void of fruit and edification, and
refers five words or sentences understood, whereby the people be instructed,
unto ten thousand pronounced in an unknown and strange Language; all these
things must be referred to the condition of those times which is far different
from the condition of the Church in our days. Mark the impiety and
audaciousness of the man which cuts down the authority of Gods word at the
root. For if it be permitted unto men to say, This Law was in the beginning,
and so they taught in the Apostles time, but now it is altered, and the Church
being better instructed does otherwise; What remains but to alter wholly the
word of God, and to give unto the Pope the authority of abrogating Divine Laws,
and pulling God from his throne to raise the Pope above God.

Cardinal Cajetan was ashamed of that; for in his Comment upon the 14. chap. of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians he speaks, as wishing that Latin were
banished out of the public service, and that the Service were made in the
vulgar tongue. Ex hac Pauli doctrina habetur quod melius ad aedificationem
Ecclesiae est orationes publicas quae audiente populo dicuntur dici lingua
communi clericis et populo, quam dici Latin.
By this doctrine of St. Paul (says he) it is gathered, that it is better for
the edification of the Church to have the public prayers (which are said in
the hearing of the people) said in the common tongue, both to the Clergy and
the peo le, then said in Latin. This is indeed a notable confession, from a
Cardinal so eminent, and of such authority in the Roman Church.

CHAP. VI. The same is proved by the example of the Church of the Old Testament.
BY all that we said of this question it is evident, that we have the word of
God, reason, and the confession of our Adversaries on our side. To which we
must add the example of the ancient Church, both of the Old and the New
Testament, which must be our rule.

I. To take the matter from the beginning, God gave his Law in an intelligible
tongu^, and the form of prayers and blessings which God prescribed unto Aaron
to use in public, were in the vulgar tongue of Gods people. Such prayers and
blessings we read, Numb. 6.23. and in the following verses, and in the 10. chapter
ver. 35. and 36. And the form of thanksgiving in the offering of the first
fruits, Deuteronomy. 26.3. And the form of prayer after the paying of the tithes in
the third year, Deuteronomy. 26.13. In a word, all the public prayers which were done
by the Priests, or by the people, were done in a tongue understood by the
people. And David gave Psalms unto the people, which were sung in the Temple
with instruments of Music in Hebrew, the vulgar tongue of Israel.

II. Under the captivity of Babylon, the Hebrew tongue degenerated from its
purity. Yet that alteration was not so great, but that Hebrew in which Moses
and the Prophets have written was understood by the Jews. Not only because the
people exercised themselves in the reading and hearing of these books both in
private houses, and in the Synagogues every Sabbath; but also because the
corruption was not so great, but that the common people understood Hebrew
easily, because of the proximity between Hebrew and the vulgar Jewish tongue.
Wherefore also in the New Testament, the Jewish tongue is often called the
Hebrew tongue, as Matthew. 27.33. where Golgotha, which is a word of the Jewish
tongue, is said to be an Hebrew word: whereas the right Hebrews said Golgoleth
that is, the skull: And Joh. 19.19. It is said that Gahbatha, in Hebrew,
signifies Pavement, although Gabbatha be a Syrian word. That the Jews after
their return from the captivity of Babylon understood Hebrew, and the text of
the books of the Law, it appears by the 8. chapter of Nehemiah, in the 2.
verse, where it is said, that Ezra the Priest brought the Law before the
congregation of men and women, and of those that were capable to hear. And it
is added that Ezra read in the book before the men and the women, and those
that could understand, and the ears of all the people were attentive unto the
book of the Law. The vulgate version agrees to this, Et legit in libro aperte,
in platea, etc. and aures omnis populi erant arrectae ad librum. And a little
after, Et legerunt in libro legis distinct and aperte ad intelligendum, and
intellexerunt cum legeretur, that is, They read in the book of Gods law
distinctly and openly to understand it, and they understood the reading. That
is not done in the Roman Church, in which the Deacon reads the Gospel, and the
Subdeacon the Epistle, in Latin, before women, peasants, and tradesmen, who
understand nothing in it, and by consequence cannot be attentive unto it.

The exposition which the Levites added unto that reading, of which the
following Texts speak, was not to expound the terms of the Law in another
tongue, but to expound the sense, as Nicolas de Lyra acknowledges upon Nehem.
8. Esdras legit in eo aperte, id est intelligibiliter declarando ea quae
videbantur obscura.
Ezra read in the Book, openly, that is intelligibly, declaring the things
which seemed obscure.

III. Joseph. (...), cap. 12. (...), etc.
Josephus in the 12. and 16. Chapter of the Book of the Empire of reason,
describes the martyrdom of the seven brethren, and of their mother by the
cruelty of King Antiochus Epiphanes, and says that the mother exhorts her
children, the youngest especially, to dye constantly for Gods Law, and that she
spoke to them in Hebrew, that she might not be understood by Antiochus who was
a Grecian. And since she spoke so to the youngest, it appears, that then
among the Jews, women and children spoke Hebrew.

IV. Luke 4.16, etc. the Lord Jesus being in the Synagogue of Nazareth, takes
the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, and reads before the People a long Text of that
Prophet; Then he adds, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; which
words show, that the assistants had well understood the words of that Text. Is
it credible, that in the Synagogues of the Jews they read Scripture in a
language not understood, seeing that in the Scriptures God speaks to the
people that he may be understood?

V. Acts 22.2. The Apostle Paul makes a speech to the Jews in Hebrew, And when
they heard that he spoke in the Hebrew tongue to them, they kep, the more
silence, Which they had not done if they had not understood it. And the Apostle
would not have spoken to the common people in a language which they understood
not. As also the rest of the Chap. the 12 verse especially, shows that the
Jews understood it very well.

CHAP. VII. That the Ancient Christian Church over all the world used an
intelligible tongue in the public Service.
HEre we have all the ancient Church on our side. It is a thing out of question
and testified by the Ancients, that every Country and Nation, even the most
barbarous, had the Holy Scripture translated in the Vulgar tongue, that the
people might get instruction by the reading of the same: Chrysostom 1. Hom.
upon John speaks thus. (...).
The Syrians, the Egyptians, the Indians, the Persians, the Ethiopians, and
other infinite Nations, having translated in their tongues the doctrines
propounded by this [John], being barbarous, have learned to discourse like
Philosophers.

Theodoret in the fifth Sermon of the way of correcting the indispositions of
the Grecians, (...), etc.
Hebrew was not only translated into Greek, but also in the tongue of the
Romans, Egyptians, Persians, Indians, Amenians, Scythians, and even of
Polonians; and in a word, into all languages which Nations use in our days.

Quorum translationem diligentissime emendatam olim linguae meae hominibus
dederim.
Hierome has translated the Bible into the Dalmatick tongue, as himself
testifies in the Epistle to Sophronius.

Austin in the Book of Christian Doctrine, chapter Ex quo factum est ut etiam
Scriptura divina quo tantis morbis humanarum voluntatum subvenitur, ab una
lingua profecta, quae opportune potuit per totum orbem disseminari per varias
interpretum linguas long lateque diffusa innotesceret Gentibus ad futurum.
5. Whence it came to pass that the holy Scripture which is the cure of so many
sicknesses of men's will, having begun to be set forth in a tongue which might
opportunely be dispersed over all the World, was spread far and wide, and made
known to the Nations unto salvation, by the means of the several languages of
Interpreters.

Vlfilas a Goth Bishop, translated the holy Scripture into the Gothic tongue,
as Sozom. (...).
Sozomenus witnesses in the 6 Book of his History, chapter 37.

It appears, that the holy Scriptures were very common among the common
people, since Hierom in his Epistle to Laeta, exhorts her to exercise her
daughter Paula to read the holy Scriptures; And commends Fabiola Deus bone,
quo illa fervore, quo studio intenta orat divinis voluminibus!
for her assiduity in the lecture of sacred Books, especially the Prophets, the
Evangelists, and the Psalms. Thus Chrysostom in the 3. Hom. upon Lazarus, and
2. Hom. upon Matthew, and in the third Homily upon the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, and in many other places exhorts the Tradesmen, the women, and
the unlearned to read often and carefully the holy Scriptures.

The Epistle to the Virgin Demetrias which is the 141. among Austins Epistles,
chapter 23. Ita Scripturas sanctas lege ut semper memineris Dei illa verba esse.
So read the holy Scriptures, that thou remember always that they are the Word
of God.

Athan. Tom. 2. p. 249. adversus cos qui nec quaerendum nec loquendum de
^criptura praecipiunt. Edit. Commet. (...).
Athanasius in the second Tome, page 249. says that Heretics dissuade the
People from the Scriptures, saying that they are not accessible; But in effect,
that they may avoid to be convinced by them.

All that presupposes that Scripture in the vulgar tongue was in the hands of
the people; for otherwise the exhortation to read it would have been vain and
unsincere. Scripture was then read in the Church in a language understood by
the people, as it appears by those frequent words in the Homilies of Greek
and Latin Fathers, As it was read to you this day. It would have been a great
absurdity to call upon the people to remember the reading of words which they
understood not.

In vita S. Martini. Inter Episcopos qui assuerant praecipue Defensor quidam
nomine dicitur restitisse, etc. Nam cum fortuito lector cui legendi eo die
officium erat interclusum, a populo defuisset, turbatis Ministris, dum
expectatur qui non aderat, unus e circumstantibus sumpto Psalterio quem primum
versum invenit arripuit: Psalmus autem hic erat, Ex ore infantium, etc.
Sulpitius Severus relates, that one called Defensor, opposed the reception of
Martin into the Office of Bishop, saying that he was a nasty base fellow; But
that one day in the Deacons absence some of the people taking the Psalter began
to read in the Church the 8. Psalm, where it is said, Out of the mouth of babes
and sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou
might still the enemy and the avenger. What we translate the avenger, the
Latin version then read in the Church calls the Defensor. At the reading of
that word Defensor, the whole people did shout aloud against Defensor, Martins
adversary, as if that place of Scripture had been intended and read against him
by Gods providence.

Our Adversaries themselves acknowledge, that in the Church of the Apostles,
and many Ages after, the Service and the Prayers were made in a language
understood by the people. Lyranus upon 1 Cor. 14. In primitiva Ecclesia
benedictiones and caetera omnia fiebant in vulgari. In the Primitive Church the
blessings and all other things were done in the vulgar tongue. We heard before
how Aquinas and Harding acknowledge, that in the ancient Church they prayed in
a language that was understood; but (say they) that use was good for that time,
and that custom was altered since because men are better instructed.

Lactantius in the third Book of Divine Institutions, chapter 20. laughs at the
Pagans hiding their mysteries unto the people, for fear of being laughed at if
their fopperies were known. Hinc fida silentia sacris instituta sunt ab
hominibus callidis ut populus nesciat quid colat.
Hence it is, says he, that crafty men have instituted a sacred silence to be
kept in the sacred Service, that the People may not know what they worship.

August. lib. de Magistro c. 1. Quare non opus est locutione cum oramus, id
est, sonantibus verbis, nisi forte sicut sacerdotes faciunt significandae
mentis causa, non ut Deus sed ut homines audiant.
When we pray (says Austin) there is no need of words, that is, of sounding
words, unless it be perhaps as Priests do, to express their mind, not that God,
but that men may hear them.

In the Council of Lateran held under Innocent the III. in the year 1215. in
the ninth chapter this constitution is found Quoniam in plerisque partihus intra
eandem civitatem, otque diocesin permixti sunt populi diversarum linguarum
habentes sub una fide varios ritus and mores, districte praecipimus ut
Pontifices hujusmodi civitatum sine diooecesium provideant viros idoneos qui
secundum diversitatem rituuum, and linguarum divina officia illis celebrent, et
Ecclesiastca Sacramenta ministrent instruendo eos verbo pariter et exemplo.
Because in most places in the same City or Diocese Nations of diverse languages
are mingled, having under the same Faith diverse ceremonies and customs; we
strictly command that the Bishops of such Cities or Diocesses provide fit men
to celebrate unto them Divine Service, according to the diversity of ceremonies
and tongues, and administer the Sacraments of the Church, instructing them by
word and example. Here is a Council which our Adversaries put among the
Universal, authorzed by the presence and approbation of such a famous Pope,
which not only permits but also commands, that divine Service be
celebrated in another language than Latin among Nations of diverse languages.
And note that he speaks of Nations diverse in Langague, but agreeing in the
Faith. That one may not think that he speaks only of the Grecians and Latins,
which then were already of different belief and separated in communion. And
that not only in some few places, but in plerisque partibus, in most places.

Isidorus in the first Book of Ecclesiastical Offices, chap. 10. Est autem
lectio non parva audientium aedificatio. Unde oportet ut quando Psallitur, ab
omnibus psallatur; cum oratur, oretur ab omnibus; quando lectio fit, facto
silentio, aeque audiatur a cunctis.
Readi^g is not of small edification to hearers; Wherefore when one says the
Psalter, all must say the Psalter; when prayer is said, all must pray; when the
Lesson is read, all must hearken with silence.

Yet to this day in the Roman Church the Order of Reader is conferred by the
Bishop pronouncing these words, Studete verba Dei, videlicet lectiones sacras
distinct et aperte ad intelligentiam et aedificationem fidelium absque omni
mendacio falsitatis proferre, etc. quatenus auditores vestros verbo pariter et
exemplo vestro docere possitis.
Study to pronounce the Words of God, that is, the sacred Lessons distinctly
and openly to the intelligence and edification of the faithful, without any
untruth of falseshood. And a little after, so that you may teach your hearers
both by word and example. This is found in the Pontifical reformed by Pope
Clement the VIII. in the Chapter of the Ordination of Rtaders. That Form of
Ordination is more ancient than the abuse which came since; and I wonder why
that Pope having corrected many things in the Pontifical, did not cause that
Clause to be put out, which drives the Readers of the Roman Church into a
perjury; for they are obliged in their ordination so to read, that the faithful
may understand their reading, and that they may edify their Readers. For by
making them read Scripture in Latin, they take away from them the means of
fulfilling the promise which they made unto God.

Wherefore John Belet, as Cassander relates in his Sum of Divine Offices,
after he has praised the custom of the ancient Church, in which it was not
permitted to say any thing in the Churh in unknown language without giving the
interpretation, adds, Quid autem in nostris temporibus est agendum, ubi
nullus vel rarus invenitur legens vel audiens quod intelligat, videns vel agens
quod animadvertat? Jam videtur esse completum quod a Propheta dicitur, Et erit
sacerdos quasi de populo unus. Videtur ergo potius esse tacendum quam
psallendum, potius silendum quam tripudiandum.
What must be done then in our time, when none is found, or very seldom, that
either reads or hears that which he understands, or that sees or does that
which he perceives? Now the Prophets saying seems to be fulfilled, The Priest
shall be as one of the people. It seems then that it is better to be silent
then to sing, and rather hold ones peace then to dance. So he derided the
singing and the gesticulations of the Priest.

All the Churches of the World that are not subject unto the Pope, and some
also that are subject unto him, are for us in this point. For in Greece the
Service is said in Greek; and for a thousand years after Christ and more, the
tongue of the Liturgy was the vulgar tongue. Now that by the domination of the
Turk and the putting down of Schools the language is altered, yet the vulgar
Greek is not so corrupted but that the Greek of the Liturgy is intelligible
unto the people. And though it were otherwise, yet the example of antiquity,
for the space of a thousand years and more, is more considerable then the
corruption happened of late.

Cassiodorus who writ about the year 520, or 530. has an excellent passage
upon this Subject upon the 44. Ps. Perscrutemur cur Ecclesia Dei de vestis
varietate laudetur cui totum simplex convenit atque unum; Sed hic varietatem
aut linguas multiplices significat, quia omnes gentes secundum suam patriam in
Ecclesia psallunt ut authori virtutum pulcherrimam diversitatem demonstrent.
Let us carefully search why the Church of God is praised for her raiment of
diverse colors, whereas all simplicity and unity is convenient to her. But this
signifies the variety or multiplicity of tongues, because all Nations say the
Psalter in the Church according to the language of their Country, to show to
the author of virtues a most beautiful diversity.

Hardingus lib. de precibus linguae peregr. Sect. 38. Quae gentes preces
publicas vernaculo semper sermon hahuerunt, etc. quales sunt Muscovitae,
Armenii et Aethiopes, etc. Russianis, Moraviis aliisque quibusdam ante 600.
abhinc annos permissum fuit ut Missam lingua Dalmatica celebrarent.
Harding acknowledges, that the Muscovites, Armenians and Ethiopians, had
always their public Prayers in their vulgar tongues; And that to the Russians
and Moravians and other Nations, it was permitted six hundred years ago to have
the Service in the Dalmatick tongue.

The Abyssine or Ethiopian Churches have their Service in the Ethiopick tongue,
as Francis Alvarez a Portughes Monk testifies, who lived seven years in the
Court of the great Neguz of Ethiopia; Franc. Alvarez. hist. Ethiop. chapter 3. Et
in tanto consecra nella sua lingua con le proprie nostre parole and non la
licua.

Et il medesimo fanel calice et non l'atza. Dice sopra quello le proprie nostre
parole nella sua lingua.


Then he consecrateth in his tongue with our very words, and makes no
elevation. He does the same of the chalice, and does not elevate it; And says
upon it our very words in his tongue. Cassander in his Liturgica translated
these words of Alvarez into Latin.

The same Cassander in the fifteenth chapter of the same Book alleges the
Commentaries of Sigismundus Liber de rebus Muscoviticis, speaking thus In
singulis Templis unicum tantum altar, and in dies singulos unumquodque sacrum
faciendum putant. Totum sacrum seu Missa gentili ac vernacula lingua apud illos
peragi solet.
The Muscovites have but one Altar in every Temple, and think that one
celebration of the Sacrament must be done every day, and the whole Service or
Mass uses to be done among them in the vulgar tongue.

Shortly, no Church and no Nation has Divine Service in Latin, but such as are
subject unto the Pope. Yea some Churches that acknowledge him, yet would not in
this point conform themselves unto the example of the Roman Church.

Bellarmin in his recognitions of the Books de verbo Dei confesses, that among
the Moscovites, Armenians and Maronites, there are Roman Catholcks that have
not the public service in Latin.

The custom of the Ancient Church both in the East and West, was, that the
Priest and the People answered one another, the Priest saying Lift up your
hearts, and the people answering We have them unto the Lord. The Priest saying
The Lord be with you, and the people answering And with thy spirit, and every
where answering to the Prayers of the Priest with a great noise like a thunder,
as it may be seen in the Liturgies attributed to Basil and to Chrysostom.
Hierom in his Preface upon the second book on the Epistle to the Galathians
says, that at Rome Ad similitudinem coelestis tonitrui Amen reboat.
the Amen of the People did sound like a thunder from heaven. Which Bellarmin
acknowledges in the sixteenth chapter of the second book of the Word of God,
Tunc quia Christiani erant pauci, omnes simul psallebant in Ecclesia, and
respondebant in divinis Officiis: at postea crescente populo divisa sunt magis
officia, et solis Clericis relictum est ut communes preces et lauds in
Ecclesia peragant.
Then (says he) because Christians were in small number, all sung together in
the Church, and answered one another in divine Offices. But since that time the
people growing, the Offices were more divided, and it was refered unto the
Clerks only to celebrate in the Church the Common Prayers and Praises. This he
says with his wonted truth; For he knew that the most populous Churches that
ever were in the World, were the Churches of Constantinople and Rome in the
fourth and fifth Ages, in which these answers of the people were used as well
as in the small Churches, and where the whole service was done in the vulgar
tongue. Neither was that dividing the Office or service when the Romanists
brought the people to silence, and suffered none to speak but the Clerks.

I say then, that these answers of the people are an evident proof, that the
people understood what the Pastor said; for how could they have answered words
which they understood not? But this custom ceased in the Roman Church, when the
people lost the intelligence of the divine Service. The Priest being become a
Barbarian unto the people, the people also is become dumb and deaf unto the
words of the Priest.

Hereupon it is good to consider the words of the Jesuit Salmeron, in his
Comment upon 1 Cor. 14. Disp. 22. Sect. Ac Subdit. Ne benedicens sacerdos
dicat, Ego quidem intelligo cum gratias ago peregrina lingua; respondet
Apostolus, At alter non aedificatur, id est, inde nullam derivari
aedificationem Ecclesiae cujus inprimis ratio habenda erat. Nam omnia tum ad
aedificationem Ecclesia fieri solebant, ut docet Apostolus; ita ut nolit ullas
preces publicas in Ecclesia celebrari ignoto prorsus sermon.
Lest that the Priest giving the blessing say, I understand well what I say
when I give thanks in a strange tongue, the Apostle answers, but another is
not edified thereby, that is, no edification thereby accreweth unto the Church,
which ought to have been considered before all things. For then all things used
to be done for the edification of the Church, as the Apostle teaches; so that
he will not have any Prayer to be done in the Church in a language altogether
unknown. If such was the Apostles constitution, as this Jesuit acknowledges,
who has given power to the Pope to break it, and to prohibit the saying of
divine service in vulgar tongues? Bellar. l. 2. de verbo Dei. c. 15. At
Catholica. Prohibetur ne in publico and communi usu Ecclesiae Scripturae
legantur vel canantur vulgaribus linguis.
as Bellarmine acknowledges, that it is forbidden to read or sing the
Scriptures in the Church in a vulgar language. But if in the time of the
Apostles all public Prayers were to be said in a known tongue, because (says
Salmeron) all things were to be done for the edification and consolation of the
Church, have we not the same necessity in our days? and should the Pastors of
the Church be less careful of the edification of the Church?

Wherefore when the Council of Trent Si quis dixerit lingua tantum vulgari
Missam celebrari debere, anathema sit.
in the ninth Canon of the 22. Session does thunder out Anathema's upon all
that say, that the Eucharist which they term Mass, ought to be celebrated in
the vulgar tongue, do they not involve the Apostle St. Paul, and the Prophets,
and the Apostles, and the whole Ancient Church within that excommunication?

Sixtus Senensis in the sixth book of his Library, in the 263. Annotation, to
confute Cardinal Cajetan, who says, that public Prayer ought rather to be
said in a known language then in Latin, alleges Ambrosius de Compsa Miratus
sum Cajetanum non esse deterritum a fructu hujusmodi traditionis quae primum a
Luthero, immo a diabolo in Luthero loquente inventa est.
who says, that this tradition was invented by Luther, or rather by the Devil,
who spoke in Luther. And yet Luther taught no other thing in this point, but
what the Apostle himself taught, by the confession of our very Adversaries, as
we proved before.

But Polydorus Virgilius a Learned man among our Aversaries, complains of the
abuse practiced in the Roman Church, saying, Polidor. Virgil. de Inventor rerum
lib. 6. Cantores nostri in templis nostris constrepunt ut nihil praeter vocem
audiatur; et qui intersunt, ejusdem vocum concentu quo eorum aures maxim
calent, contenti, de vi verborum nihil curant. Unde ventum eo est ut omnis
divini cultus ratio in istis cantoribus sita esse videatur.
Our singing men make a noise in our Temples, so that nothing is heard but the
voice, and the bystanders being contented with the harmony of such voices
wherewith their ears are warmed, care not for the sense of the words; and so
far we are gone, that among the people the whole Divine Service seems to
consist in those singing-men; and that most people come to the Church to hear
them as if they came to a stage for plays.

Yea Sixtus Senensis, in the forealledged place, after Ambrosius de Compsa,
acknowledges, that very often in the Roman Church the Priests themselves
understand not what they say. Illud potius vituperandum crat quod non solum qui
supplent locum idiotae plerunque non intelligant quid oretur, verum etiam
saepenumero nec ipsi presbyteri aut diaconi qui orant aut legunt.
Not only (says he) they that supply the place of the ignorant, understand not
for the most part that which is said in the Prayer, but even the Priests
themselves, or the Deacons that pray or read, very often understand it not,
which is an abuse, etc. In his sixth book chapter 1. p. 1079.
Cardinal du Perron could not dissemble this, saying, that if there be
Churchmen that want learning or understanding, the fault lies upon them that
ordain them. For he know well enough that the Country is full of Priests that
can hardly read, and are far from understanding Latin.

Estius a Doctor of Dovay in his Comment upon the fourteenth chap. of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, defends with all his strength the use of an unknown
tongue in the public service. Yet this Confession comes from him. Quamvis per
se bonum sit ut divina officia celebrentur ea lingua quam plebs intelligat, id
enim per se confert ad plebis aedificationem, ut bone probat hic locus.
In it self it is a good thing that Divine Offices be celebrated in a language
understood by the people; for this serves of it self unto the edification of
the people, as it is well proved by thr Text of St. Paul. Wherefore Cajetans
opinion being formally and abstractly considered, is true.

CHAP. VIII. Two causes that move the Pope and his Clergy to maintain the
celebration of the Mass and of the ordinary Service in the Latin Tongue.
POpery is a bulk of doctrines and ceremonies built up with mavelous art: All
the deepest craft of humane prudence was set on work to contrive and maintain
it. No wonder then that the Apostle calls the structure of the Kingdom of the
son of perdition, the mystery of iniquity.

In the point we have in hand, the Pope and his Clergy proposed to themselves
two ends. The first is, to keep the people in ignorance, and use them to
believe without knowing, to follow their leaders with blindfolded eyes, and to
obey without inquiring. This is evident, in that the leaders of the Church were
afraid that even the Latin should be too intelligible, and therefore they would
have the principal parts of the Mass to be said with such a low murmur, that
the voice of the Priest cannot be heard. To the same end tends the prohibition
of reading Scripture, and the Images, and the implicit Faith, and that Maxim
that the Pope cannot err in the Faith. For in effect his Empire is grounded
upon the blindness of the people, and the ignorance of the people is his
strongest prop.

The second end of the Pope in establishing the Latin tongue in the public
Service, was, to plant the marks and standart of his Empire among the Nations
which he had conquered. The custom of great Monarchs is to give their tongue to
the Nations brought under their power, to tame them and inure them to their
dominations. So did the Romans in Gauls and in Spain. And the King of Spain
obliges the Indians to speak Spanish; and those Indians being become Spaniards
in language, become also Spaniards in affection. The Pope does the same, giving
to the Kingdoms which he has subdued his tongue with his religion. The simple
people believe that their Religion must be Roman as well as the tongue which is
used in Religion, and that both Christian Faith and the Language come from the
same place.

CHAP. IX. A third cause why they will not have the Mass to be understood by
the people. Some clauses of the Mass which would offend the people if they were
unstood.
BUt the chief cause why the Pope will not have the Mass to be understood by
all, is that the Mass contains many things which would either instruct or
offend the people, if the people understood them.

For the Mass is full of Clauses, some of which are contrary to Popery, and are
conformable with our Religion; Some evidently contrary to the doctrine of the
Gospel, and some contrary to common sense.

I. For example, the People might be taught not to believe Merits, if they
understood the words of the Mass which condemn them, when the Priest prays
that God receive us into the company of the Saints, non aestimator meriti, sed
gratiae largitor, not weighing our merits, but granting us pardon.

II. Also the people being instructed to pray for the Souls of the dead that
are frying in Purgatory, would be amazed to hear the Priest praying for the
dead in these words, Memento etiam Domine famulorum et famularum tuarum, qui
nos praecesserunt cum signo fidei, et dormiunt in somno pacis.
Lord remember thy servants and handmaids that went before us in the sign of
Faith, and are sleeping in the sleep of Peace. He that has given money to a
Priest to recommend one of his friends in the Memento of the Mass, would say, I
had given money for a soul which I thought to be tormented in a burning fire;
but now I learn that my friends soul is laid down in a peaceable sleep. I will
take heed another time of giving my money for a soul that is sleeping quietly.

III. Likewise the people being taught to believe, that after the consecrating
words, the bread is transubstantiated into the Lords body, and that the thing
which the Priest holds is no more bread, but the natural body of Christ, would
be amazed to hear the Priest saying these words over the consecrated Host, Per
quem [Christum] haec omnia Domine semper bona creas, sanctificas, vivificas,
benedicis and praestas nobis. By which [Jesus Christ] O Lord, thou createst
always all these goods, and sanctifiest them, and blessest them, and affordest
them unto us. For they should find it very strange, that the Priest calls the
body of Christ, all these goods. And that the Priest says, that God creates
always Jesus Christ, seeing that God creates only those things that were not
before they were created, and that God creates no more the glorious body of
his Son Jesus Christ. And that it is a great abuse to say that God creates
always a thing that is always in its perfection. They would wonder that God
quickens Christ always, as if God at every moment did raise him from the
dead. Scruples would arise in the minds of the people, hearing the Priest
saying these words unto God, Per Christum haec omnia bona creas and praestas
nobis, Thou createst and affordest these goods to us by Christ. For he that
has some liberty of Judgment, would reason thus in himself, It must needs be
acknowledged that these goods which the Priest has before him, are not Christ
himself, since God gives them unto us by Christ. Neither does God create and
quicken Christ by Christ. Upon that any person of good sense would say, No
doubt but that this prayer was said by the ancient Church in another sense; for
every word is fit and proper to be said over a quantity of bread and wine set
upon the Table, but not over the body of Christ.

IV. Neither would the people be less amazed, seeing the Priest offering unto
God the consecrated Host in these words Super quae propitio ac sereno vultu
respicere digneris.
Upon which things be pleased to look with a propitious and serene face; For a
man that has his wits about him, would say, How comes this to pass, that
Christ's body, which is but one, is called, these things, as if Christ had many
bodies? And what an abuse is this, that the Priest prays, that God will look
upon his Son Jesus Christ with a propitious and serene face; as if he was
afraid that Christ should not be acceptable unto his Father? or as if Christ
had need of our recommendation to God to be accepted of him. For note that the
Priest by these things, understands the Host which he has in his hand, not the
faith or the devotion, or the prayer of the people; as it appears by the words
next before, where he says, that he offers unto God an immaculate Host, a
holy bread, a cup of perpetual salvation; Then he adds, Upon which things,
etc.

V. The people would not take less offense at the following words Supra quae
propitio et sereno vultu respicere digneris, et accepta habere, sicut accepta
habere dignatus es munera pueri tui justi Abel, et sacrificium patriarchae
nostri Abrahae.
Upon which be pleased to look with a propitious and serene face, as thou were
pleased to accept the presents of thy righteous son Abel, and the sacrifice of
our Patriach Abraham. For they would inquire what those presents were which
Abel offered unto God; and finding that it was a Lamb or a Calf, they would be
angry at the heart to hear that comparison whereby Christ is compared unto a
beast; and whereby the Priest asks of God, that the body of Christ be as
acceptable unto him as a Bullock or a Lamb offered by Abel; for we have already
showed that by these things he understands the consecrated Host and Cup, which
he compares with the presents of Abel, not our faith and devotion with that of
Abel.

VI. The like matter of scandal should be found in the following words, in
which the Priest adds, Supplices te rogamus, Omnipotens Deus, jube hac
perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum, in conspectu
divinae Majestatis tuae.
We humbly beseech thee Almighty God, command these things to be carried by the
hands of thy holy Angel, to thy high altar, in the presence of thy Divine
Majesty. This indeed is sufficient to offend a mind that has some clearness of
judgment. What? (may he say) Do we ask of God that the Angel come and take the
Host from the Priests hands? Must the eternal Son of God be presented to his
Father by an Angel? Does he stand in need of the mediation of Angels to be
acceptable unto his Father? Or if the Priest pray that the Angel come, and take
the Host from his hands, why does he eat it presently after these Words? Why
does he not stay for the Angels coming? He seems to be afraid to have his
prayer granted. Besides when he calls Christ these things, he speaks manifestly
against his knowledge and intention; for Christ is not these things, but one
person.

And here one may have here again the same thought as before; That these
prayers are good, being said over Alms, and over a quantity of bread and wine
not transubstantiated, laid upon the table according to the custom of the
ancient Church; but are absurd being spoken of Christ. Doubtless these prayers,
more ancient then the doctrine of Transubstantiation, have lost their first
signification by the change of the doctrine.

VII. The following words give the like subject of offense, when the Priest
adds, Vt quotquot ex hac Altaris participatione sacrosanctum filii tui corpus
sumserimus, That as many of us as shall take by the participation of thine
altar the sacred body of thy Son. For to what purpose is that language when no
body participates? Seeing that in most Masses the Priest eats alone, and in all
Masses drinks alone? and that in private Masses no body is present? and yet the
Priest speaks as if many had received.

VIII. Also the words, whereby they hold that the consecration is made, might
give offense; for they are said only recitative, that is, in a form of
relation, as when an History is related. As Gabriel Biel observes in the 48.
Lesson upon the Canon of the Mass, saying, that the Priest pronounces these
things, non enuntiative sed recitative, not by form of enuntiation, but of
relation. Whereas the Roman Church will have these words to be said
effectively, as if God by them declared that he will have this bread to become
flesh. When God said, Let the light be, and let the earth bring forth herbs,
etc. these words were effective and operative, and brought forth light and
plants; But he that relates that God said, Let the light be, does not bring
forth light. Yet the Priests words are but a bare relation of that Christ said:
The Priests words are these Qui pridie quam pateretur accepit panem in sanctas
et venerabiles manus suas, et elevatis oculis in coetum ad te Deum Patrem suum
Omnipotentem tibi gratias agens benedixit, fregit, deditque Discipulis suis,
dicens Accipite et manducate ex hoc omnes, Hoc est enim corpus meum.
Who (that is Christ) the day before he suffered, took the bread in his holy
and venerable hands, and lifting up his eyes unto thee, his Father Almighty,
giving thee thanks, blessed, brake, and gave to his Disciples, saying, Take,
and eat of it you all; For this is my body. All that is but a bare relation
which cannot have any effective virtue: Which is confirmed by these words,
Accipite, manducate: whereby it is evident that the Apostle expresses not what
he does, or will do, but only what Christ has done; for ordinarily when the
Priest pronounces these words, there is no body that takes or eats after the
Priest, and private Masses are without Communicants.

IX. Perhaps also some one of the people more curious then his fellows, having
made bold to look into the holy Scripture, might observe, that the Apostle
Paul, 1 Cor. 11.24. affirms that Christ said, This is my body which is broken
for you, and upon that by a curiosity, which is now held the way to heresy,
would inquire why the Priest leaves out these words, which is broken for you;
For they are words that decide the difference, It being evident that as the
Lords Body in the Eucharist is not really broken, but Sacramentally; also the
Lords body is not really but Sacramentally in the Priests hands. No reason can
be given why these words, which is broken for you, should be a Sacramental and
figurate expression, and the words, This is my body, should be taken otherwise;
for it is certain, that the bread of the Sacrament is in the same manner the
body of Christ, as the body of Christ is broken in that Sacrament. Now the body
of Christ is not really broken in it; then the body of Christ is not really in
the same. But Satan did labor to stop that window, by which such a clear light
comes unto us, having taken away that word out of the Bibles of the Roman
Church, where instead of frangitur there is tradetur: instead of is broken,
they have put, shall be delivered.

X. From the bread the Priest comes to the cup, and relates the words of the
Lord, saying that Christ having taken the Cup, said, Accipite, Bibite ex eo
omnes, Hic est enim calix sanguinis mei novi and aeterni Testamenti, mysterium
fidei; that is, Take, drink all of it; for this is the cup of my blood of the
New and eternal Testament, a mystery of faith. Here also there are many
subjects of offense: For since the Priest witnesses, that Christ said, Drink
ye all of it: why is it the privilege of Priests and Kings only to drink the
Cup? If to Kings and Priests only that word drink is directed, the same must be
said of the word eat; for these words are directed unto the same persons. By
that reason none but Priests and Kings must eat in the Sacrament. Besides, the
Apostles being in Christ's Company, did not in that action keep the rank of
Pastors, but of sheep and disciples. Wherefore the Apostle will have the people
of Corinth to examine themselves, and so eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup.

XI. In this especially these words give matter of offense, that the words of
the Mass are found neither in Saint Paul, nor in any of the Evangelists. St.
Paul relates that the Lord said, This cup is the New Testament in my blood, do
this in remembrance of me: Excellent words; For these words, This is my body,
and these, This cup is the New Testament, must be understood in the same
manner. Now neither a Cup, nor that which is within it is really a Testament,
but Sacramentally, and in signification; no more then is the bread (which they
call the Host) really the body of Christ, but Sacramentally, and in
signification. Wherefore that this might not be perceived, the words of the
Lord were changed in the Text of the Mass: For instead of these words, This cup
is the New Testament, the Priest says, This is the cup of my blood of the New
and eternal Testament.

XII. To the same end, instead of these words, Do this in remembrance of me,
the Priest says, a mystery of faith, which is a strange depravation, done
purposely because the word remembrance expounds these words, This is my body,
namely that the bread is called the Lords body, because it is the remembrance
of it, according as Scripture names signs and commemorations, with the name of
things signified.

XIII. Here is another subject of scruple and scandal which the people should
receive, if the Mass were said in a known tongue: For long before the words,
which they call consecrating words, there are prayers in the Mass, in which the
bread not consecrated is called the sacrifice, and the immaculate Host offered
unto God for the sins of the living and the dead in these words, Suscipe hanc
immaculatam hostiam quam ego indignus famulus tuus offero tibi Deo meo vivo pro
innumerabilibus peccatis and offensionibus et negligentiis meis, and pro
omnibus circumstantibus, sed and pro omnibus fidelibus Christianis vivis atque
defunctis.
Receive this immaculate host, which I thine unworthy servant offer unto thee
my living and true God, for my innumerable sins, and offenses, and negligences,
and for all that stand about me, but also for all the faithful Christians,
both living and dead: The like things he says over the Cup, not consecrated.
All that is full of difficulties; for the bread not consecrated, is not the
same Host as that which is consecrated, which they say to be the true body of
Christ. By this means two Hosts of diverse nature, and two sorts of sacrifice
are in the Mass; and that which is most strange, and of hardest digestion, is;
that the Priest offers bread not consecrated unto God in Sacrifice for
satisfaction for his sins, which is giving a piece of bread for payment for our
sins, and for the price of our redemption.

Bellar. l. 2. de Missa c. 17. Sect. Offertorium. Quinque illae orationes,
Suscipe sancte Pater, etc. Offerimus tibi Domine, etc. Veni sanctificator, etc.
In Spiritu, humilitatis, etc. Suscipe sancta Trinitas, etc. neque antiquae
admodum sunt, neque in Roma in Ecclesia ante quingentes annos legebantur.
Bellarmine in the second Book of the Mass, 17. chap. seems to be angry with
these Collects; for he says, that they are not very ancient, and that before
five hundred years, they were not said in the Roman Church. Now there are five
Collects or Prayers together of the same nature in that part of the Mass which
they call the Offertory, which this famous Cardinal made bold to accuse of
novelty, and observes that Innocent the third, who writ of the Mass in the
year 1214. makes no mention of them.

That by these prayers the Priest makes an oblation, and offers a sacrifice
of bread not consecrated, Bellarmine does acknowledgk it in the 1. Book of the
Mass, 27. chap. saying, Bellarm. cap. 27. Sect. prima. Negari non debet panem
et vinum aliquo modo in Missa offerri, et proinde pertinere ad rem quae
sacrificatur. Hac propositio patet primum ex ipsa Liturgia. Nam cum ante
cousecrationem dicimus Suscipe sancte Pater hanc immaculatam hostiam, certe
pronomen Hanc demonstrat ad sensum id quod tunc manibus tenemus: Id autem pants
est. Et similes sunt in Liturgia non paucae sententiae, quae panem offerri
manifestissime demonstrant.
We must not deny that bread and wine are in some sort offered in the Mass.
This appears first by the Liturgy it self. For when we say before the
Consecration Suscipe Sancte Pater hanc immaculatam hostiam, Receive O Father,
this immaculate Host, this word Hanc sensibly demonstrateth that which we hold
in our hands: Now it is bread that we hold. In the Liturgy (so he calls the
Mass) there are many sentences which show manifestly that bread is offered.
Here is then in the Mass an Host offered in Sacrifice for the sins of the
living and the dead, which is not the body of Christ, but bread not consecrated.

But as for that Bellarmine says, that these prayers are new, and brought in
since five hundred years, he says true in some sort. It is true that it is a
very late custom to sacrifice bread not consecrated unto God for the sins of
men; but to call the bread and wine of the holy Communion which the people
brought, and which the Pastor offered unto God, Sacrifices and holy oblations,
is a very ancient custom, and a prayer conformable unto the word of God, which
calls Alms and Prayers, and all holy actions, sacrifices.

Bellarm. ibid. Sect. Deinde. Veteres Patres passim ita tradunt. Irenaeus l. 4.
c. 32. dicit Ecclesiam offerre Deo sacrificium ex creaturis, id est ex pane and
vino. Cyprianus, l 2. Epist. 3. dicit Christum obtulisse calicem patri vino and
aqua mistum. Et in Sermon de Eleemosyna reprehendens divites foeminas quae non
adferebant panem consecrandum, Locuples (inquit) and dives in Dominicum sine
sacrificio venis, and partem de sacrificio quod pauper obtulit sumis. Vbi per
sacrificium panem intelligit qui per sacerdotes Deo sacrificandus erat.
The Fathers of the first Ages speak so. Thus Ireneus in the fourth book, 32.
chapter saying, that the Church offers unto God a sacrifice of his creatures,
that is, bread and wine. And in the Sermon of Alms, rebuking rich women that
brought no bread to the Church for the consecration, he says to them, Thou
rich and wealthy woman that come to the Lords Supper without a Sacrifice,
that take part of the sacrifice which the poor has offered. Where it is
evident that by the Sacrifice he understands the Sacrifices of not consecrated
bread and wine, brought by the people; As the same Cardinal freely
acknowledges in the same place.

But that which is most express in this matter, is, that the Priest upon
Christmas day adds, Oblata Domine munera nova unigeniti tui nativitate
sanctifica.
O Lord, sanctify by the new birth of thine only Son the gifts which we have
offered unto thee. He speaks of an oblation ready made, and yet this is said
before the consecration.

The title of the 24. Canon of the third Council of Carthage is such Vt in
sacrificio tantum panis et calix offeratur.
That in the sacrifice nothing be offered but the bread and the cup. And there
is in the Text of the Canon; Ibid. In Sacramentis corporis et sanguinis Domini
nihil amplius offeratur quam ipse Dominus tradidit, hoc est panis et vinum aqua
mixtum. Nec amplius in sacrificiis offeratur quam ex uvis et frumentis.
In the Sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord, let nothing be offered
but what the Lord himself has instituted, that is, bread and wine mixed with
water. And that nothing more be offered in the Sacrifices, but that which comes
out of grapes and corn.

XV. That which follows, would make as deep an impression in the minds of the
people, as any thing that we spoke of before, and would lay open the errors of
the Mass, were it pronounced with a loud voice, and in the vulgar tongue. The
Priest beginning the Mass, says his Confiteor, which runs thus, Consiteor Deo
Omnipotenti, Beatae Mariae semper Virgini, Beato Johanni Baptistae, Sanctis
Apostolis Petro and Paulo, omnibus Sanctis, and vobis, fratres, quia peccavi
nimis cogitatione, verbo, opere; Mea culpa, Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa. Ideo
precor Beatam Mariam semper Virgin^m, Beatum Michaelem Archangelum, Beatum
Johannem Baptistam, sanctos Apostolos Petrum and Paulum, omnis Sanctos, et vos
fratres, orate pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum.
I confess unto God Almighty, to the blessed Mary, always Virgin, to the
blessed John the Baptist, to the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, to all the
Saints, and to you brethren, that I have sinned too much in thought, word and
deed: My fault, my fault, my most great fault. Wherefore I beseech thee Blessed
Mary, always Virgin, the blessed Michael the Archangel, the blessed John the
Baptist, the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, all the Saints, and you brethren, to
pray for me to the Lord our God. In this Confession, the Priest confesses his
sins to the dead, contrary to all the examples of prayers and confessions that
are found in Scripture, which are all made unto God alone. For God alone we
have offended. Tibi soli peccavi, Psalm. 51.6. Against thee, thee only have I
only sinned. Wherefore God alone can forgive us our sins; And he alone hears
the prayers of the heart, because he alone knows the hearts of men, 2 Chronicles.
6.30. Ut cum altari assistitur, semp^r ad Patrem dirigatur oration.
Observe that by the 23. Canon of the III. Council of Carthage it is expressly
forbidden to address any prayer in the Eucharist to another then the person of
the Father, permitting not so much as to pray to the Person of the Son. Much
less then would those Fathers have suffered that in the Eucharist Prayers
should have been offered unto Saints and Angels.

XVI. But that which is worst in that Confession, is, that the Priest calls
upon the Archangel Michael, John the Baptist, Peter and Paul, etc. to be his
intercessors toward God, without speaking one word of Christ's intercession,
who yet ascended into heaven purposely to make intercession for us; the Apostle
teaches us, Romans 8.34. and we learn of St. John, 1 John 2.1, and 2. that we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. Thus in the Letanies they say to every Saint Ora pro
nobis, but to Christ Miserere nobis, depriving him of the Office of Intercessor.

XVII. If the Mass were said in French or Spanish, should not the people be
offended, hearing the people saying in the beginning of the Mass, Oramus te
Domine per merita Sanctorum, quorum reliquiae hic sunt, ut indulgere digneris
omnia peccata mea.
We beseech thee Lord by the merits of the Saints whose relics are here, that
thou be pleased to pardon all my sins? What? (might the people say) Must the
Lords Table be changed into a Sepulcher? Is the Mass said over dead men's bones?
And why do they ask salvation by the merits of Saints, as if Christ had not
satisfied enough for us? or as if to obtain remission of sins there was need
that men, that were sinners and stood in need of pardon, should deserve for us
the remission of our sins? To what purpose is that payment for debts already
paid, and for which Christ has fully satisfied? If the Saints have merited
any thing, God by giving them eternal salvation has more then sufficiently
paid them for their merits. It is unjust to require that the same money serve
to make two purchases, when it was hardly sufficient to make the first.
Besides, we were told that the Saints are not Mediators of redemption, but
only of intercession; but now we see that the Mass speaks of them as of
mediators of redemption, affirming that they have merited for us salvation and
remission of sins.

XVIII. Did the people know that among those Saints whose bones are set under
the Altar, and to whose merits the Priest has his recourse, there are many
whose holiness is very doubtful, although the Pope has put them in the list of
the Saints, with a command to bestow invocation upon them; that most part of
those relics are false and supposititious; And that many of those Saints never
were men, but imaginary persons and forged at pleasury, See the Buckler of the
Faith of this Author, in the chapter of Invocation of Saints.
as we have showed in other places; I say, could the people see all this abuse
which is kept hid in the dark, they should be amazed at their religion, and
would groan under the yoke of their hard captivity.

XIX. Also they should have a just subject of offense in the Priests saying in
private and solitary Masses, Orate fratres, etc. Pray brethren. For who are
these brethren that he speaks to being alone? Pope Innocent the III. in the
second book of the mysteries of the Mass, chapter 25. answers, Pie credendum est et
sacris authoritatibus comprobatur, quod Angeli comites assistant orantibus.
that these brethren are Angels. But the following words contradict that,
Brethren, pray that my sacrifice and yours be acceptable unto Almighty God; for
this Sacrifice is not made for Angels nor by Angels. Besides, if these words
Brethren pray, are addressed unto Angels, these words also take eat, are addressed
unto them, and we must believe that in solitary Masses Angels are present to
eat.

XX. But what would the people say hearing these words of the Canon of the
Mass, Communicantes and memoriam venerantes imprimis gloriosae semperque
Virginis Mariae, Communicating and venerating, in the first place, the memory
of the glorious Mary always Virgin? Why should the Priest say communicating in
the plural number, when no body communicates? But who can suffer that the
Communion of the holy Sacrament be done in the first place to honor the memory
of the Virgin Mary, seeing that the institution of the Lords Supper by Christ
himself shows expressly, that it was instituted in memory of Christ, who says
Do this in remembrance of me? It seems they would have Christ to have said,
Do this in the first place in remembrance of my Mother. We must speak of the
holy and blessed Virgin with all respect and reverence, but we must not alter
for her the nature of the Lords Supper, nor turn it from the true end of the
same; For it was instituted to announce the Lords death, not to announce the
death of the holy Virgin, seeing that she did not suffer for our redemption.

XXI. It would have been some comfort to the hearers, if the Priest having said
that the Communion is done in the first place to honor the memory of the
Blessed Virgin, had added, that it is also in memory of Christ. But that he
omitteth; for these are the Priests words; Communicantes and memoriam
venerantes, inprimis gloriosae semperque Virginis Mariae Genitricis Dei et
Dominini nostri Jesu Christi, sed et beatorum Apostolorum ac Martyrum tuorum,
Petri, Pauli, etc. Lini. Cleti, Clementis, etc. Cosmae, Damiani and omnium
Sanctorum tuorum, Quorum meritis precibusque rogamus ut in omnibus protectionis
tuae muniamur auxilio, per eundem Christum, etc.
Communicating and venerating in the first place the memory of the glorious and
always Virgin Mary, Mother of our God and Lord Jesus Christ, but also of the
holy Apostles and Martyrs, Peter, Paul, etc. Linus, Cletus, Clemens, etc. Cosme
and Damian, and of all thy Saints. By whose merits and Prayers we beseech thee,
that in all things we may be fenced with the help of thy protection by the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. He makes indeed mention of Christ, but says not that
this Communion is done in memory of him. Only he says, that in the first place
he celebrates the memory of the Virgin Mary, and next that of the Saints, among
whom he puts in many Popes. It is not enough for him that the prayers of the
Saints do us good, unless they have also merited the grace of God for us.

XXII. Toward the end of the Mass the Priest having taken the Host and the
Cup, prays for himself, Corpus tuum Domine, quod sumpsi, et sanguis quem
potavi, adhaereat visceribus meis.
Let thy body Lord which I have taken, and the blood which I have drunk, stick
to mine entrals. He ought rather to have prayed with the Apostle, that Christ
would dwell in his heart by Faith, Ephesians. 3.16. And that his body might be a
temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. For as St. John says, 1 John 4.13.
Hereby do we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit. But to imagine that the body of Christ sitting at the right hand
of God sticks to the guts and entrals of a Priest, it is with dishonouring
Christ, defiling a man's soul with carnal thoughts.

To which though our Adversaries give way, teaching that the wicked, yea and
beasts also eat the Lords body; so it will follow, that the glorious body of
the Son of God sticks in their entrals, and that it stuck to the entrals of
Judas after he had received the Sacrament. Pope Innocent the III. in the fourth
book of the Mysteries of the Mass, chapter 16. moves an important question; If
(says he) one having nothing in his belly but the consecrated Host and the
Blood of the Chalice, is taken with a lask, which and of what nature are his
excrements? Si forte secessus vel fluxus aut vomitus post solam Eucharistiae
perceptionem evenerit, ex accidentibus et humoribus generatur.
The solution is, that they are accidents and humors. But he does not solve
the difficulty, whether Christ remains sticking to his entrals.

XXIII. It were infinite to represent all that may be found in the Mass of all
the year, and in all the public Service of the Roman Church, which might
scandalize the people if it were spoken in a vulgar Tongue. As that which is
said upon good Friday, Ecce lignum crucis in quo salus Mundi pependit. Venite
adoremus, Deus misereatur nostri Evohe.
Behold the wood of the Cross upon which the Salvation of the World was hanged.
God have mercy upon us, Evohe: That word Evohe is a word of triumph which the
Bacchants, mad and drunken women, used in the honor of their god Bacchus. Then
the Priest puts off his shoos to worship the wood of the Cross barefoot.

Then also this Anthem is said, Crucem tuam adoramus Domine et sanctam tuam
resurrectionem laudamus. Crux fidelis inter omnes arbor una nobilis. Nulla
sylva tantum profert fronde, flore, germine. Dulce lignum, dulces claves, dulce
pondus sustinet.
We worship thy Cross O Lord, and praise thy resurrection. And speaking to the
Cross, Faithful Cross, the only noble among trees, No forest brings forth so
much in leaf, in flower, in bud. The sweet wood bears sweet nails, and a sweet
weight. While these words are said, every one worshippeth the Cross. And when
they lift up the Cross they say, Ave lignum triumphale, etc. Hail triumphal
wood, which is manifestly spoken to the wood. And upon this most part of the
Doctors maintain that the Cross must be worshipped with adoration of latria,
which is the highest adoration.

XXIV. Upon the Saturday before Easter the Mass is said in Violet, in which
Mass they bless incense, and give it virtue to expel Devils, and all the
candles of the Church are put out, and lighted again with blessed fire. The
Deacon bears three wax lights on a staffs end, then sets five grains of
incense in the figure of a Cross upon a wax light, upon which wax light this
blessing is said with singing in a style, the impiety whereof is absurd, and
the terms ridiculous. In hujus igitur noctis gratia suscipe Sancte Pater
incensi hujus sacrificium vespertinum, quod tibi in hac cerei oblatione solemni
per ministrorum manus de operibus apum sacrosancta reddit Ecclesia; Sed jam
columnae hujus praeconia novimus quam in honorem Dei rutilans ignis accendit.
Qui licet sit divisus in parts, mutuati tamen luminis detrimenta non novit.
Alitur enim liquantibus ceris quas in substantiam pretiosae hujus lampadis apis
matter eduxit. O vere beata nox quae spoliavit Aegyptios, etc.
These are the very words, In the grace of this night, receive Holy Father, the
Evening Sacrifice of this Incense, which the sacred Church renders unto thee in
this solemn offering of a wax light by the hands of the Ministers of the work
of Bees: But already we acknowledge the praises of this pillar, which the
bright fire kindles in the honor of God. Which though it be divided into
parts, knows not the detriment of borrowed light. For it is fed with molten
wax which the mother Be has produced in the substance of this precious Taper.
O truly happy night which have stripped the Egyptians, and inricht the Hebrews!
Night in which earthly things are mingled with the heavenly, and the divine
with the humane! We beseech thee then Lord that this wax light consecrated in
the honor of thy Name persevere without failing, to destroy the obscurity of
this night, and being acceptable in the odor of sweet savor mingle it self
with the supreme Lights. Let the Morning Star here find her flames, that
Lucifer I say, which knows no setting. All that fricassy of absurd words, which
give unto a Taper that which is proper to the doctrine of the Gospel, and puts
a wax light made with the works of Bees among the heavenly Stars, is very far
from the language of the Holy Ghost.

XXV. Upon the same Saturday they bless the Fonts filled with water for
Baptism, in these words. Make this water by the Empire of thy Majesty to take
the grace of thine only Son by the Holy Ghost, which by the secret Note, The
Godhead mingling it self with the water gives it the virtue of regenerating
Souls, and makes the water to become a new creature, and a celestial race, by
the immaculate womb of the fountain. How the Priest makes three signs of the
Cross.
admixtion of his Godhead make this water fruitful, prepared for the
regeneration of men, That having conceived sanctification by the immaculate
womb of the divine Fountain, being born again into a new creature, it may
become a celestial race; and that the mother grace bring forth in an infancy
all whom the sex discerns in the body, or the age in the time. Away then
hence (thou Lord commanding it) all unclean spirits. Let all the wickedness of
devilish fraud stand far. Let not the mixture of the contrary virtue have place
here. Let her not fly about laying ambushes. Let her not creep in, hiding her
self. Let her not corrupt by infecting. Let this holy and innocent creature be
free from all assaults of the impugner, and purged by the parting of all
wickedness. Let this water be a living spring, a regenerating water, a
purifying liquour, that all they that shall be washed in this salutary laver,
the Holy Ghost working in them, may get an indulgence of perfect purgation.
Wherefore I bless thee creature of water, by the living God, by the true God,
by the holy God, by that God who in the beginning separated thee from the dry
ground by his Word, etc. Then he breathes upon the water in the form of a
Cross, and prays that these waters may be effectual for purifying the
understanding. And dipping the Taper three times in the water he says, Let the
virtue of the Holy Ghost descend into the fullness of the Fountain. After that,
he blows three times upon the water in this figure PS. Then he pours in
oil and chrisma in the form of a Cross. There is as much sense in all these
words, as efficacy in the ceremony. I suppose that some fanatical distracted
Monk, whose brains were swarming with extravagant conceits, framed these
Prayers in an ignorant age; or that some profane man devised these ridiculous
expressions to make a sport of God and Religion.

XXVI. Thus when they consecrate Salt, The Bishop or Priest says, I conjure
thee creature of Salt, etc. And speaking to the salt, as if the salt
understood, he gives virtue to it against evil spirits.

In the Missal to the use of Paris, in the Mass of the Holy Virgin Mary, there
is a Prose or Prayer in these terms, O felix puerpera, nostra pians scelera,
jure Matris impera Redemptori. O happy child-bed-woman, who expiatest our sins,
Command our Redeemer by right of mother.

XXVII. Could all these things and the like, wherewith the Roman Service is
full, be pronounced in French or another vulgar tongue; without amazing and
alienating the spirits of the hearers, and moving some of them to loath, some
to deride, some to execrate the grossness of the abuse offered unto Christian
Souls? Who would not laugh hearing the Priest saying in the Introit of the
Mass, Ad Deum qui laetificat juventutem meam, Unto God that makes my youth
glad, Although the Priest have a hoary head.

Truly the whole body of the Roman Service, especially the Canon of the Mass,
is so composed, that I make no doubt but that the Popes would gladly alter many
things in it, were it in their power; and would do the same with it as they
have done in the Masses of the Saints, out of which Pius V. and Clement VIII.
Popes have razed many Proses and Prayers to the Saints, which still are extant
in most part of the Missals. That which is most displeasing to our Adversaries
in the Canon of the Mass, is, that there are many clauses in it contrary to
merits, to Purgatory, to Transubstantiation, to private Masses, to the
Communion in one kind only, and to the unknown language. Also that it is
evident that almost all the Prayers of that Canon were made to be said over
alms, and over bread and wine, not over Christ's body. But they dare not take in
hand the amendment of these things, because Syn. Trid. Sess. XXII. Can. 6. Si
quis dixerit Canonem Missae errores continere, ideoque abrogandum esse,
Anathema esto.
the Council of Trent in the XXII. Session pronounces Anathema against any man
that will say, that any thing ought to be mended in the Canon of the Mass. They
have tied their own hands with that Law. This only remedy remains to them, to
keep the people from understanding the Mass, using for that a barbarous tongue,
a low mumbling, and a confused and inarticulate tone.

CHAP. X. Examination of the reasons of our Adversaries, of Card. Du Perron
especially.
UPon the Prayers of private men in a language not understood by the very
person that prays, our Adversaries yield the bucklers, and abandon their
cause. Only they say, It is the Church; for this word Church is a covering for
all sorts of abuses, and a plaster for all sores. This they oppose to the Word
of God, and to the whole Antiquity, and to reason, and to common sense, which
in this point are contrary to the Roman Church of our age.

But as for the public Service in a tongue not understood, they bring some few
small reasons, which must be examined.

I. They say, that the title of the Cross was written by Pilate in three
Languages, Hebrew, Greek and Latin. They will acknowledge Pilate who was a
Pagan Judge, for a Lawgiver that gave this Law to the Christian Church. For
being a man of great prudence, it is to be presumed, that he took care that the
Mass should be sung in a convenient Language. Thus the authority of Pilate
carries it above that of the Word of God, and against the examples of Christ,
the Prophets, and the Apostles. And if according to the custom of the Romans
the title of the Cross had been written in one tongue only, by their reason the
Mass should be sung in one tongue only. Or if Pilate had written nothing, the
Mass ought not to be sung at all.

II. Neither is their reason better when they say Card. Du Perron. 6. book 1.
chapter against K. James.
that it is expedient, that the divine Service be celebrated in all Countries
in the same language, that strangers may understand it. This second reason
contradicts the first. For if it be expedient that the divine Service be done
everywhere in the same language, we must not stand upon the inscription of the
Cross in three languages, and divine Service must be celebrated in one
language, over all the Universal Church.

For the same reason Sermons ought to be preached every where in the same
tongue in the behalf of strangers. Certainly the Service in Latin is no ease to
the strangers that are in France; for of those strangers there are three for
one at the least that understand no Latin; and for one that understands Latin,
there are ten that understand French. And those strangers that understand
Latin, cannot understand the Mass, a great part whereof is pronounced with such
a low voice, that they that stand by the Priest cannot hear him. But is there
any shadow of equity in this, that in consideration of a few strangers that are
in great Cities, the whole French Nation must be deprived of the intelligence
of the divine Service? especially all the inhabitants of Villages and
Market Towns, where there are no strangers? whereas the true way to gratify
strangers in a great City like Paris, should be to establish for the Italians a
Church, where they might have the Service in Italian, and the like for other
Nations. By this means every Nation should have the Service in Paris in their
natural language.

III. They add, that having the same tongue everywhere, is a sign of union and
concord in the Universal Church. By speaking so, they declare that it should be
expedient that the Service should be neither in Greek nor Hebrew, which tongues
nevertheless they affirm to have been authorized by the inscription of the
Cross. But the Union which God recommendeth in his Word, is not the Union in
the same language but in Faith and charity, which Union may be between men
diverse in language; Whereas persons of the same language many times disagree
in the Faith. God is glorified when he is purely and unanimously served and
called upon in diverse languages; as God himself says, As I live, says the
Lord, Romans 14.11. Isa. 43.23.
every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall confess to God. Wherefore
God gave unto his Apostles the gift of diverse tongues, that in all tongues God
might be served and called upon.

IV. They presuppose that the Divine Service was not instituted for the
instruction of the people, but only to glorify God by Prayers and
Thanksgivings, Du Perron in the same place.
and that the people by his presence may give his consent to that which is done
in the Church, and partake of the fruits which the Church obtains of God by
the Liturgy. And upon that presupposition they say, that the people that
understand not, lose not these fruits, nor the ends for which the Divine
Service was instituted, because the authority of the Church is unto them a
sufficient security, and that it is enough that their Pastors understand for
them.

But by those very ends for which they say that Divine Service is instituted,
it is easy to convince them. For persons assembled to glorify God by Prayers
and Thanksgivings, must know what they ask, and what they thank God for. These
Doctors will have the people to ask, and not to know what; to give him thanks,
and not to know for what. And whereas the people assembleth to give consent to
that which is said and done in the Church, how shall they give their consent
and approbation unto things which they understand not? And if they be assistant
to be partakers of the benefits which the Church receives by the public
Service, they are then assistant to be instructed and comforted; for it is one
of the fruits for which Divine Service is instituted. And whereas in the Mass
the Priest speaks unto the people, in vain does he speak unto those that do not
understand him. Also since in the Mass Chapters of Scripture are read, in which
God speaks unto men, we must not hinder that God be understood by men. The
Apostle, Romans 10.17. says that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word
of God; not then by a presence without understanding that which God propounds
to us in his Word. The same Apostle speaking to the people of Corinth, will
have them to 1 Cor. 11.26. (...).
announce the Lords death as often as they eat the bread, and drink the cup of
the Lords Supper; Which cannot be done by persons that are present and
understand not what is said. Such as are assistant to a service which they
understand not, are deprived of the benefit thereof.

V. As for that the Cardinal says, that the Church is a security to the
people, as if the Church were to answer for the people in Gods Judgment, I say,
that to that Church which bears her self for a security, there is need of
another security to assure us that she does not err, and that God accepts of
her security. Truly in the day of Judgment the Pastors shall not answer for
the people. That man shall be deceived that will in that day give his Parson
for a security. Those Pastors especially shall not be receivable, who to raise
their authority by leading the ignorant which way they would, have kept the
people far from all intelligence. But why cannot the Greek Churh be a security
as well as the Roman? seeing that it is more ancient then the Roman, and that
the Roman Church is her daughter, and has received Christian Religion from
her? For the Greek Church boasts also, that she is Catholic, and has the
chairs of St. Peter and of many Apostles.

VI. But P. 1079.
(says the Cardinal) if to profit at the Mass it was necessary to understand
it, the deaf and they that stand far from him that officiateth, should receive
no profit by it. If this reason be worth any thing, it will follow that we must
preach in an unknown tongue. For if it were necessary to preach in an
intelligible tongue, the deaf and the persons that stand too far from the
Preacher, should receive no benefit thereby. I answer then, that when the
defects of Nature keep us from hearing that which is said, we are not
accountable for it before God; for God imputes not to us as a crime, that which
himself has done. But we are accountable unto him of the hindrances which we
bring our selves unto the understanding of his Word. God supplyeth the defects
of Nature by the ways which are known to him: But man after he has done evil,
cannot (but seldom) bring a remedy to it. If the light of the Sun be useless to
the blind, it follows not therefore that the eyes of them that see must be
put out. Likewise if one or two are deaf, we must not therefore deprive the
rest of the people of intelligence. And he that stands far from him that
officiates speaking in a known tongue, might have profited more if he had been
nearer, and he may draw near another time.

VII. He objecteth also the strangers in England, that are present at the
English Service and understand no part of it. To which I say, that such
strangers go to that Service perhaps once or twice out of curiosity, not
devotion; and that if they understood English they might be more edified. Also
that the French have at London and in other Towns their Service in French.

VIII. He says also, that in the time of Christ and his Apostles, the Jews had
their ordinary Service in their Synagogues, in which they understood nothing;
Which we have already showed to be false. For Hebrew was then intelligible
among the people of Judea. It is not the same of the Jews called Hellenists, in
the sixth of the Acts, who were Jews transported into Egypt by Ptolomeus Lagus,
who also were called Babelim, and were spread in very great number over all
Africa. They were so called, because they were descended from the people that
had been transported into Babylon. Those Jews read in their Synagogues the
Greek Version of the Septuagint. Wherefore also the Apostle to the Hebrews,
writing to them, alleges the Scripture unto them according to their Version.
Of those Jews was See Scaliger de Emendatione temporum. p. 143.
Philo a Jew of Alexandria, a Learned man in Greek, but ignorant in Hebrew. For
in Alexandria the Greek tongue was so common, that the Bishops as Athanasius,
Cyrillus, Theophilus and others, preached there unto the people in Greek.

IX. It is without reason, that the Cardinal objecteth unto us the example of
the Priests of the Law, interceding for the people in the Temple, while the
people was without in the Court, and by consequent could not hear what the
Priest said. For here it is question of the Priest speaking to God in the Mass
in the presence of the people, and speaking to the people. Also of the Mass, in
the which Chapters of Scripture are read, All that in a tongue which the people
understands not. Yea there are many Priests that understand not their Mass. It
is then nothing to the purpose, to bring us here the example of a Priest that
spoke not to the people, and spoke not unto God before the people while he was
in the holy place, and read to the people no Text or Chapter of Gods Law.
Neither do we find in Scripture, that the Priest spoke or pronounced any Prayer
with his mouth while he made propitiation for the people in the Holy place, or
in the Sanctuary. I verily believe, that if that Priest coming out of the
Temple unto the people attending in the Court, had spoken to the Congregation
in a barbarous and strange tongue, the people would have stoned him.

X. These Doctors confess, that by the unknown language the people is deprived
of instruction and comfort: But that defect (say they) is supplied by Sermons,
in which the Contents of the Mass are expounded. Suppose that it is so; Is it
not a great abuse for one to make wounds that he may apply plasters? It were
better that the Priest should so speak to the people in his Mass as to be
understood, then to make the poor people to hope that within some years they
should learn the exposition of it in some Sermon. But it is most false, that in
their Sermons they expound the Mass, either for the words or the matter. Take
me a Peasant or a Tradesman, who has heard the Mass fifty years, you shall
find him altogether ignorant of that which is said in the Mass. Do they make
the people understand in Sermons why the Priest praying for the dead, says
that he prays for those that sleep in the sleep of peace? Or why the Priest
presenting the consecrated Host unto God, which Host they say to be Jesus
Christ, asks of God that he would accept of that gift as he did of Abels
Sacrifice, which was a calf or a lamb? Or why the Priest prays in the Mass,
that the Angels may take Christ whith lies upon the Altar, and carry it up to
the heavenly Altar? Or why the Priest calls the body of Christ these gifts,
these presents, which God always creates and quickens? Or why the Priest in
his Confiteor confesses his sins unto God, to the holy Virgin Mary, to Michael
the Archangel, and to St. John the Baptist, without speaking one word of
Christ? Or why in the Mass the holy Virgin is preferred before Christ, in these
words, communicating, and celebrating in the first place the memory of the
Virgin Mary, although the Lords Supper be instituted for the remembrance of
Christ only, and to announce his death?

XI. Cardinal Du Perron finds, that the incommodity which is in the Service not
understood by the people, brings this benefit, that the merit of the endeavor
and exercise of the Faith of the people is thereby the greater. He thinks, that
the less knowledge there is in Faith, the more merit; and that he that has
less intelligence, is he that has more Faith, and that meriteth more. Harding
says much the same thing, That the people indeed understands not the Latin of
the Mass, Harding De precibus peregrina lingua factis; Hic pius animorum
affectus tam est proculdubio Deo gratus ut nulla verborum intelligentia
conferri queat.
but that their pious affection is so acceptable unto God, that no
understanding of words can be compared to it. By that reckoning there is merit
in want of knowledge, and ignorance must be numbered among the blessings of God.
Grant that once, we must no more instruct any man in the true knowledge of God,
for fear of diminishing the merit and price of his Faith. Yea if this Doctrine
may be current; that Faith consists in ignorance, not in knowledge; and that
Faith is opposed to science, as Cardinal Bellarmine told us before: Truly this
Maxim is a great prop of the Papal dominion, and of the authority of the
Clergy; since it teaches to believe without knowing, and to follow the Pope
and his doctrine, blindfolded, without inquiring of the will of God or of his
Word, which is a light that God presents unto us, that we may our selves know
the right way. Truly although incurable ignorance diminish the fault, yet it is
an evil; as being born blind excuses going astray, yet going astray is evil.
But to study to be ignorant, To fear to learn, To be wilfully blind, and to
think that there is merit in wilful ignorance, it is, besides folly, a
headstrong obstinacy, and a full purpose to reject the knowledge of Gods will.
And I cannot comprehend that great endeavor and exercise of Faith, which the
Cardinal says to be in them that believe without understanding, seeing that
there is no labor in not believing, knowing nothing and refusing to learn.

XII. The same Prelat insisteth very much upon the danger of translating the
Liturgy into a vulgar tongue, saying that the alteration of one syllable or one
letter only in the the mystery of the Church, may bring an alteration in the
Faith, as in the (...) of the Arians. That one could not translate Divine
Service without running into that danger. That the Phrases of old French should
be rediculous in our time, as it may be seen in the Romances; and that Marot's
traduction of the Psalms a hundred years hence will appear rude, silly and
ridiculous.

If that objection has any weight, it should have with more reason hindered the
traduction of the holy Scripture into Latin, and into the vulgar tongues, for
fear that some depravation in a word or in a syllable alter the doctrine of
Salvation; for the Text of Scripture is far more important then that of the
Mass, seeing that changing a word in Scripture is a crime; but the text of the
Mass has received a thousand alterations and additions, as our Adversaries
acknowledge. Yet that fear did not hinder the Ancients to make many versions of
Scripture both in Greek and Latin, The multitude whereof was so diverse, that
Hieron. in Evangelistas ad Damasum. Si Latinis exemplaribus sides est
adhipenda, respondeant quibus; tot ^nim sunt exemplaria pene quot codices.
Hierome says that there was almost as many diverse versions ae copyes of the
Bible. And Austin says, that the multitude of Latin Interpreters was almost
infinite. Our Adversaries confess, that the vulgar Latin version is much
different from the Hebrew and Greek Texts; but they acknowledge not, that this
diversity has caused in the Church of Rome any alteration in the Faith. That
fear did not hinder Hierome to translate the Bible into the Dalmatick tongue,
nor Vlfilas to turn it into the Gothic tongue, nor every Nation of the Church
to translate it into their own. And the versions into vulgar tongues were so
far from altering in any respect the truth and authority of the Greek and
Hebrew Originals, that the World may thank the Churches that have now Divine
Service in their vulgar language, for restoring to the Western Church the
purity of the Hebrew and Greek tongues, Aug. l. 2. de doctrina Christiana cap.
11. Ut ad exemplaria praeced^ntia rever^^tur, si quam ^abitationem attul^rit
Latinoram interp^etum infinita varietas.
for bringing the Hebrew and Greek Originals to the public sight, and for the
restitution of the integrity of the version of Scripture, which the Roman
Church had disfigured in the vulgar version.

But why does the Cardinal apprehend a danger in the translation of the public
Service, and finds no inconvenience in so many alterations that were made in
Christ's institution; so many new pieces being sowed up to the Mass Concerning
these Additions see Platina in the life of S^^tus the I. and Innocent the III
in the 2. book of the Mass, chapter 61. We showed before how Bellarmin
acknowledges in the 2. book of the Mass, chapter 17. that five Prayers which are
in the Offertory, were not in it 500. years ago.
unto which several Popes have added some clauses? Has not Pius the V.
reformed the Missals, and put out many Prayers, Proses and Sequences, which
were in the old Missals, whereby Priests are put to great trouble?

And to what purpose does he allege that inconvenience, to which (if one may
believe our Adversaries) they have a ready remedy, since they say that the Pope
and the Roman Church cannot err in the Faith. For whenever the Pope will
examine and approve the Mass translated into French, that Translation shall be
authentical among our Adversaries, and shall be without exception after his
approbation.

As for that he says that the French terms in two or three hundred years would
become ridiculous, the like may be said of Latin and Greek, and of any other
tongue. Whence it would follow, that the Mass must never be said in Latin, for
fear that by the lapse of time the terms of the Mass become ridiculous. The
words which by the established form of the Divine Service were preserved, never
become ridiculous among them that approve that Service. In the public Service
of the Roman Mass there are words truly ridiculous, and such as never were
good, as Evohe, Miserere nobis, and Stabat matter dolorosa; and many like these,
which yet are not ridiculous in the Roman Church, because they are authorized
by the Divine Service. And these words Alleluja and Hosanna are long since
become vulgar, and yet are not ridiculous when they are pronounced in the
reading of Scripture or in the public Service.

XIII. Finally, the Cardinal objecteth, that if the Service were no more done
in Latin, there being no more common language, Universal Councils could be held
no more, and so all means should be taken away of deciding the points of Faith
with infallible certainty, and the ancient Decrees and Canons should be
abolisht. This Objection is confuted by experience; for the Greek Church and
the Roman had not in old time, and never had a tongue common to both, and yet
they celebrated Councils together. They chose in Italy some Deputies that
understood Greek; for then the Latin Church did accommodate her self unto the
Greek, because the Emperors lived in Greece, and that by their command the
Bishop of Rome sent his Deputies to the Universal Councils; None of which
Councils was held in Italy, although the Bishops of Rome desired it; and were
humble petitioners for it to the Emperors.

If to hold Councils in the West, it is necessary that the Latin tongue be
common everywhere; So many Academies and Colleges where Latin is taught are
sufficient to preserve the Latin tongue, although the public Service be in the
vulgar tongue: as it is seen in Countries, whence Popery is banished, though
they have Divine Service in their own language. There also the Councils and the
ancient Canons are carefully preserved. It is a gross abuse, to think that the
barbarous Latin of the Mass, serves for the preservation of the Latin tongue,
or that the text of the Mass serves to understand Virgil or Livy, or to speak
in Tullie's style. Yea though the Latin of the Mass were as elegant as it is
rude and barbarous, it would be but a weak help to preserve the Latin tongue.
The pure Greek of the Greek Liturgy did not hinder the corruption of the Greek
tongue, when the Turks had once put down Schools. And the Liturgy of the
Armenians which is in the Armenian tongue, and the Liturgy of the Ethiopians
which is in the Ethiopick tongue, have not hindered the corruption of the old
Armenian and Ethiopick languages.

As for grounding Christian Faith upon the decision of Councils which
contradict one another, the late Councils being contrary to the old, and the
Pope approving nothing but that which is fit for his turn, opposing himself
often to Universal Councils, it is another question which is not for this
place. The clear Texts of Scripture which need no interpretation, are
sufficient unto Salvation. Who so bears himself as an infallible Judge of the
sense of Scripture, sets himself above God, for he makes God to speak according
to his will; He may alter Scripture undet a pretense of expounding Scripture,
and has a way open to build an Empire to himself. Such a man has need to be
free from all vice, lest he bring an interpretation that serve to color vices,
feed his covetousness, or maintain his ambition.

Such are the reasons of our Adversaries, which are but shifts and humane
considerations, without, yea against the word of God, and they are confuted by
experience and by common sense.

CHAP. XI. Examination of the proofs that the Cardinal brings out of Antiquity,
for the Service in a strange tongue.
IF the reasons of our Adversaries were weak, their allegations out of
Antiquity are no stronger. Cardinal Du Perron is he that has most contributed
to the gathering of those allegations.

He says that In his Book against King James, lib. 6. cap. 1. page 1089.
in the time of the ancient Fathers, the Service was never celebrated in the
Christian Religion but in two tongues, Greek and Latin. This he affirms
without proofs, and against truth, and we brought before many proofs to the
contrary. Himself in the beginning of the chapter acknowledges, that the Syrian
Churchs have their Service in old Syriack, the Armenian Churches in old
Armenian, and the Ethiopian Churches in old Ethiopick. He ought then to have
proved, that the Armenians and Ethiopians had sometimes their Liturgy in Greek
or Latin, which shall not be found. The same I say of the Indian and Persian
Churches, who never made use in their Liturgy, no more then in the civil
commerce, of the Greek or Latin tongue; but only in this last age in some
corners of the East Indies, where the Jesuits have brought in the Roman Service.

Next he alleges the Jews who use Hebrew in their Synagogues, a tongue which
is not vulgar in any Country of the World. So he defends his cause with the
authority of the sworn enemies of Christ, whose example if we must follow, we
must also be circumcised and renounce Christianity. But we acknowledge in that
practcie of theirs the fulfilling of Gods curse upon that people, 1 Cor. 14.21.
With men of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this People, Isa.
28.11.
and so they shall not understand me. For as for the Jews of the time of Christ
and his Apostles, we have proved in the sixth chapter of this Treatise, that the
people then understood Hebrew.

Du Perron. p. 1077.
The Cardinal makes use of the very Pagans and Mahumetans, holding that the
Roman Church has wisely done to follow their example. He shows sufficiently
that he finds no help in the Word of God, since he has recourse to such
authorities. He says then that the Turks and Persians celebrate their Service
in the Grammatical Arabic, not in that which is vulgar to the Turks and
Persians; that the Verses of the Salians in which the ancient Service of the
Roman Commonwealth was contained, were hardly understood by the Priests. He
might have said also, that the Magicians will add barbarous and unintelligible
words unto their conjuring. If in this question the Devil, who seduced the
Pagans, and now blinds the Mahumetans, must be taken for Judge, we must speak
no more of Gods Service or Gospel. That must needs be a desperate and forsaken
cause that makes use of such proofs. Note by the way, that this Prelate while
he goes about to show his learning in History, betrayeth his ignorance. For
the Arabians, who make well nigh one half of the Mahumetans, have their Service
and the Alcoran in their vulgar tongue. And the Verses of the Salians contained
but a small part of the Roman Pagan Service, namely the Service of Mars and of
Quirinus, for they were Priests of Mars. But the body of the Roman Religion was
contained in the Tuscan discipline, brought in by Numa.

Page 1089.
He says also, that in the Eastern Church the Service was in Greek only, which
we have convinced of untruth. The ancient Churches of Armenia, Persia and India
never had their Service in Greek. And it is without doubt that the Churh of
Jerusalem in the Apostles time-celebrated the Sacraments in the same language
as Christ instituted them, which was understood by the People. Durandus in his
Rational, in the fourth book, chapter 1. says that In primitiva Ecclesia mysteria
Hebraice celebrabantur, sed tempore Adriani Imperatoris Graece in Ecclesia
Orientali Christianorum primo celebrari coeperunt.
in the Primitive Church the mysteries were celebrated in Hebrew; but that in
the time of the Emperor Adrian they began to be celebrated in Greek in the
Eastern Church of the Christians, understanding by the Eastern Church that
which was subject to the Roman Empire in the East, namely Syria, Judea, Natolia
or Asia Minor, to which also we may add Egypt. In all those Countries
wheresoever the Service was done in Greek, there also Sermons were done in
Greek. An evident proof that the Greek tongue was there the most vulgar, though
it differed from the ancient vulgar tongues. Thus Athanasius and Cyrillus and
Theophilus preached in Greek to the people of Alexandria. And Cyrillus of
Jerusalem preached in Greek at Jerulem. And Eusebius in Cesarea of Palestina,
and Chrysostom in Antioch the capital of Syria, and Basilius in Cesarea of
Cappadocia, and Gregory Nazianzen at Nazianza, and Gregorius Nyssenus at Nyssa.
Cicero pro Archia Poeta. Graca leguntur in omnibus fere gentibus; Latina suis
finibus exiguis sane continentur.
Tully in his Oration for the Poet Archias says, that Greek is read almost
over all Nations. For the Empire of the Grecians successors of Alexander, had
planted the Greek tongue in Syria, in Egypt, in Cilicia, in Cappadocia, and
Galatia, and had made it so familiar, that the vulgar tongues used before the
reign of the Seleucides and the Ptolomees were less familiar then the Greek;
for always Sermons must be accommodated to the ears of the plain people. Thus
in the Reformed Churches of Gascoigne and Languedoc Sermons and divine Service
are in French, though it differ from the language of the Country; But French is
so well understood there, that the people prefer French before their Gascon
dialect, and understand it with the like facility. The Cardinal was not
ignorant of that, Which he shows by maintaining only that in the East Greek
was not the vulgar tongue, but he maintains not that Greek was not understood
there. So he wanders out of the question. For our difference is not whether the
public Service must be celebrated in the vulgar tongue, but whether it must be
celebrated in a language understood by the people.

Hierom in his Preface of the second book upon the Epistle to the Galatians,
says, that the language of the Galatians was like that of the Gauls of
Triers. But there he speaks of the tongue which the Galatians had brought to
the Country of Galatia, not of the tongue which they had learned in it. Yet the
Cardinal makes use of that passage of Hierom to prove that in Galatia Greek was
not the vulgar language. But he falsifieth that passage according to his
custom; Whereas the passage is altogether against him. Hierom's words are
these, Galateas accepto sermon Graeco quo omnis Oriens loquitur, propriam
candem linguam habere quam Treviros. That the Galatians besides the Greek
languge which all the East speaks, have a proper tongue like unto that of
Triers. This passage plainly affirms, that the Greek tongue was current in
Galatia as in all the East. But the Cardinal alleges Hierome in these words,
The Galatians tongue was like that of the Gauls near Triers. The falsification
is evident. But St. Paul writing to the Galatians in Greek presupposed that
they understood Greek. The Lycaonian language mentioned, Acts 14.11. was rather
a dialect then a diverse tongue. And though they had a diverse tongue, yet it
is evident that Greek was understood by the Lyconians, since Paul and Barnabas
spoke to the common people in Greek.

CHAP. XII. How Latin was brought into the Divine Service in France and Spain.
FRom the East the Cardinal passes to the West, and says that over all the
West the Service was celebrated in Latin. But this touches not the question.
For in all places where the pubick Service was in Latin, Sermons were also in
the same tongue, and Latin was understood by women and children. It cannot be
found in the ancient History that ever the Latin Service was used in any place
where Latin was not understood. Thus in Gauls the Service was celebrated in
Latin, because Latin was become more vulgar among the Gauls then their ancient
tongue, which wore away by little and little; so that the Gauls were called
Romans, and are so called by Gregory of Tours, and by that name distinguished
from the Franks and Burgundians, who were strangers. The language of the
Country was called Roman, whereas the language of the Court was Dutch, such as
they spoke in Guelders and Gulick. The difference remained yet in the time of
Charlemagne. For in the third Council of Tours held under his Reign, in the
year of Christ 812. in the seenteenth chapter every Bishop is commanded Et ut
easdem Homilias quisque aperte transfer studeat in rusticam Romanam linguam,
aut Theotiscam, quo facilius cuncti possint intelligere quae dicuntur.
to have Homilies or Sermons in two languages; In the Roman rustic tongue,
that is, in the tongue of the common people, and in the Theotick or Tudesk,
that is, in Dutch, that all might understand the Sermons. Now this was the time
when the Gallicane Church by the violence of that King began to receive the
Roman Service, notwithstanding the resistance of the Clergy, whereas they had
before the Ambrosian Service, and were in nothing subject to the Bishop of Rome,

Under the Empire of Marcus Aurelius about the year of the Lord 168. Christian
Religion began to spread in Gauls, and then first began Martyrdoms, as
Sulpitius Severus says, (who was a Gaul, and lived near that time) in the
second book of his Sacred History. Sub Aurelio deinde Antonini filio persecutio
quinta agitata. Ac tum primum intra Gallias martyria visa, serius trans Alps
Dei religione transgressa.
Under Aurelius son of Antoninus the fifth persecution was moved; and then
first Martyrdoms were seen in Gauls, the Religion of God having past very late
over the Alps. In that time the Latin tongue was so familiar in Gauls, that
it it was more used then the old language of Gauls, so that the language of
the Country was called Roman, and the Gauls Romans, as we said before. It is
like that the Latin of Gauls was neither so polite nor so congruous as that of
Rome. Wherefore Pacatus in a Panegyric to Theodosius, Tum difficilius
progenita atque haereditaria orandi facilitate non esse fastidio rudem hunc et
incultum Transalpini sermonis horrorem.
excuses himself for not speaking so good Latin as those that were born in
Italy. Then the Contracts, the Pleas, and all the acts of the Law were done in
Latin. The Gotthick Laws which were observed from the Straight of Gibraltar to
the River of Loire, abbreviated from the Theodosian Code by the Visigoth Kings,
were Latin, as Fauchet teaches, who of all the French Antiquaries is the most
learned. Fauchet in the life of King Clovis.
In the year of Christ 252. under the Emperor Decius (as Gregory of Tours
observes in the first book of his History) Gratian came to Tours, to preach
the Gospel among the Pagans, Saturninus to Toulouse, and Dionysius to Paris,
where he was Bishop and suffered Martyrdom. This is he who is falsely named
Dionysius or Denis the Areopagite. Saturninus also was cast down from the
Capitol of Tolouse. The language of these men being Latin, and the people which
they preached to, speaking Latin, it is no wonder that they instituted a Latin
Service, and yet it was not after the Roman way, Fauchet ibidem chapter 19.
but with diverse ceremonies according to the necessity of the time, and the
exigence of the places, to tame the Pagans. Which diversity continued till the
Ambrosian Service was received in Gauls, which was observed there until the
time of Charlemagne, who brought in the Romon Serviee.

The Franks being entered into France, and having subdued it as far as the River
of Loire (for the rest as far as the Pyrenees was under the Visigoths until
the time of Clovis, who left no part of France to the Visigoths, who reigned
also in Spain, but the low Languedock, which the Romans called Septimania, and
a little part of Guienne) the Latin or Roman tongue was corrupted and fell from
its purity; Yet not so, but that the Latin Divine Service was intelligible
still. We heard before the testimony of Sulpitius Severus in the life of St.
Martin, relating that one of the People having taken the Psalter in the place
of the Reader then absent, began to read the eighth Psalm, where there is ut
destruas inimicum and defensorem, at which word defensorem, the people cried
out against one Defensor, who opposed Martin's election to the Episcopacy.

Prosper Aquitanus writ about the year of Christ 450. In his first book of
Contemplative Life, chapter 23. he prescribes that the Preachers language sit
simplex and apertus, etiamsi minus Latinus, disciplinatus tamen and gravis, be
simple and plain, though it be not very good Latin, yet that it be orderly and
grave, that it may hinder no body, though ignorant, to understand it. Now he
speaks of the people of Guienne.

Almost in the same time lived Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Clermont in
Auvergne, who had married the daughter of the Emperor Avitus, by whom he had
children. This man who writ all his Epistles in Latin, preached also in Latin.
In the tenth Epistle of the second book Ut nisi vel paucissimi quique meram
Latiaris linguae proprietatem de trivialium barbarismorum rubigine vindicarint,
eam brevi abolitam defleamus.
he complains, that in his time among the vulgar the purity and property of
the Latin tongue decayed, and degenerated into barbarousness. And in the
Epistle to Pope Perpetuus Quae Epistola est 9. lib. 7.
(for then all the Bishops that were a little more respected then the ordinary
Bishops, were called Popes) there is a Latin Sermon made by the said Sidonius
unto the People of Bourges, a certain proof that the people of Bourges
understood Latin.

Now although the mixture of Visigoths and Franks among the people of Gauls
had altered the Latin tongue, yet the Latin could not be rooted out of the
land. And the Frank Kings whose language was Dutch of Guelders, to comply with
their people learned Latin, as Fortunatus witnesses, speaking of King Aribert,
Cum sis progenitus clara de gente Sicamber,
Floret in eloquio lingua Latina tuo.


But by the lapse of time Latin being corrupted in Gauls, and the Tudesk
language abolished, the Roman was so altered that it became another tongue the
Latin. And already in the time of the second race of our Kings the tongue of
the Country was no more Latin. And yet through the negligence of Bishops and
the ignorance of the people, no care was taken to put the Divine Service in the
vulgar tongue. We find that then the study of Bishops was to adorn Churches,
lay up relics, and provide Singing men with strong and clear voices to sing
the Service with Art, and fill the vaults of the Quires. Images were not yet
received in France, nor the celibat of Clarks, nor Purgatory, nor Roman
Indulgences. But the Wars of the French in Italy against the Lombards in the
time of Pepin, and of his son Charlemagne, caused a strict League of the Kings
of France with the Bishop of Rome, who was a mortal enemy to the Lombards.
Whence it came to pass that Pepin, and after him his son Charles, and Lewis the
Meek son of Charles, made great presents unto the Bishops of Rome, and gave him
all the Lands and Possessions which the Pope now enjoys in Italy, yet
reserving the Sovereignty to themselves. Charles adds to his liberalities
this favor, that at the request of Pope Adrian the I. he banished the Ambrosian
Service out of his Kingdom, See Durand in the fifth book of the Rational, chapter
2. And Fauchet in the seventh book of French Antiquities. an. 796.
and established in France by force and against the will of the French Clergy
the Gregorian or Roman Office. By this change the Latin tongue in the public
Service was fully established. For that which was done before only by the
negligence of the French Bishops, was done since that time by a Law, as the
bondage increased from age to age. It would be now a crime of Heresy, and a
manifest rebellion against the Papal Sea, to call for the Divine Service in
another tongue then the Latin or Roman. And I know not whether it was by hazard
or by conjecture, or by inspiration, that Ireneus in this word (...)
Latin found the name of Antichrist and the number of 666.

The like things happened in Spain, where the Latin tongue was become so
frequent and so familiar, that in the time of the Emperors Domitian and
Trajan, and long after them, it was as familiar in Spain as at Rome, saving
only in Arragon, and in the Cantabrian mountains, (now Bescay) and in Gallicia.
Seneca and Quintilian and Martial excellent Authors of the Latin tongue, were
Spaniards. Martial's Parents were Fronto and Flacilla, which are Roman names,
as also the names of Martial and Quintilian; an evident sign that the language
of the Country was Roman. No wonder then that when Christian Religion was
received in Spain, the ordinary Service was Latin. Which yet was not after the
way, nor by the order of the Bishop of Rome, who indeed was respected there for
the dignity of the City, but yet had no power or jurisdiction in Spain.

In the year of Christ 408. Genceric King of the Vandals conquered Spain over
the Roman Empire, and soon after left it, to pass into Africa, quitting the
place to the Visigoths, who reigning before in Aquitaine made themselves
Masters of Spain, in the year of Christ 417. The Laws of these Visigoths were
Latin, and though their language was Gotthick, they were well acquainted with
Latin. Wherefore also their Councils and general Assemblies spoke Latin. The
ordinary Office or Service of the Orthodox Spaniards (for the Visigoths were
Arians at the first) was called the Mozarabick or Toletan Office, of which an
abridgement is extant in Isidorus in the book of Ecclesiastical Offices. This
Isidorus born at Sevil, writ about the year of Christ 630.

In the year 713. the Saracens abolished the Kingdom of the Goths in Spain,
killed their King Roderick in battle, and banished Christian Religion out of
most part of Spain. They held Spain for many ages, till the residue of the
Christians which were fled into the mountains, having taken vigor again, in
the end expelled the Moors, restored Christian Religion to Spain, and set up
many little Kingdoms. Their Service was still Latin according to the ancient
form, although by the Mixture of the Saracens with them, they had lost the
ordinary use of the Latin tongue. Their Office was the old Mozarabick Office
which remained in Spain till about the year of Christ 1080. Vide Roderic
Archiepis. Toletan. lib. 2. c. 25, et 26.
when King Alphonsus to please Pope Gregony the VIII. did with open force and
against the will of the States of the Country establish the Roman Office in
Spain. Then the Latin tongue which before was used by custom, was established by
a Law, And so remains to this day.

CHAP. XIII. Of England and Germany, and how the Roman Service and the Latin
tongue were received in those Countries.
LEt us pass into England, in old time called Britain. Harding in the first
Section of his Treatise of Prayers in a strange tongue says, that Etenim
circiter nongentos abhinc annos constat plebem in nonnullis regionibus preces
suas publicas ignola lingua recitasse, id quod in Anglia nostra fuisse
factitatum faciam manifestum.
about nine hundred years ago public Prayers began to be made in some
Countries in a language not understood; And that the said custom began then in
England. That Doctor well read in Antiquity finds not the use of the Latin
tongue in England more ancient then nine hundred years since, wherein he says
true.

We must know that England received the Christian Religion before any Churches
were set up in Gauls. Nicephorus in the second book chapter 40. says that Simon
Zelotes the Apostle carried the Doctrine of the Gospel into the West Sea, and
to the Britanick Islands. Gildas an English Author who lived in the sixth Age,
and Polydorus Virgilius in the second book of his History, say, that Joseph of
Arimathea was the first that preached the Gospel in Britain. Baleus in his
first Century alleges many other witnesses. Tertullian who writ about the end
of the second Age, in the seventh chapter of the book against the Jews, says, that
Britannorum inaccessa loca Christo vero subdita.
the inaccessible places of the Brittons were subjected unto the true Christ.
And Theodoret in the ninth book of the means of curing the indisposition of the
Grecians; (...).
Our Fishermen and Publicans and our Tanner (so he calls the Apostles) have
brought unto all men the Evangelical Laws, and have persuaded not only the
Romans and those that are tributary to them, but also the Scythians, the
Indians, etc. and the Britans, to receive the Laws of him that was crucified.
Westmonasteriensis and Galfridus.
Some Authors say that in the year 185. Lucius King of Britain sent to Pope
Eleutherius, beseeching him that he might be instructed by him in the Christian
Religion, and that he abolisht Paganism in all Britain, so that there
remained not one Infidel; A story invented in the Popes favor, but manifestly
false; for these Historians create Britain Kings peaceably reigning in the
South of the Island, which was subject to the Romans, and had no other King but
the Roman Emperor. The state of this Island under the Romans may be seen in
Cornelius Tacitus in the life of Julius Agricola, and in Xiphilinus the
Epitomizer of Dion, in the lives of the Emperors Nero and Severus. In that
time the Christians living in the South of Britain, suffered persecution under
the Romans who were Pagans. And for the North of the Island now called
Scotland, and the Country of Northumberland, it was Pagan, and so was long
after the time of Eleutherius.

Hieron. Oceano, Scotorum and Asotorum ritu ac de rep. Platonis promiscuas
uxores ac communes liberos habeant.
Hierome in his Epistle to Oceanus speaks of the Scots as of a People that had
women common in his time, which was above 200. years after Eleutherius. Idem
lib. 2. in Jovi^ianum, Cum ipse adolescentulus in Gallia viderim Scotos gentem
Britannam humanis vesci carnibus, et cum per sylvas porcorum greges et
armentorum pecudumque reperiant, pastorum nates et feminarum papillas solere
abscindere, et has solas ciborum delicias arbitrari. Scotorum natio uxores
proprias non habet.
In his second book against Jovinian he says, that he had seen Scots eating
man's flesh. And Galfridus in the second chapter of the third book of his History
speaks of them as of Pagans.

Besides, the Christians of Britain celebrated the Passover upon the fouteenth
day of the Moon of March precisely, contrary to the constitutions of the Roman
Church. Which they would not have done, had they been brought to Christian
Religion by the Roman Church.

Britain remained under the domination of the Romans Pagans till the year of
Christ 286. in Diocletians time, when the Roman Senate sent Caransius to
repress the incursions of barbarous Nations. But Caransius made a league with
the Britans, expelled the Romans, and made himself King. And from that time,
sometimes the Romans prevailing, sometimes the Natives, the Island was but
weakly possessed by the Roman Empire.

In the year of Christ 307. Constantin, son of Constantius and Helena a
Christian woman, was Governor of the Island for the Romans. Being Pagan, he
took the title of Roman Emperor, past into Gauls, thence into Italy, and made
himself an absolute Emperor. Then turning Christian, he gave peace and
prosperity to the Churches of Britain.

In the year 383. Maximus a Christian and Orthodox Prince governed Britain; for
then all that part of the Island which was subject to the Romans was Christian.
This Maximus invaded Gauls with an Army and conquered it, and took the title
of Roman Emperor against Gratian son of Theodosius.

In the year of Christ 434. the Empire being fallen in the West, and torn by
the Goths, Franks, Vandals, and Burgundians, the Romans forsook the Isle of
Britain. Which moved the natives to defer the Kingdom to Constantin brother to
the King of Armorick Britain, as one descended from their Nation, and a
Christian virtuous man.

In the year 446. according to the calculation of Westmonasteriensis, the
Pelagian Heresy spreading in the Isle of Britain, the Bishops of the Land
being assembled in a Synod, sent into France, and writ to German Bishop of
Auxerre, and to Lupus Bishop of Troyes in Champagne, men famous for their
doctrine, and besought them to come and assist them with their help and
counsel, which they did, and with success, God pouring a blessing upon their
holy endeavor. This Historian says not that the Pope sent them, as some
untruly affirm, but that they came upon the request of the Britans.

In the year of Christ 449. three Ships of Anglosaxons came from East Friseland
into the Isle of Britain and made way for others that came four years after in
great number. They were a Dutch and Pagan Nation, serving Saturn, Jupiter, and
Mercury. Being once landed, they could never be expelled out of the Land, and
subdued the South and the East of the Island, and planted Paganism in it,
dividing the Country into many little Kingdoms. But besides the Christians that
lived under the dominion of the Saxons, all the West part of the Island, that
is Cornwall, and Cambria now called Wales, was Christian. Scotland had already
received the Christian Religion, so that the Island was half Christian.

In the year 596. Pope Gregory the I. judged the conjuncture of English
affairs to be a fit time for him to raise the authority of his See. For the
Christians of England being not fit to give instruction to the Pagan English
Kings by reason of their continual wars; and those petty Kings being brutish
and easy to be led, and the Christians of the Island living under other Laws
and other ceremonies then the Roman Church, he sent Austin a Monk of St.
Benedict (the only order of Monks that was then in the West) into England, an
industrous politic man, to work two ends. The one to reduce the Christians of
the Island to the form and service of the Roman Church, and induce them to
acknowledge his See. The other, to draw if he could some of those Pagan Kings
to the Christian Religion.

This Austin came into England with an attendance of forty persons, and
presented himself to one of those Kings called Ethelbert King of Kent, who
received him honorably. Shortly after having insinuated himself into the
Queens favor, he persuaded her to embrace the Christian Faith. The Queen
persuaded her husband to the same. And he was followed by a multitude of
Pagans. From this King Austin got leave to have communication with the
Christians of the West part of England, whom he exhorted to join with him,
because (says Westmonasteriensis) sanctum Pascha et alia perplura unitati
Ecclesiae contraria faciebant. They did the Passover and many other things in
a way contrary to the unity of the Church. These Christians before they
communed with him, consulted a man famous for his wisdom and holiness, one that
led a solitary life; and asked him, whether at the swasion of Austin they
should leave their ancient customs. The good man answered them, If he be a man
of God, follow him. But (said they) how shall we discern whether he be a man of
God? He answered them again, You shall know it by his humility, and if he
induces you by his example to bear the Cross of Christ. They then having met
with Austin in a Synod appointed for that meeting, Austin received them with
contempt, and would not so much as rise from his seat when they came in. They
also repayed his contempt with contempt, and contradicted all that he
propounded, taxing him of pride. And although Gregory had sent him the Pallium,
and had named him Archbishop, yet Nihil horam facturos, neque illum pro
Episcopo habituros esse respondebant. Baron. An. 604. Sect. 58. Beda ait Scotos
and Britannos and Hibernos ne quidem cibum capere voluisse cum Laurentio
Augustini successore. Bid Hist. Angl. l. 2. c. 4.
they declared unto him that they did not acknowledge his authority, and would
not obey him in any thing. At which Austin incensed, threatened them that the
Anglosaxons would avenge him; And he made his word good; for Ethelfrid King of
Northumberland, though a Pagan, took his quarrel, and whether out of goodwill
to Austin, or out of hatred to Christians, he made of them a great slaughter.
They had at Bangor a great Monastery of about twelve hundred Monks, all poor
Tradesmen, getting their living by their labor; Of them this Pagan* King made
a Massacre and a Sacrifice unto Austin.

But as for the Saxon Christians converted by Austin from Paganism, they
received the Roman Service such as Austin would give them, and subjected
themselves unto Austin, sent by the Bishop of Rome about the year 600. of
Christ; Which is the time that Harding marketh unto us, saying, that since 900.
or a thousand years the Service was celebrated in England in a language not
understood, acknowledging that it was this Austin who with the Roman Service
brought also the Roman tongue, which since that time remained in the public
Service of England till the time of the Reformation. Every age since that time
has added some piece to the Religion, so that if this Austin had risen from
the dead seven or eight hundred years after his death, he should have found in
England and at Rome quite another religion then that he had preached. That which
we have said of this Austin and his entry into England and his behavior, is
found in Beda, in the second chap. of the second book of the History of the
Anglosaxons, in Galfridus Monumetensis, in the fourth chap. of the eighth book
of the History of the two Britains. And in the flower of Histories of Matthew
of Westminster.

Beda in the fourth book of his History says, that in the year of Christ 668.
one Steven by Surname, taught the people of Northumberland to follow the Roman
singing in the public Service. In that time the Roman Service was not yet
received in France nor in Spain. The same Austin passing through France and
finding there the Service different from the Roman Liturgy, asked counsel of
his Master Gregory how he should behave himself in that diversity; Gregory
answered him, that he should follow that which he thought best, and should
comply with the Churches where he should happen to be. This is found in the
said Austin's Interrogations added in the end of Gregorie's Works.

As for Germany, Christianity came very late to it. In the year 700. Radbod
King of the Frisons was a Pagan, and Franconia did then but begin to receive
the Gospel. And the Saxons against whom Charlemagne made so many wars, in the
year 775. and the following years, were Pagans, and were beaten to Christianity
by the sword, as also the Frisons.

Suibert in the years 704, 705. and the following years, did very much advance
Christianity about the Rhine and in the Country of Brandenburg; But it appears
by no History in what tongue he established the Service.

In the year 719. Winefrid an Anglosaxon Surnamed Boniface, began to preach the
Gospel to the Germans Pagans, being sent by Pope Gregory the II. the great
Patron of Images. This Winefrid being altogether wedded to the advancement of
the Papal See, I make no doubt but that he gave to the Germans newly converted
from Paganism, the Service in the Roman both form and tongue.

CHAP. XIV. Of AFRICA, and how the Service in the Latin Tongue came to it.
OF Africa Lib. 6. cap. 1. p. 1091.
M. Du Perron speaks thus, Aug. de doctrina Christiana, l. 2. cap. 13.
St. Austin affirms, that the custom that was among the people to pronounce
when they sung the Psalms, Floret sanctificatio mea, instead of Florebit, was
so rooted by long use among the people, that there was no possibility to root
it out. And yet it is certain that the Latin Tongue was nowhere vulgar but in
Italy, and in the Towns of the Roman Colonies scattered here and there in the
Empire, such as was Carthage in Africa, where the Latin Tongue was vulgar.
Whence it is that Austin that Countryman says, that he learned Latin among the
caresses of his Nurses.

This Prelat does according to his custom, which is to prove a thing which is
not in question. He says that the Latin tongue was not vulgar in Africa, but
that is not the question. We dispute not here of the vulgar tongue, but of the
tongue understood by the people. It is not material whether Latin was or was
not vulgar in Africa; the question is, whether it was understood. In that part
of Africa which he marketh, the Liturgy was said in Latin, because it was there
more common and better understood by the people then the Punick language, which
was the old vulgar tongue. It is much already that the Cardinal grants that
Latin was the vulgar tongue of Carthage, the capital City of Africa. The same
he confesses of the Cities of Africa that were Colonies. Now the vulgar tongue
of the capital City of the Country being Latin, where the Court of the
Proconsul was, and the Imperial Officers, where the causes were judged in
Latin, and where an innumerable multitude of people resorted; many other Towns
besides being Roman Colonies, and over all the Towns those whom the Romans
called Curiales, the Grecians (...), and which they call in France les gens du
Roy, the Kings men, being Latins, it is no wonder if all the people of the
Country used themselves to speak Latin, and if Latin was more familiar with
them then their old vulgar Punick tongue. Wherefore as in Carthage, so in Bona,
and other Towns of Africa subject unto the Romans, not only the Liturgy, but
the Sermons were in Latin. It was in Latin that Cyprian, and Aurelius, and
Austin preached.

Austin being born in the Town of Thagasta, or Tegesta in Numidia, where the
people were half barbarous and remote from Carthage, Aug. 1. Confess. c. 14.
Latina didici sine ullo metu atque cruciatu inter etiam blandimenta nutricum,
and joca arridentium.
yet says that he had learned Latin among the caresses of his Nurses, because
his Father was a Curial and an Imperial Officer; as Posidonius relates in
Austins life. Wherefore also in Austins Books there are many passages whereby
it appears, that the African people understood Latin better then Punick. As
in the 26. Sermon of the words of the Apostle he speaks thus to the people,
Sermon. 26. de verbis Apostoli. Proverbium notum est Panicum quod quidem Latin
vobis dicam quia Punice non omnes nostis.
There is a common Punick Proverb, which I will tell you in Latin, because you
do not all understand the Punick. And upon the 50. Psalm. We know all that in
Latin they say neither sanguines, nor sanguina. And in the second Book of
Christian Doctrine, Chap. 10. Cum dicimus bovem, intelligimus pecus quod omnes
nobiscum Latinae linguae homines hoc nomine vocant.
Cum dicimus bovem, when we say an Ox, we understand that beast which all that
are with us Latins by language call by that name. And in the first Book of
Retractations, Chap. 20. Volens causam Donatistarum ad ipsius humillimi vulgi
et omnino imperitorum et idiotarum netitiam pervenire, et eorum quantum fieri
posset per nos inhaerere memoriae, Psalmum qui eis cantaretur per litteras
Latinas feci.
Desiring that the cause of the Donatists should come to the knowledge of the
common people, and of the most ignorant and idiots, and that by our means it
should be fixed in their memory as much as it is possible, I have put a Psalm in
Latin letters to sing unto them.

By all these instances it is made as clear as the bright day, that the ancient
Church in Greece, Egypt, Asia, Armenia, Ethiopia, Africa, subject to the
Romans, Italy, Gauls, Spain and England, Divine Service was said in a tongue
understood by the people: Which M. Du Perron does tacitly acknowledge; for he
does not say that in those Churches the Service was said in an unknown tongue,
but only affirms that it was said in another tongue then the vulgar: Which
yet is false of Italy, of Greece, of the most part of Natolia, of the City of
Carthage, and of all the Roman Colonies of Africa. But it is true of all
Churches without exception, that their Sermons and their Liturgy were in the
same language.

THE END.
The Authors thanksgiving to God for the finishing of this Work.
O LORD my God and gracious Father, I shut up this Work with humble thanks to
thy Sovereign Majesty. I should be ungrateful if this Work done by thine
assistance should not end in thy praise. For it is in thy strength O Lord, that
I have gone through with it. Thy strength is made perfect in weakness. Thou
choosest poor weak things to confound the strong. In the smalness of the
instruments of thy Work thou set forth the greatness of thy virtue. Not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory. For who are we that
we should bear such a heavy burden? And what is our strength, that we should be
Gods Champions in such a great combat? But this very truth which we defend,
gives strength to them that defend it. And thou refusest not thy help to thy
Servants, who in the defense of thy cause have no other end but the glory of
thy holy Name. Thou O Lord, who have been favorable to me from the beginning
of my days, wilt not forsake me in mine old age, and wilt yet make it fruitful
to the edification of thy Church. Being beaten with many rods, torn off from my
dear flock, lamenting the bruise of thy people, destitute of necessary helps
for such a great Work, sore vexed now almost two years with a grievous
sickness, which brought me near my grave, and having in my ordinary calling
work enough to employ a whole man; yet against hope I believed in hope, to the
undertaking of this great labor, and against all likelihood I have perfected
it by thy gracious help. And now I hope, O my God, that this labor of thy
Servant, done by thine assistance, shall be made powerful by thy grace, to
bring those spirits to the right way, that go not purposely out of the way, and
that err only for want of instruction, Against mine inclination I have employed
in this Work a multitude of humane testimonies; for I know that thy Word alone
is the rule of our Faith, and thou receivest not men for Judges in thy cause. I
know also that one word of thy mouth is better then all the writings of all
men. But we are carried away by the stream, and are forced to yield unto the
disease of this age, which having thy Word for suspect as a dangerous Book,
seek in humane writings a shelter against Divine rules. We show unto the
patrons of error that they lose their cause even before the Arbitratours whom
themselves have chosen. But O Lord, thou art both powerful and merciful, to
bring in an age, in which thy Word alone shall be heard, and thy Son consulted
alone for the deciding of all doubts. Do it O Father of mercy, and God of all
comfort. Have mercy upon the Nations that lie in deep darkness. Let the light
of thy Word shine before the eyes of all people. As for me, after a long
tugging, in a way beset with thorns, having notwithstanding my many defects and
infirmities, held out against the contradiction of an Age contrary to thy Word;
I rejoice to feel the approaches of my desired rest, and to see my race almost
at an end. But thou O Lord, wilt send laborers into thy harvest that will
labor with more success, and whom thou will endow with a greater measure of
the Spirit to defend thy holy truth. Lord it is thy cause, Lord it is for thy
sake that we are hated. Stir up thy jealousy, and thine ancient compassions,
for thy people which thou have redeemed; that many souls may be saved, and thy
holy Name glorified. For, O Lord, though we be worthy to be forsaken, and
unworthy to be helped, yet thou art worthy to be glorified. It were a small
thing indeed that we are afflicted, but that in our afflictions thy truth is
oppressed, and thy holy Name blasphemed. Hear then O God and Father of all
consolation; Hear us and forgive us for thy Names sake. Thou art wise in thy
Counsels, just in thy Judgments, powerful to execute thy Will; But together
thou art full of compassion, and true in thy promises. Do then O Lord according
to thy word. For thou have promised that thou will never forsake us, and that
thou will be with us even unto the end of the World. Thou that have redeemed us
from the power of Satan by the death of thy Son, wilt deliver us also from the
hands of those that oppress us. The time comes, and now draws near, when out
of our dead ashes, after this fiery trial of thy Church, a great light shall
break forth, and thou will confound the tongues of Babel, and pull down the
throne of iniquity of the son of perdition. In the mean time give us grace to
possess our souls in patience till the measure of iniquity be filled up, and
while we expect from heaven our Lord Jesus, who will come to revise our cause,
and to give to every man according to his works. Amen.

An Alphabetical Table OF THE Principal Matters contained in this BOOK.
A
ABsolution cannot be a Sacrament. page 534 The ancient Church did not give the
Absolution secretly after a private confession, but reconciled the sinner
publicly after the end of the penance. page 653. and seq. In the ancient
Church Satisfaction was still performed before Absolution. Ibid. Absolution by
the Priest is not necessary. page 555 Absolution by the Priest is not a
judicial act; That of the Roman Church is full of injustice. page 558. and seq.
Confession of the Adversaries. page 562. and seq. Form of the ancient
absolution. page 568 Absolutions in the form of a prayer both in the extreme
union, and in other actions. page 568. and 569 Answer to Thomas Aquinas about
judicial absolution. page 570, 571 Gross abuses of absolution in the Roman
Church. page 573. and seq. Absolution with corporal and pecuniary pains, is
contrary to the Word of God. page 576 Absolution is given in the Roman Church
before the fulfilling of Penitence. ibid. Absolutions without penitence. ibid.
Absolutions by Proxy. page 577 Absolutions lucrative unto Priests. ibid.
Absolution given to the dead. page 579 Impious and absurd Rules about
Absolution. page 582 Absolution upon condition of doing some wicked act. page
587, and 588 Innocent the third, absolveth the English from the Oath of
allegiance made to King John. page 636 David Prince of Northwales dispensed by
Pope Innocent the fourth from the oath of allegiance by him made to Henry the
third, King of England; the condition of the dispensation being, that he become
the Popes vassal. page 648 Formosus Bishop of Porto, dispensed by the Pope from
keeping his oath. page 27 Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople, did for a long
time use the Bishops of Rome as his Inferiors. page 376 The horrible hatred of
the Popes against the memory of Acacius after his death. page 377 Against
accidents without subject in the Eucharist. page 748 The Acts of ancient
Councils both Greek and Latin, published by our adversaries, are much
falsified. page 331 Relative Adoration an invention of Du Perron. page 414 Du
Perron falsely says, that Joshuah worshipped the Ark, and that David exhorts
the people to worship it. page 777 The Apostles did not worship the Sacrament.
page 776 Du Perron proves by Numa, and by the Quatrains of Pibrack, that the
Apostles have adored the Sacrament sitting. ibid. That in the ancient Church
they did not worship the Sacrament with service of Latria. page 778, etc.
Worshipping the species, that is, the signs and accidents is an idolatry of the
Roman Church. page 777 The Emperor Adrian built Temples without Images for
Christians. page 441 Pope Adrian was strangled by a Fly. page 633 Aerius was
too blame to trouble the Church about Fast days. page 505 Women Agapets, or
conjoined, are forbidden by the first Council of Nice. page 485 Agrippin Bishop
of Carthage gathers a Council against the belief of the Roman Church. page
298 Amedeus Duke of Savoy elected Pope, and named Felix. page 107 Albigeois
persecuted, An. 1188. page 635. Croisada preached against the Albigeois. An
horrible slaughter of them. page 638 Alcibiades, he macerated himself with
fasting, and is rebuked for it. page 510 Pope Alexander the third treads upon
the neck of the Emperor Fredericus Barbarossa. page 105 It was the office of
the Bishop of Alexandria to signify unto all the Bishops of the Empire (and by
consequent to that of Rome) the day of Easter. The great power of the Bishop of
Alexandria, and that he was in nothing subject to the Bishop of Rome. page 271
Opinions of Ambrose, not approved by the Bishop of Rome. page 138 Ambrose
elected Bishop before he was baptized. page 312 He excommunicates the Emperor
Theodosius without the advice of the Bishop of Rome. ibid. He spoke of the
Bishop of Rome with respect, but was not subject unto him. ibid. The Works of
Ambrose are much falsified. page 420 Ambrose believed that a man could do
penitence in the Church, but once in his life; and Tertullian believed the
same. page 327 Ammianus Marcellinus, being a Pagan Author, describes the
dissolutions and the pride of the Bishops of Rome of his time. page 302
Anatolius succeeded Flavianus in the Patriarchat of Constantinople. page 364
Proofs that he was not subject to the Bishop of Rome. ibid. He presideth in the
Council of Chalcedon. page 365 Old Heretics worshipped Angels. page 40, 41
Angels fallen by the love of women. page 134, 135 Annonary and Sub^^bicary
Countries. page 272. and seq. St. Bernard calls the Popes Court the Ministers
of Antichrist, and a pasture of Devils. page 88 Pope Gregory the first has
prophesied of Antichrist. page 89 Alnulf Bishop of Orleans in Hugh Capets time,
calls the Pope Antichrist. page 102 The Church of Antioch in Chrysostoms time
would prefer her self before the Church of Rome. page 96 The Archbishop of
Antioch would not acknowledge the Pope his Superior. page 643 What true
Antiquity is. page 118 That we must judge of Antiquity by the truth. ibid. That
the Roman Church is not ancient. page 118, 120 That the Roman Church
contradicts antiquity. page 143 St. Antony, father of the Monks, and his
life. page 300, 301. Fables and untruths in the Apocrypha. The Church of the
Old Testament did not acknowledge them Canonical. page 178 Nor the Christian
Church. page 193. and seq. Apocrypha condemn Purgatory and Limbus. page 191,
192 They condemn Idolatry, Images, Invocation of Saints, Prayers for the souls
in Purgatory, and merits. ibid. The Apostleship was not affected to one
particular Church. page 214. The Apostles were equal in power by the very
confession of our Adversaries. page 218 The title of Apostolic See was common
to many Churches, and was not proper to the Roman Church alone. page 342 How
and in what sense St. Austin said that in the Roman Church the principality of
the Apostolic See was always in vigor. page 344, 345 Examples of appeals from
the sentence of the Bishop of Rome. page 266 The Heretic Julian appeals from
Pope Innocent the first to the Oriental Churches. page 339 When the appeals
from the judgment of a Council first begun. page 355. and seq. That Athanasius
never appealed to the Bishop of Rome. page 197 Nor Peter Bishop of Alexandria.
page 305 Nor Chrysostom. page 320 Appeals from Africa to Rome forbidden by the
Milevitan Council. page 324 and seq. That as well in the great causes of the
African Church, as in the little, it was not lawful to appeal to Rome. page 326
That the causes of Bishops were not evocated to Rome, no more then those of
inferior Clerks. page 327 Letters of the Bishops of Africa to Celestinus
Bishop of Rome, forbidding him to receive any appeal from Africa, and desiring
him not to meddle with their businesses. page 330 Of Appeals to the Bishop of
Rome. page 331, 332, etc. Of the Appeal of Flavian Patriarch of Constantinople
to Leo the first. page 355 Of the Appeal of Theodoret to Leo. page 357 St.
Austin says, that it is lawful to appeal from the Judgment of the Bishop of
Rome to a Council. page 359 That the Council of Constantinople the first, and
that of Chalcedon will have the judgment of Councils, and that of the
Patriarch of Constantinople to be without appeal. page 359 Laws of Emperors
against appeals to the Bishop of Rome. page 360 Appeals to Rome forbidden in
England by Henry the second. page 633 Means to apply to ones self the benefit
of Christ. page 613 In the second Temple there was no more Ark. page 188 In the
first Temple the golden Cruse with Manna was not. page 202 Archbishopric of
Rhemes given by Pope John the tenth, to a child of five years of age. page 101
The seamless Coat of Christ found at Argentacil. page 633 Arius rises; what
troubles he stirred. page 267, and seq. Arnobius his opinions not approved in
the Roman Church. page 142 Arnold burnt at Rome. page 633 Arnulfus Bishop of
Orleans calls the Pope Antichrist. page 102 Aspersion and immersion in Baptism.
page 70. 797, 798 Athanasius his opinions not approved in the Church of Rome.
page 137 He says that St. Peter's throat was cut. page 234 He is banished by
Constantine. page 289 He is recalled. page 290 He is deposed by the Council of
Antioch, and Gregory put in his place. ibid. He scapeth and takes sanctuary in
Italy. ibid. He returns to Alexandria, sent back by Pope Julius. Being driven
thence again, he lives hidden in Egypt three years; then scapes again. page
296. and seq. He is restored by the Council of Sardica, and returns to
Alexandria by the will of two Emperors, Constans and Constantius, page 291
Maximus, Patriarch of Jerusalem, restores him to his Bishopric. page 292 A
Book of the Virgin Mary falsely attributed to Athanasius. page 408 Whence
Atheism proceeds? page 3 Augustine has acknowledged a Church of the elect, and
never retracted it. page 6. and 7 He believed that children not baptized are
doomed to eternal death. page 129 Austins opinions rejected by the Roman
Church. page 139 Du Perron corrects St. Austin. page 220 Austin made the
Articles of the Milevitan Council, in which the appeals from Africa to Rome
were condemned. page 325 He was not subject to the Roman Church. page 338 He
makes a doubt whether the Saints hear our Prayers. page 394, 395 Texts of
Austin, against Transubstantiation, depraved by Du Perron. page 737 And by the
corrupters of the new additions. page 765 Austin impugneth with all his
strength the real and oral manducation of Christ, page 752 and 794, 755
Vindication of Austins Treatises upon St. John, which Du Perron despises. page
758 Vindication of Austin, against Du Perrons reprehensions. page 761, etc.
Aurelianus, an Heathen Emperor, judges of the differences about Paulus
Samosatenus. page 279 Of austerity, dirt, and nastiness. page 499. and seq.
Example of a strange austerity. page 500 Altar See Table. In old time Altars
were wooden and moveable. page 758, etc. There was but one Altar in a Temple.
ibid. Whether the Churches authority ought to be above that of Scripture. page
55. and seq.
B.
WHether St. Peter by Babylon understands Rome. page 233 Balsamon Patriarch of
Antioch equalleth the Bishop of Constantinople to that of Rome. page 294 That
Baptism conferred by women came from ancient Heretics. page 48 That Baptism of
things inanimate, Bells, Ships and Agnus Dei, came from Pagans and Heretics.
page 48 The question of rebaptizing of Heretics is not a point necessary to
salvation. page 163 In that question both Cyprian and Steven erred. ibid. and
seq. The Baptim of Infants is proved by our Adversaries by many texts of
Scripture. ibid. The belief of the ancients, that infants dying without Baptism
are eternally tormented in hell. page 129 The Roman Church shuts them in a dark
dungeon, eternal, and burning. And that being in a burning fire they feel no
pain. page 669 That sins both before and after Baptism are both alike blotted
out by Christ. page 618 Of the aspersion or immersion in Baptism; That we have
no commandment of God concerning that. page 70 797, 798 Of spittle in Baptism.
page 53 That the Roman Church holds not Baptism necessary, though she make a
show to believe the contrary. page 664. and seq. The Roman Church holds, that
persons come to years of descretion may be saved without Baptism. page 665 and
seq. Two calumnies of Du Perron about that matter. page 665, 666 Explication of
this Text, Joh. 3. Unless a man be born by water, etc. page 666, 667 That
Baptism is not absolutely necessary to infants. page 667, 668 In what sense St.
Paul says, that the children of the faithful are holy. page 668 Gregory
Nazianzen, Tertullian, Gerson, Lombard, hold Baptism not necessary, so that it
be not despised. page 669, 670 Austins opinion upon this subject. page 670 The
Roman Church holds that the Baptism which Christ conferred, was not necessary.
page 670 She holds the Baptism of water necessary to salvation. page 666 That
in the defect of Baptism the vow suffices. page 668 That by Baptism original
sin is altogether blotted out in infants. ibid. and seq. That the defect of
Baptism by water, is supplied by Martyrdom. page 668 How contemptible Baptism
is in the Roman Church. page 673. and seq. That it is no less esteemed then
confirmation. page 674 Doctrine of Baptism, and of the virtue and efficacy of
the same in the Reformed Churches. page 674, 675 The Roman Church having
deprest Baptism extolleth it with improper praises. page 675 She makes Baptism
conferred by a Pagan better then that which was conferred by Christ. page 670
671 Second Baptism of the Fathers. page 138 Baronius maintains perjury, and
the Popes power to dispense from keeping an oath. page 100 Destroys the
succession of Popes. ibid. Understood not the signification of this word Roman
in ancient Authors. page 117 Censureth Fathers. page 122 A notorious lie of
Baronius. page 264 His boldness to corrupt history, and to bring in Fables.
page 268 He receives for true the Fable of Constantines Baptism by Sylvester.
page 275 He makes bold to condemn the Councils of Milevis and Carthage. page
330 He is taxed by Du Perron of Error in History. page 337 He censureth the
Emperor Justinian for making Laws about Christian Faith, and Ecclesiastical
policy. page 380 St. Basil complains of the pride of the Western men, and of
Damasus Bishop of Rome. page 303 An opinion of Basil, which the Roman Church
rejects. page 137 Basilides and Martial Spanish Bishops, being degraded, have
recourse to the Bishop of Rome. page 299 Cyprian opposes himself to the
judgment of the Bishop of Rome, and hinders the restitution of those Bishops.
page 300 Saint Bathaeus suffered worms to crawl about his teeth. page 500
Beating and whipping ones self are not satisfactions before God. page 619
Beatitude is in the Roman Church a degree and expectative of Saintship. page
402 Bell and the Dragon, that History is fabulous and condemned by Pope
Gelasius. page 184 It is not held Canonical. page 179 The Church of Rome
teaching to believe without knowing, follows ancient Heretics. page 45
Bellarmine says that Faith is opposite to Science, and is better defined by
ignorance then knowledge. page 46. and 812 That the question of the Popes
primacy is the summary of Christian Religion. page 96. 97 Confesses that he
finds not in Scripture that the Pope is St. Peter's Successor. page 97 That to
believe St. Peter's Succession in the primacy, is not of divine right. page 213
That the merits of Christ are in part necessary to all, in part not necessary.
page 467 He says that a sinner can say to God, Thou will pardon me fully by
Christ, etc. But I will not have such a great liberality, etc. page 468 He
says that it belongs not to an Em^erour to give Laws about sacred things. page
820 He believes that God forgiveth to those only to whom the Priest has
forgiven. page 552 He says that God is judged by the Priest, and that the
Priest is judge in Gods cause, page 552 553 He maintains that a man is a
redeemer of himself. page 602, 603 He says, that we can satisfy God with our
own works, and with condignity and equality. page 605 He teaches that the
sacrifices of great cattle were more propitiatory then of small cattle. page
616 He says that the Popes Canons are Canoninical Scriptures. page 210
Benedict the ninth a Pope of ten years of age. page 102 Benedict the thirteenth
deposed at Constance, retains the Popedom. page 106, 107 Berengarius condemned
by Nicholas the second: His Confession. page 27, 28 Which is no more received
in the Roman Church, ibid. Bernard Abbot of Clervaux complains of the Roman
Church. page 88 He taxes Pope Eugenius that he had bought the Popedom. page 99
Bertram the Priest under Charles the Bald of France, writ against the real
presence in the Eucharist, and was not troubled or blamed for it. page 744 The
Bible was translated into the Dalmatick tongue by St. Hierome, and into the
Gothic tongue by Vlfilas, a Goth Bishop. page 823 Queen Blanch worshippeth the
relics of St. Edmond, and represents to him the kindnesses she had done him in
his life time. page 653 Her complaints against the Pope. page 656 The power of
binding and loosing; and how far the Pope extends that power. page 580 How it
is proved by the Roman Church. page 68, 69 Bishop of Bishops an arrogant title
for a mere man. page 338 The calling of Bishops; their office, and how it was
corrupted. page 94 In their reception in the Roman Church, they take an oath of
allegiance without any mention of God or his word. page 89 Titular and
imaginary Bishops. page 110 All Bishops are successors of the Apostles. page
224, 225 And equal in dignity. ibid. Roman Bishops were elected by the
suffrages of the people. page 240 A Bishop must not meddle with businesses of
the world. page 241 The order of Bishops, and the limits of their Jurisdiction,
were according to politic order and jurisdiction. page 272, 273, 308 An
express Canon of the Council of Calcedon for that. page 359 Proof of the same
by many examples. ibid. Bishops of the Roman Church boast, that they give the
holy Ghost. page 565 The Bishop of Rome taxed to pay 4000. Crowns for his entry
into h s Office. The other Patriarchs taxed to pay 3000. page 820 Body of
Christ is no more on earth. page 702, 703 It is presented to us in the
Eucharist, not as glorified, but as dying for us. page 701, 702 -- 741 The
Scripture and the Fathers speak of three sorts of body of Christ. page 711 The
Fathers say, that the bread is the body of Christ. page 718 The Fathers call
bread that which is received in the holy Communion. page 727, 728 Great
quantity of bread was laid upon the Table. page 771 Every one took with his
hand the consecrated Bread, and some carried it home. page 771 and 772. It was
carried to the absent. page 772 Decretal of Pope Boniface the second speaking
of St. Austin and of the Africans, as separate from the Roman Church. page 334
Why that Decretal is suspected to be false. page 335. 339 How Boniface the
eighth came to the Popedom, and his end. page 105, 106 He instituteth the
Jubilee to be kept every hundredth year. page 29 He attributes unto himself
power both over the spiritual and the temporal of all the world. page 31 Bull.
de Coena Domini. page 36, 37. Doctor Bullinger confesses, that in the first
Ages little deference was made to the Roman Church. page 251, 252.
C.
THe Chalice vomited by a little Girl. page 770 Why the Pope took the Cup from
the people. page 799 Calvin is defended against the accusations of Cardinal Du
Perron upon Joh. 3. Except a man be born again by water, etc. page 671, 672
Proofs that the Books of Judith, Tobit, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Maccabees, are
not Canonical. page 177 Testimony of Josephus concerning Canonical Books. page
177 Enumeration of Canonical Books, according to the Greek Fathers. page 193
And according to the Latin Fathers. page 196 Austins opinion concerning the
Canonical Books. page 204 Opinion of Pope Innocent the first, about the same.
page 207 And of Gregory the first. ibid. Decrees and Decretals of Popes set
among, yea above Canonical Books. page 208. and seq. The Canonization of Saints
comes from the Heathen Apotheoses. page 50. 401 There is great reason to doubt
whether they are Saints and happy whom the Pope has canonized. page 401
Corrupt ways and forms of Canonization. ibid. Canonization of St. Edmund, twice
denied. page 648 And finally granted. page 652 Edward King of England canonized
two hundred years after his death. page 633 Canons of the Apostles, contrary to
the Roman Church: They approve the marriage of Priests, and condemn Fasting on
Sunday and Saturday. page 241 The Roman Church holds the Popes Canons for
Canonical, and to have more authority then the Canonical Scriptures. page 208
Cardinals, when they begun, and what was their office at the first. page 94 By
what means Cardinals attain to that degree. page 109 They are discharged of the
care of their Churches. page 110 A Cardinal, surnamed the Ape. page 109 Cases
reserved to Bishops. page 574 Cases reserved to the Pope. ibid. Cassander he
complains of the abuses committed about images. page 444, 447 Cassian his
opinions not approved by the Roman Church. page 141 The mystagogical Catecheses
of Cyrillus of Alexandria are false and supposititious. page 789, 790 The
Catechetical Prayer of Gregory of Nyssa was depraved by the Eutychians, and is
full of Errors. page 784 St. Catherine, an imaginary Saint that never was. page
400 St. Caterine of Siena, being yet in swaddling clothes, would not suck upon
Fridays: She whips her self with an iron chain. page 503 In what sense the
Fathers take the title of Catholic Church. page 5 That the word Catholic
cannot be the mark of the true Church. page 79, 80 That the Roman Church is not
Catholic. page 81. and seq. That Du Perron understood not in what sense the
Fathers take the word Catholic Church. page 82. and seq. Celestin the third
strikes down with his foot the Crown of the Emperor, Henry the sixth. page 105
Celestin the fifth rid upon an Ass: He is cozened, and finally, put to death by
Cardinal Benedict, who since was called Boniface the eighth. page 106 Vow of
Celibat is contrary to the word of God. page 469 The Patriarchs, Prophets,
Priests, and Apostles did not live in Celibat. page 470, 471 The rashness of
the vow of Celibat. page 472, 477 It is condemned by St. Paul. page 472 In the
Roman Church that vow is not free, but forced. page 477 Du Perron says, that
in Constantins time the Celibat of Bishops began. page 478 And that the
Apostles command about it, was but ad tempus. ibid. The doctrine of the Roman
Church about the Celibat contradicts Scripture. page 479 480 The Council of
Nice forbids the obliging of Clarks to the Celibat. page 484 The Council of
Fontanet in Lombardy condemns the Celibat of the Roman Church. page 314 Coena
signifies a common Supper. page 776 The form of administering the Lords Supper.
page 768 We have no certain precept of the Lord about the hour of celebrating
the Lords Supper. page 797 When Ceremonies grow, ignorance grows also. page
658 The Chair sanctifies not the Pastor, but the holiness of the Pastor, and
of his Doctrine sanctifies the chair. page 89 The succession of Chairs is set
down by the Roman Church, as a mark of the true Church. page 2 Austerity and
chastity of that Order. page 496 The Cherubims of the Tabernacle were no Images
of any Angel, and were not worshipped. page 439 St. Christopher an imaginary
Saint. page 400 Chrysostom prefers the City and Church of Antioch before
Rome. page 96 His opinions not approved in the Roman Church. page 139, 140, 413
Chrysostom recommends the reading of Scripture unto the common people. page
169, 170 He was set in the Patriarchat of Constantinople by Theophilus
Patriarch of Alexandria, without asking the advice of the Bishop of Rome. page
312, 323 He was twice deposed by the same Theophilus, notwithstanding the
intercession of Innocent Bishop of Rome. page 319. and seq. The title of the
Epistles of Chrysostom to Innocent is false and supposititious. page 321
Chrysostom is contrary to the invocation of Saints. page 420. and seq. The 26.
Homily of Chrysostom upon 2. Cor. is horribly falsified. page 422 He puts two
persons in Christ. page 413 Our adversaries take the question of the Church at
the wrong end. page 1, and 2 Of the word Church, and the diverse significations
of the same. page 3 The word Ecclesia imports union, yet now a days is a cause
of disunion. page 1 And why. Whether the Church must be believed before we be
taught what we must believe. page 2 The controversies of Religion must not be
begun by the question of the Church. ibid. By the Church the Romanists
understand only the Pope and the Clergy. page 3, and 4 The Church is a word
that has diverse significations. page 4 What it signifies in Scripture. ibid.
The diverse appellations of the same. ibid. The Church of the elect, and the
triumphant Church, wherein they differ. ibid. What the Church is according to
the ancient Doctors, and what according to those of the Roman Church. page 5
The Church of the elect is not discerned with the eye. page 6 D^vers names of
the Church of the elect. ibid. Of that of the elect which is invisible. page 6,
7. St. Austin acknowledged it. ibid. Of what Church the symbol speaks. page 5
Definition that Du Perron gives to the Church. ibid. Reasons of the
Adversaries against the Church of the elect. page 8 Objections of Du Perron
against it. page 8, and 9 What the Fathers understand by the Catholic Church.
page 6 Two sorts of Churches. ibid. What the Church of the elect is. page 6,
etc. What is the Church grounded upon. page 218, etc. Two differents between
the Roman Church and the Reformed Church. page 813 Whether the societies of
Heretics ought to be called Churches. page 12, 13 Whether there be no
salvation out of the Church. page 13, etc. Whether it be always visible. page
15, etc. Whether it can err. page 22, etc. Whether it has more authority then
Scripture. page 55, etc. Five rules to limit the authority of the Church. page
56 She is not an infallible judge of the sense of Scripture. page 64, etc. Of
her pretended authority to change the commandments of God, and to dispense from
them. page 70, 795, 797 And to add to Scripture. page 148 The form and order of
the Church in the Roman Empire in St. Austins time. page 340, 341 Conformity of
the Abyssine Churches with ours in Doctrine. page 21, 22 All Churches are
first, Apostolical, Original, and mothers. page 341 Which and of what nature
must the marks of the Church be. page 73 Of the true mark of the true Church,
which is the profession of the true Doctrine. page 73, 74 The true Doctrine is
more known then the true Church. page 74, etc. Of the duration of the Church.
page 110, etc. Of her multitude and extent. page 111, etc. Of Miracles. page
114 Of union in the visible Church. page 116 Of antiquity. page 118 Of the
Greek Church; it is more ancient then the Roman, and is the mother of the Roman
Church. page 22, 98, 99 The Church of Jerusalem is called by the Emperor
Justin, the Mother of the Christian name. page 308 The Roman Church has erred,
and erreth. page 26, etc. Contrarieties between Scripture and her. page 36, 37
Antiquity of the Roman Church: And how her doctrine is descended from Pagans,
Jews, and ancient Heretics. page 38, etc. She teaches Perjury, Fornication,
the rebellion of Subjects, revenge after pardon granted, and rebellion of
children against their parents. page 84, 85 The Roman Church of this time is
contrary to that of old time. page 130, 131, 132, 133, 143, etc. The Church of
Millain was very late subjected unto the Church of Rome. page 313 Clement the
first, his Decretal that goods and women be common. page 134 He calls James
Bishop of Bishops, governing the Churches of all the world. page 240 Clement
the second is poisoned by his Successor. page 203 Opinions of Clemens
Alexandrin. not approved by the Roman Church. page 166, 134 He extolleth
Traditions very much. page 149 Consent of the Ancients in the number of Gods
Commandments. page 130, 131 Dissent of the Roman Church about it. page 131
Communion under one kind was borrowed from the Manicheans. page 49 Is contrary
to the Scripture and the Fathers. page 793 Du Perron confesses that by the
communion under one kind, the signification of the Sacrament is diminished.
page 794 Why the Communion to the cup was denied to the people. page 799 The
first Council of Nice limits the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome within the
Provostship of Rome. page 272 Council of Sardica: What was done in it? The
separation of the same into two Councils. page 291 The small authority it had.
page 293 It was not universal. page 297. and seq. Du Perron makes the Council
of Nice, and that of Sardica, to be but one Council. page 298 (...) Canons of
Sardica help not the Popes primacy. page 299. 300 Council of Arles. page 266
Commands Sylvester Bishop of Rome, and judges of his sentence. page 266, 267
Council of Sinuessa, and that of Rome under Sylvester, both false and
supposititious page 267, 268 Council the first of Constantinople. page 306, 307
Council of Milevis. page 324 Council the sixth of Carthage. page 328. and seq.
Council the first of Ephesus. page 420 Council of Chalcedon. page 364. and seq.
The Eliberin Council forbids Images. page 441 Council the third of Carthage,
and the sixth of Constantinople, are contrary to Transubstantiation. page 745,
746 Council the second of Nice has erred. page 26 The Roman Council under
Gregory the seventh, and what impious Articles were established in it. page 28
Council of Lateran under Innocent the third, and the errors of the same. page
28, 639 Council of Foutanet in Lombardy. page 314 Council of Clermont under
Urban the second, in which the Pope usurped investitures. page 631 Council of
Rhemes under Hugh Capet. page 102 The Council of Constance deposes three
Popes. page 30, 31, 107 Dispenses from keeping Faith to Heretics. ibid.
Depriveth Fredrick of Austria of his Dominions. ibid. Depriveth the Laity of
the Communion of the Cup. ibid. page 796 Council of Florence. page 32 Council
of Lateran under Julius the second, and Leo the tenth; Impieties of that
Council. page 32 Council of Pisa assembled by Lewis the twelfth. page 33
Council of Lions, and the farewell and comfort of a Prelate given to the people
of the City. page 650 Councils contrary the one to the other, and
excommunicating one another. page 27. 101 The Council of Pisa declares two
Popes Heretics. page 106 Council of Basil. page 107 Council of Trent, and all
its errors. page 108 It falsifieth Scripture. page 575 The Emperor Justinian
and Pope Gregory the first, honor and esteem the four Universal Councils as
much as the four Evangelists. page 368 Since the Apostles there have been no
Universal Councils, in the sense that our Adversaries take the word Universal.
page 25. 291 Whether the Councils can err. page 25 Absurdity of this
proposition, that a Council approved by the Pope cannot err. page 533 Gelasius
maintains that the Universal Councils can err. page 377 Why the Popes would
never be present at the ancient Universal Councils. page 349, 354 An Universal
Council may be convocated without the Popes consent. page 269 The Emperor
Constantin, and his Successors have convocated Councils. page 269, 270
Constantin has convocated the first Council of Nice, without expecting the
will of Sylvester, Bishop of Rome. page 269 Council of Tyr convocated by the
absolute command of Constantin. page 275 The same Council transported to
Jerusalem. page 289 The Council of Sardica was not convocated by the Bishop of
Rome. page 291 The first Council of Constantinople convocated by the Emperor
without, yea against the advice of Damasus Bishop of Rome. page 306 The first
Council of Ephesus was convocated by the only command of Theodosius the second.
page 346 The same Emperor convocateth the second Council of Ephesus. page 353
Council of Chalcedon convocated by the Emperor Martian, without, yea against
the advice of Leo the first, Bishop of Rome. page 364 The Emperors sent an
absolute command to the Bishops of Rome to come to Councils, or to send to
them. page 348 The Popes petitioned the Emperors to assemble Councils, and many
times were refused. page 348, 353, 364 Hosius Bishop of Cordova (not the
Deputies of the Bishop of Rome) presided in the first Council of Nice. page
270, etc. The same Hosius presided in the Council of Sardica above the Legates
of Julius Bishop of Rome. page 301 Damasus Bishop of Rome had no Legates in the
first Council of Constantinople. page 306 Meletius Patriarch of Antioch
presided in the same. page 307 Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and Valentin of
Numidia, had the precedence in the sixth Council of Carthage, before the Legates
of the Bishop of Rome. page 328 Count Candidian presided for the Emperor in
the first Council of Ephesus. Among Bishops, Cyrillus of Alexandria presideth
in that Council in his name, not as Celestins Legate. page 350 The Popes Legates
placed under others. ibid. Dioscorus of Alexandria, presideth in the second
Council of Ephesus, above Leo's Deputies. page 354 Count Helpidius, presideth
in it for the Emperor. page 355 Patricians and Counts preside in the Council
of Chalcedon, and command in it absolutely. page 365 The Tomes of Councils,
both Greek and Latin, are miserably falsified. page 373 Du Perron
acknowledges, that Confession is not of absolute necessity. page 523, etc. He
confesses that auricular confession was not in use in old time. ibid. He says
that Confession is not a Sacrament, but a necessary condition to the Sacrament.
page 524 The Adversaries confess, that the Confession made to the Priest, is
not instituted in the word of God. ibid. Public Confession is necessary. ibid.
Four kinds of Confession received in our Churches. page 526 St. James saying,
Confess your faults, etc. spoke not of the confession made to the Priest. page
526 Chrysostom exhorted his hearers to confess their sins to none but God. page
531 Lombard and Gratian hold the Confession made to the Priests to be
unnecessary. The Jesuit Greg. de Valentia, chideth Gratian about that. page
532 An obligation laid upon Citizens to confess their sins more exactly then
Country people. page 538 What we find amiss in the auricular Confession of the
Roman Church. page 537, etc. Foulness of Confessions. page 539, 540, 541 Rules
for Confessions. ibid. Lucrative Confessions. page 577, 578, 579. 819 By
Confessions they search consciences, and the secret infirmities of Families.
page 819 By the Doctrine of the Adversaries, and of M. du Perron, it is better
for one to suffer his King, and his Father to be killed, then to reveal a
confession. page 542 They hold that it were better to suffer Christ to be
killed, then to reveal a confession. page 543 The boasting of a Spanish
Confessor. page 540 The Sacrament of Confirmation is a humane tradition, yet is
preferred before Baptism, page 674 How and in what sense we must be conformable
unto Christ. Confutation of the Council of Trent about that of Conformity. page
618 Gregory the I. says that the Apostles did not consecrate but with the
Lords Prayer only. page 402 The Fathers hold that the consecration of the bread
is done by prayer. page 704 That in the Mass no consecration is made. page 683
A Fable, that the words of consecration having been pronounced by a shepherd,
they were smitten by Gods hand. page 747 Conrad, son to Frederick the second;
The Croisada is preached against him. page 656 When Constantine embraced the
Christian doctrine, page 286. etc. Constantine gives Judges to the Donatists.
One of them was the Bishop of Rome. page 266 He will have the judgment of
Melchiades Bishop of Rome examined in the Council of Arles, page 266, 267
Constantine raised again, and settled the Christian Church without any
communication about it with the Bishop of Rome. page 267 Constantine's Baptism
and Death. page 286. and 275 He is accused by Du Perron of irregularities and
actions against all good order. page 266 Of the donation of Constantine, and
the falsehood of the same. page 282. etc. The Patriarch of Constantinople placed
in the second rank after that of Rome, by reason of the dignity of the City,
by the I. Council of Constantinople. page 308 He governed the Church of all the
world. page 343. There was no appeal from his judgment. page 359 He is made
equal in all things with the Bishop of Rome by the Council of Chalcedon. page
368. etc. 375. etc. The Patriarchs of Constantinople have summoned the Bishops
of Rome to appear before their See. page 377. etc. Menas Patriarch of
Constantinople excommunicates Vigilius Bishop of Rome. page 381 The Patriarchs
of Constantinople qualify themselves Ecumenical Patriarchs. page 381, 384
Pope Adrian gives that title to Tharasius Patriarch of Constantinople. page 384
Example of Gennadius Patriarch, showing that he was not subject to the Bishop
of Rome. page 375 What is contrition, what attrition. The Doctors say, that by
the virtue of the keys attrition becomes contrition. page 577 That it is the
meritorious cause of Justification, and that attrition is an imperfect
contrition. page 659, 660 The Council of Trent has declared that concupiscence
is no sin. page 34, 71 In the ancient Church cortines were set before the Holy
Table till the hour of the Communion. page 769 With how many arts, corruption,
and soul dealing the election of the Popes is made. page 108 The Image of the
Cross according to the Doctors, must be worshipped with adoration of Latria.
page 447 Prayers made to the Cross. ibid. Privileges of the Crossed, and how
they redeemed themselves from the vow. page 642 The Crossed cozened by the
Pope. ibid. and 647. etc. Graces granted to them by Innocent the IV. page 650
Cyprian had opinions which the Roman Church approves not. page 136 His opinion
about St. Peter's Primacie. page 225 Cyprian, and Steven Bishop of Rome, have a
sharp dissension between them. page 247 A Schism moved against Cyprian by
Novatus. ibid. A Narrative of his troubles. ibid. etc. Cyprian calls always the
Bishop of Rome his brother. page 248 He is held almost over all the West as a
President; yea and over the Countries of the East, South, and North. page 295
He opposes the advice of the Bishop of Rome in the business of Basilides and
Martial. page 248 Bitter invectives of Cyprian against Steven. page 248, 249.
He assembleth a Council against the doctrine received in the Roman Church. page
249 Cyrillus of Alexandria is exhorted by Celestin Bishop of Rome to proceed
against Nestorius page 346 He presided in the first Council of Ephesus in his
own name, not as Legate of Celestin. page 349 Cyril of Jerusalem is the first
that appealed from a Council. page 358 The mystagogical Catecheses are falsely
ascribed unto him page 790
D
THe Popes would put their Decretals among Canonical Scriptures. Page 208. etc.
Pope Nicholas the I. puts them above Scripture. Page 209, 210 Gregory the I.
speaks much like that Nicholas. Page 210 Decretal of Innocent the I. forbidding
the marriage of Clerks. Page 207 Decretals of the three first Ages are
supposititious, and forged by Ruulphus Bishop of Ments. Page 246, 261 Of the
authority of Decretals, and why Du Perron would make no use of them to prove
the Popes primacie. Page 253 For the interpretation of Decretals public
Schools were erected, an honor not deferred unto holy Scripture. Page 252 How
arrogant Decretals are. ibid. Decretals in many things agree not with the Roman
Church. Page 253 Barbarous language of the Decrees and Decretals. Page 255
Scripture is profaned in them. ibid. etc. Ignorance of the Author in History.
Page 257 Their falsehood. Page 258 Acknowledged by the Doctors of the Roman
Church. ibid. When, and by whom, and why they were forged. Page 263, 264
Decretal of Telesphorus, a false and supposititious piece. Page 519, 520 The
Roman Decree calls a second marriage Fornication. Page 72 Hinkman Archbishop of
Rhemes, acknowledges not the Decretals. Page 209, 263 A notorious
falsification of a Canon of the Milevitan Council by Gratian. Page 324. etc.
The like of a Canon of the Council of Chalcedon. Page 371, 372 How the
Dedication or Consecration of Churches is celebrated. Page 424 Dennis or
Dionysius Alexandrin joins with Cyprian against Steven Bishop of Rome. He
dedicates his Apology to Steven Bishop of Rome. Page 251 The Book of Dennis
surnamed Areopagita of the Hierarchy of the Church, is contrary to the Papal
Monarchy. Page 212, 240 When the Books of that Dennis were written. Page 779 An
absurd conjecture of Du Perron. ibid. Fable of Dennis held Patron of France.
Page 400 He preaches the Gospel in Paris in the year of our Lord 252. Page 844
Those Deaconesses that St. Paul speaks of, made no vow of Celibat. Page 473 The
Death of Gods children, and that of Infants born in Gods Covenant, is not a
satisfactory pain. Page 600, 601 How we must understand the depositions and
restaurations of Bishops made by a Patriarch out of his Patriarchat. Page 299,
346, 349, 350 What a Diocese was in the ancient Church Page 366 That Nicolas
the I. corrupts the word Diocese in a Canon of Chalcedon, turning the
singular to a plural. Page 367 Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria presideth in
the second Council of Ephesus. Page 354 He excommunicateth Leo Bishop of Rome.
Page 300 Useless Disputes in Christian Religion are causes of Atheism. Page 3
The Roman Church by the distinction of meats imitateth the ancient Heretics.
Page 47, 70 Of the prohibition of eating blood and strangled things. See Meats.
Page 70 Dominick whipped himself three times a day with an iron chain. Page 503,
594 Dominicans. Their first coming into England. Page 635 Dulia, when it is
taken for a Religious service, belongs to God only. Page 404 Athanasius and
Theodoret condemn those that defer dulia unto the creature, Page 407, 408
Perpetual duration cannot be a mark of the Church, and fits not the Roman
Church. Difference between duration and antiquity. Page 110, 111.
E
COntention concerning Easter Day. Page 242, 268 The Book of Ecclesiasticus is
not Canonical, nor of Solomon, and contains errors rejected by the Roman
Church. Absurdities in it. Page 182 St. Austins opinion concerning
Ecclesiasticus: Page 204, 205 Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury twice declared
not fit to be admitted Saint. But the third time he is canonized. Page 648, 652
Absurd words of the Bull of Canonization. Page 652, 753 Queen Blanch
worshippeth his relics, and puts him in mind of the good she had done him.
Page 653 Edward King of England Canonized 200 years after his death. Page 631
Edward the I. a valiant and hardy Prince, makes bold with the Revenue of Abbeys
and Priories, Page 657 Election of Popes was done in old time by the will of
the Emperors. Page 101 Foul ways in the election of Popes of the last Ages.
Page 108 In the ancient Church the Priest did not lift up the Host above his
head, but the Priest turning himself toward the people, took up the dish with
both his hands. Page 768 Constitution of Adrian the first, and Leo the eighth,
that a Pope be not elected, but by the Emperors will. Page 101 Three Popes
deposed by Henry the second. Page 103 Henry the fourth deposes Gregory the
7th. Page 104 The Emperor Honorius judges of a Schism between two Bishops of
Rome, Boniface, and Eulalius. He uses both as his Subjects. Page 327, 328 His
Imperial Law provideth against the Schisms of the Roman. See Page 328 The
Emperor Theodosius the second, governs the first Council of Ephesus, and
presideth in it. Page 350 Represseth and punishes Bishops. Page 352 Gives to
Dioscorus, Patriarch of Alexandria, the Presidency above the Legates of the
Bishop of Rome. Page 354 He gives power to Count Helpidius to imprison the
Bishops of the Council. Page 355 Obedience of Leo the first, Bishop of Rome to
the Emperor Martian. Page 364 Pope John sent Ambassador by King Theodorick to
the Emperor Justin. Page 379 King Athalarick makes a constitution that the
Pope give three thousand pounds for his entry. Page 380 Justinian continues the
same constitution. Page 380 Athalarick by an express Law set against the Popes
house, forbids Simony in the election of Popes. Page 380 Agapet sent Ambassador
by King Theodat. ibid. Epiphanius prefers St. James before the other
Apostles. Page 311 He tears a vail, where an image was painted. ibid. Page 442
Condemns all Statues and pictures of men. ibid. He condemns Heretics that
worshipped the Virgin Mary, and called her Queen of heaven. Page 41 And those
that worshipped Angels. ibid. He sets the Angels above the Virgin Mary. ibid.
Opinions of Epiphanius rejected by the Roman Church. Page 140. etc. How the
Holy Communion is celebrated in Ethiopia. Page 22. 775 Eucharist judged
necessary to children after Baptism. Page 126 Pope Eugenius comes to Paris:
Gives to Peter Amerin the Archbishopric of Bourges in spite of King Lewis the
eighth. Page 632 He excommunicates Lewis, and puts his person in interdict
three whole years. ibid. Eugenius the fourth deposed by the Council of Basil,
retains the Popedom in spite of the Council. Page 207, 208 Opinions of Eusebius
of Cesarea contrary to the Roman Church. Page 138 Vindication of Eusebius
against the calumnies of Du Perron. Page 241, 242, etc. Reasons why he is so
much hated and condemned as an Arrian by the Cardinals Baronius and Du Perron,
Page 243, 244. He calls Jesus Christ a second essence, and a second God. Page
243 He is suspected of Arianism. ibid. He is contrary to images, and calls them
an Heathenish custom. Page 40 Eutyches his Heresy; he is deposed by Flavian
Patriarch of Constantinople. This gave occasion to the second Council of
Ephesus. Page 353 What the Exarchs were in the ancient Church. Page 366
Excommunication used to recover things lost. Page 35 It is not to be pronounced
against an University, College, etc. Page 242 A Superior might be
excommunicated, by an inferior. Page 244, 337 How the word of excommunication
must be understood, when in old time a Superior was excommunicated by an
inferior. Page 244, 350, 322 Popes excommunicated by other Bishops. Page 360,
361, 643 Bishops of what place soever they were, and though never so small,
might excommunicate an Heretic Bishop. Page 377 Menas Patriarch of
Constantinople excommunicated Pope Vigilius. Page 381 Dioscorus of Alexandria
excommunicateth Pope Leo. Page 300 Pope Innocent the first, excommunicateth
Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, who nevertheless remained in his See. Page
323 The Bishops of Rome excommunicate Acacius, who nevertheless remained
peaceable possessour of his Patriarchal See. Page 361 The Popes Gelasius and
Hormisdas excommunicate all the Oriental Churches; only because they kept the
name of Acacius deceased in their Ecclesiastical Tables. That excommunication
lasted forty years. Page 379 Excommunication of Friderick the second, published
at Paris in ambiguous terms. Page 649
F.
FOur texts of Scripture falsified by du Perron. Page 176 Two other
falsifications in the same Page. ibid. Du Perron says falsely, that St. Paul
has excused his low style. Page 190 Falsification of a text of the Epistle to
the Galatians. Page 218 Falsification of a text of Deuteronomy. Page 383 A text
of Matthew. 22. falsely alleged. ibid. Four texts of Scripture falsely alleged in
du Perrons speech pronounced in the full Assembly of the States at Paris. Page
386 A text, 1 Cor. 14. falsified. Page 396 The same text falsified otherwise in
another place. ibid. A text, 1 Cor. 13. falsified both in words and sense. Page
397 He falsifieth 2 Cor. 11. translating (...) ignorant. Page 190 A text of St.
Peter falsified. Page 198 A text, 1 Cor. 4. falsified. ibid. He affirms
falsely, that in Scripture Priests abstained from their wives. Page 481 He
affirms falsely, that St. Peter spoke of wives, when he said to Christ, Behold
we have left all. Page 482 Falsification of a Text, 1 Timothy 4. where he makes
St. Paul to say, prohibentes abstinere, adding this word prohibentes. Page 487
A text, Tit. 3. falslely alleged. Page 552 A text falsified, 1 Cor. 7. But now
they are Saints. Page 667 A text of Joshua falsely alleged. Page 777 He
maintains, against all truth, that Moses and Aaron, speaking to the stone,
worshipped the stone. Page 781 Gregory the first falsified. Page 198 And St.
Hierome. Page 200 And St. Ambrose. Page 217 St. Cyril of Jerusalem falsified.
Page 234 And Athanasius. ibid. St. Chrysostom falsely alleged. Page 235 Two
texts of St. Cyprian falsified. ibid. Page 236 Leo the first, Bishop of Rome,
falsified. Page 236, 525 Epistle of Pope Anastasius falsified. Page 244 St.
Ireneus falsified. Page 244 A text of Cyprian clipped. Page 250 Socrates
falsified. Page 270 A place of Notitia Imperii falsified. Page 273 A notorious
depravation of a Canon of Nice. Page 273, 274 Verses of Gregory Nazianzen
falsely translated. Page 274 Three falsifications of a place of Socrates. Page
293 St. Ambrose falsified. Page 294 Evagrius falsely alleged. ibid. And the
Council of Chalcedon. Page 295 Allegations falsely affirmed to have been made in
the Council of Chalcedon. Page 299 St. Basil twice falsified. Page 295 And once
more. ibid. A place of Ambrose clipped. Page 315 Fiction and lie of Cardinal Du
Perron. Page 316 He alleges Letters of Chrysostom to Innocent the first,
which are known not to be written to Innocent, but to the Bishops in general.
Page 320 Cedrenus falsely alleged. Page 321 And so Prosper and Marcellinus
Comes. Page 321, 322 A place of Innocent to Victricius falsely alleged. Page
336 St. Austins Epistles falsely alleged. Page 332 A place of the 96. Epistle
of St. Austin falsified. ibid. Another falsification in the citation of the
162. Epistle of St. Austin. Page 332. 333 Falsification in the allegation of
the sixth Council of Carthage. Page 333 Justinian's Novel falsely alleged. Page
334 Du Perron, after Baronius, brings an Epistle of St. Austin manifestly
false. Page 335, 336 A place of Fulgentius ill translated. Page 336 A place of
Optatus falsified. ibid. A place of an Epistle of Chrysostom falsified. Page
337 Two falsifications in a place of Liberatus. Page 347 He says falsely that
the precedence which Dioscorus had in the Council of Ephesus, was declared a
tyranny. Page 354 Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, falsely alleged. Page 357
Socrates falsified. Page 358 Another Falsification of the same place. ibid. A
place of Evagrins clipped. Page 376 St. Hilary alleged against his sense, and
against truth. Page 183 Words of Anthimus clipped, and ill translated. Page 384
Place of Athanasius depraved. Page 384 Photius falsely alleged. ibid. Basil
falsified. Page 395 A place of Thedoret clipped, by the omission of the word St.
Michael. Page 405 Eusebius falsely alleged. Page 410 A place of Origin horribly
clipped and falsified. Page 414 Ambrose falsified. Page 420 Gregory Nazianzen
falsified. Page 426 A place of Epiphanius wrested. Page 427 Chrysostom
falsified. Page 461 A Canon of Ancyra falsified in the word (...). Page 484 The
Elberin Council falsified. Page 486, 487 Epiphanius clipped and falsified. Page
489, 490 Places of Eusebius clipped and falsified. Page 490, 410 A place of
Hierom falsified with this addition, that Hierom beat his breast with a stone
till blood came. Page 502, 503 A place of Basil falsified, with the addition of
the word only, and corrupted in the sense. Page 526, 527 Another place of Basil
falsified in the same manner. Page 527 Chrysostom clipped. Page 531 A place of
Patriarch Jeremiah, and another of the German Doctors falsified. Page 532 The
Cardinal in his speech before the States at Paris falsely alleged the Council
of Constance. Page 545, etc. Cyprian falsified. Page 532. 554 Ambrose clipped.
ibid. Austin corrupted in the sense, and falsified in the words. Page 689
Ambrose falsified. Page 711 A place of the third Council of Carthage falsified.
Page 692 Justin Martyr corrupted, not in the words, but in the sense. Page 716
Ambrose falsified. Page 722 Theodoret falsely translated. Page 724, 725 Horrible
depravation of a place of Austin, 12. chap. of the Book against Adimantus. Page
738 The Canon Hoc est taken out of Austin clipped. Page 741 German the Patriach
falsified. Page 774 Nicholas Pectoras falsified. ibid. Theodoret falsely
translated. Page 781 In one place of Cyril of Alexandria three falsifications.
Page 790, etc. Four falsifications in another place of Cyril. Page 791 Hilary
wrested. Page 791 Aristotle falsely alleged. Page 789 A place of Calvin
falsified. Page 383 Another falsely alleged. ibid. Fasting free in Scriptures.
Page 507 Diverse customs of ancient Christians in fasting. Page 508 Fasts of
Montanists. Page 509, etc. Ancient fasts were free. Page 509 The Devil advises
to fast. Page 511, 512 The Jesuits fast but little. Page 512 Fasting upon
Saturday and Sunday condemned by the ancient Fathers and Councils. Page 514,
519, 134, 339 Aerius did ill to trouble the Church about fasting. Page 505
Praise of fasting. Page 506 What we find amiss in the fasts of the Papists.
Page 506 Fasts upon weeks days in the ancient Church upon Wednesdays and
Fridays. Page 512 Absurdities and abuses of fasting in the Roman Church. Page
512 A strange kind of Fast, consisting not in sobriety, but in distinction of
meats. Page 512 In the Roman Church carowsing breaks not a fast. Page 512 What
persons are not obliged to fast. Page 513 Of the Fathers, and their authority.
Page 120 To what end, and how we allege Fathers. Page 710 Difficulty about
judging of the doubts of Faith, by the testimony of Fathers. Page 120 The Roman
Church condemns the Fathers, even in the things about which they agree. Page
121 Bellarmin, Baronius, Gregorius de Valentia, Maldonat, Villa, Vincentius,
condemn the Fathers. 122, 123, 124 Particular opinions of the Fathers, in which
they dissent from the Roman Church. Page 133, etc. Du Perron corrects St.
Austin. Page 220 He accuses the Fathers of wresting the Scripture to their
advantage. Page 221 And uses them as men without faith and conscience. Page
416, etc. He takes in the Fathers that which is evil, and leaves that which is
good. ibid. Examination of Du Perrons shift that the Fathers spoke darkly of
the Eucharist before the Catechumens and Infidels. Page 756 Felicissimus a
Priest of Carthage, stirs a Schism against Cyprian. Page 247 Pope Felix put
out of the Dypticks. Page 361 The Feast of the dedication, in winter, Joh. 10.
Page 203 Feast of the conception of the Virgin Mary. Page 130 The fire came
down from heaven upon the dedication of Solomon's Temple, was out long before
the ruin of that Temple. Page 161 Flavian remains a peaceable possessor of the
Patriarchat of Antioch against the will of the Bishop of Rome, who in the end
consents to it, not daring to oppose him. Page 316 Of those that whip
themselves for their own selves, or for others. Rhenanus says, that this
Flagellation comes from the Lacedaemonians. Page 499 Examples of Flagellation.
Page 503 Expositions of these texts, The flesh profits nothing, etc. And
except you eat my flesh, etc. Page 707 Faith consists in knowledge. Page 812
Implicit Faith, grounded upon the Faith of others, whence it comes. Page 811
Faith Theological, and not Theological, of Bellarmine. Page 433 The Council of
Constance determines, that one is not obliged to keep faith to Heretics. Page
31 Fermosus dispenses from keeping an oath. Page 27 He is declared after his
death an unlawful Pope, and his body dragged into the Tyber. ibid. The Roman
Church, teaching perjury, follows the old Heretics. Page 45 The Pope
authorizeth perjury, and dispenses from oaths. Page 84 Urban the second,
forbids to keep faith to excommunicate persons. Page 104 Jesuits teach perjury
before Judges. Page 542, 543 St. Francis, of him and his rule; How absurd and
impious it is. Page 497 He wallows in the mire. Page 497 His perfection. Page
504 He is said to have gone beyond Christ. ibid. Franciscans their first coming
into England. Page 647 They were exactors of moneys, and the Popes Factors.
ibid. Their sudden increase. Page 647 Their equipage. Page 653 The language of
the Franks was that of Ghelders. Page 843, 844 The French Nobility and Gentry
in the time of Lewis the ninth, make a League against the Pope, and oppose his
exactions. Page 653 General lamentation and murmr against the Pope, among the
French people, during the imprisonment of Lewis the ninth. Page 655 Frederick
Barbarossa trodden under the feet of Pope Alexander the third. Page 105 He
holds the Popes left stirrup instead of the right. Page 632 Being
excommunicated, he goes into Syria, and conquereth Jerusalem; but the injuries
done to him by the Pope, force him to leave Syria. Page 640 The Templers
endeavor to deliver him to the Sultan. Page 640 He extorteth his absolution
from the Pope. ibid. He is a rare example of patience and meekness. ibid. His
excommunication is pub^isht in all the Provinces subject to the Pope. Page 649
He is degraded from the Empire in the Council of Lions, by Innocent the fourth.
Page 650 Innocent corrupts four of Fredericks servants to stab him. Page 652
His death. Page 658 His sons, and his bones are excommunicated. ibid.
Frumentius Preaches in India without ordinary calling. Page 91 Fulbert Bishop
of Chartres corrupts an excellent text of St. Austin. Page 738
G.
GElasius Cyzicenus has written the Acts of the Council of Nice. A place of
that Gelasius falsified, and contrary to the truth of the History. Page 271
Opinions of Pope Gelasius rejected by the Church of Rome. Page 142 Pope
Gelasius affirms against truth, that Pope Innocent absolved St. Chrysostom.
Page 322 He is a sworn enemy to the memory of Acacius Patriarch of
Constantinople, so far as to excommunicate all the Oriental Churches, because
in their Ecclesiastical Tables they had the name of Acacius written. Page 377
The Greek Churches accuse him of pride. Page 378, 399 He teaches that
absolution cannot be given to the dead. Page 142 He forbids baptizing at any
other time but Easter and Pentecost. Page 377 He alleges Scripture in
derision. Page 378 He makes bitter invectives against the Council of Chalcedon.
Page 379 He says that all that Universal Councils say, must not always be
believed. Page 379 He disputes against Christ about the blasphemy against the
holy Ghost, Page 378 He maintains that Scripture is not always perfect. Page
377 He acknowledges that Popes are subject unto Emperors in civil matters, and
that they must not meddle with temporal businesses. Page 378 He threatens the
Emperor Anastasius to be his accuser in the day of judgment. ibid. He assumeth
to himself that which Christ says, He that is not with me, is against me.
ibid. He renounceth all Ecclesiastical Canons made in favor of the Church of
Rome. Page 379 He is contrary to Transubstantiation. Page 142 He condemns the
Communion under one kind. Page 142, 796 Genebrard speaks disgracefully of the
life and succession of the Popes. Page 101 A notable example of Gennadius
Patriarch of Constantinople, showing that he was no subject of the Bishop of
Rome. Page 375 Genserick King of the Vandals conquereth Spain in the year 408.
and leaves it to the Visigoths. 845 St. George was an Arian, enemy to
Athanasius. Page 400 Gerbert Archbishop of Rhemes promoted to the Popedom by a
paction with the Devil. Page 102 The Epistle ascribed to St. Ambrose, which
speaks of Gervasius and Protasius, is false. Page 420, 450 Confutation of the
distinction of grace general and sufficient, and grace effectual; whereof the
one gives power to do, the other gives to do. Page 474 The Emperor Gratian
leaves the title of Pontifex Maximus in the year Page 385. 311 Gratian
preaches the Gospel at Tours among the Pagans in the year Page 253. 844
Gregory the I. did not believe that by the Church of the elect the Roman is
understood. Page 7 and 8 Arrogant words of Pope Gregory the I. Page 210 He
acknowledges three chairs of St. Peter equal. Page 226 He was offended with
that title of universal Bishop. Page 381 He praises the parricide of Phocas.
ibid. He speaks to the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, as to his equals.
Page 311 He chideth Serenus an Image-breaker. Page 451 How he speaks of a
Priest that abstained from his wife. Page 492 Pope Gregory the II. declares
some meats unclean. Page 512 Pope Gregory the VII. degradeth married Priests.
Page 494 What opposition arose upon that ibid. He was the first that made bold
to degrade an Emperor, but he sped ill by it. His confession in his death.
Page 630 Gregory the VIII. taken by Celestus the II. is condemned to perpetual
prison. Page 104 Gregory the IX. excommunicates Frederick the II. Receives two
thousand ounces of gold to absolve him. He turns the Crossed against him. He
gives the Empire to Robert, brother to Lewis IX. King of Fravce, who refuses
that gift. Page 640, 641 His miserable end. Page 647 Grgory Nazianz^n had
opinions which the Roman Church allows not. Page 137 He wished that there were
no primacy in the Church. Page 302, 303 He is promoted to the Patriarchat of
Constantinople by Peter Patriarch of Alexandria, without the advice of the
Bishop of Rome. Page 305 He doubts whether the Saints hear our prayers. Page
393 He is the first of the Fathers in whom prayers to the Saints are found.
ibid. Opinions of Gregory of Nyssa not approved in the Roman Church. Page 140,
783, etc. That Catechetical Oration which is among his works, was corrupted by
the Eutychians. ibid. Gregorius Thaumaturgus gives rules about Penitence. Page
525 Gregorius Turonensis mistaken in history. Page 334 Gregorius de Valentia
Jesuit, censureth the Fathers upon the point of Transubstantiation. Page 124 He
holds that God exacteth of us more satisfaction then is requisite, according to
the rigor of justice. Page 606. He despises satisfactions. Page 620 He taxes
Scripture of insufficiency. Page 148
H
HEnry the I. of England maintains that the investitures belong unto him. He
banisheth Anselm. Page 631 Henry the II. of England invadeth Ireland by the
Popes permission, upon condition that every house pay a penny to the Pope. Page
632 He prohibits appeals to Rome, and the bringing of any Mandat from Rome, and
the exacting of Peter's pence in England. Page 633 In his reconciliation with
Thomas of Canterbury, he holds his horses bridle twice. ibid. Four of his
Courtiers kill Thomas in the Church of Canterbury. Page 634 His submissions,
even to be whipped by the Monks. ibid. Henry the III. of England makes homage of
his Crown to the Pope. Page 641 Pope Honorius declares him major. ibid. His
submission to Legate Otho, whose knees he touched with his head. Page 643 In a
Feast at Westminster he yields the royal chair unto the Legate. Page 646 His low
mind to suffer his Kingdom to be eaten up by the Popes servants. Page 650
Notable letters of Henry to Pope Innocent IV. Page 655 Henry IV. Emperor, and
his miserable end in his old age. Page 631 Henry Archbishop of York poisoned in
the chalice of the Sacrament. Page 632 Whether the societies of heretics ought
to be called Churches. Page 12 Whether heretics may be saved. Page 14 Opinions
of St. Hierome not approved in the Church of Rome. Page 141 Du Perron
calumniates Hierome. Page 200 Hierome makes all Bishops equal. Page 309 Hierome
calls Rome Babylon, and the harlot in scarlet, and the Clergy of Rome the Senate
of the Pharisees. ibid. He says that the offices of Priest and Bishop are one
and the same. Page 310 He praises the poverty and simplicity of the ancient
Bishops of Rome. ibid. Hierome believed that the Saints deceased hear not our
prayers. Page 194 His vehemency against Matrimony Page 416 He says that the
Fathers writing against the Pagans, write often against their own sense. Page
415. He accuses St. Paul of fraud and dissembling. Page 417 He speaks of him
with contempt. ibid. He taxes him of lie, and is therefore blamed by St.
Austin. ibid. In the midst of his austerity his heart was set upon unlawful
lust. Page 502 He is whipped before Christ's throne for being a Cueroman. Page 503
He forbids altogether to eat flesh and drink wine. Page 511 And contradicts
St. Paul. ibid. Hilary Bishop of Poitiers. His opinions which the Roman Church
allows not. Page 138 Hilary Bishop of Arles. His quarrel with Leo I. Bishop
of Rome. The Emperor Valentinian gives sentence in favor of Leo. Page 363
Impiety of Pope Hormisdas, in alleging Scripture. His pertinacie to hold the
Oriental Churches so long excommunicated for the only table of Acacius written
in their Records. Page 379 Hosius Bishop of Cordova, beloved of the Emperor
Constantine, and employed to oppose Arius, without the advice of the Bishop of
Rome. Page 268 He presideth in the Council of Nice. Page 271 Hosius sat not
there as a Legate of the Bishop of Rome, as Du Perron affirmed. ibid. He made
the Symbol of Nice. Page 302.
I.
FAble of St. James the Apostle beheaded, and his body transported from
Jerusalem to Compostella, confuted by Baronius. Page 400 The Church of
Jerusalem Mother of all Churches. Page 308 Jesus Christ, wherein we must
imitate him. Page 116 He alone was exempt from original sin. Page 129, 130 He
is the only Mediator. Page 429, etc. Opinions of St. Ignatius rejected by the
Roman Church. Page 134 Ignorances of Cardinal Du Perron in Scripture. Du Perron
esteemed that Jesus Christ spoke Greek with his disciples. Page 5 He takes the
custom to deliver a malefactor at Easter for a tradition. Page 160 He takes
the Fable of the continual fire upon the Altar confirmed by miracle in the time
of the transmigration, for an history. Page 161. 227 He calls the Books of the
Old Testament a Rabbinical supputation. Page 202 And will have the Books of
Esdras to have been enclosed within the Ark of the Covenant. ibid. He knew not
that the immortality of the soul is proved in the Books of Moses. Page 160
Another notorious ignorance. Page 228 He believed that the Ep^stle to the
Hebrews was written to the Church of Jerusalem peculiarly. ibid. His false
opinion that the Epistle to the Galatians was written before that to the
Romans. ibid. He affirms that these words, He shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost and with fire, were spoken by Christ, whereas they were spoken by John
the Baptist. Page 673 Another ignorance. ibid. He knew not whether Christ
celebrating the holy Communion with his Disciples was sitting or standing. Page
776 He will have Moses and Aaron to have worshipped the stone when they spoke
to the stone. Page 777 Ignorance of the Cardinal in Philosophy. In page 17. and
222. and 385. He was ignorant that all Faith is relative. Page 404 He
understood not what Council is. Page 472 He believed that the actions of the
understanding, and the spiritual manducation, are done without the intellect.
Page 789 He says that money is a thing not real, but intentional. ibid. He
thought that the habits and operations of the intellect are not real. Page 790
He teaches, that from the Genius to the Species, one may argue affirmatively.
Page 792 He maintains that this word substance signifies accidents. Page 727
He puts two substances in bread; the one internal and invisible, the other
external and visible. Ignorance of the Cardinal in the Greek tongue, and in the
Latin Grammar. He knew not that the Aorist of the Greek infinitive has
commonly a present signification. Page 154 He interprets (...) and (...)
transmarinos; whereas it signifies dwelling by the seaside and Islanders.
Page 310 And (...) reverencing, whereas it signinifies thinking. ibid. He
believes that (...), John 1.30. signifies has been done. He interprets (...)
venerable, whereas it signifies hoary. Page 275 He interprets (...) because,
whereas it signifies although. Page 293 He interprets (...) convocate, whereas
it signifies call, or invite to come. ibid. He interprets fumosum typhum, a
smoaky whirlwind, whereas it signifies the fumous or vain pride. It seems he
mistakes (...) for (...). Page 336 (...) he interprets judgment, whereas in
the place which he alleges, the word signifies a vote or advice. Page 337
(...) he translates studious, whereas it signfies expetitus, desired by all,
taking (...) for (...). Page 338 Concilio evocato, he translates, having
convocated a Council, whereas it signifies having called the Council to
himself, for the Council was assembled before. Page 347 (...), he translates
humane things, whereas it signifies, the men that are upon earth. Page 410 A
Greek place of Origin ill translated. Page 415 (...), he translates, men of
good will, whereas it signifies men with choice or liberty of will. Page 415
He corrupts a place of Chrysostom upon Tit. 1. joining with (...) the word
(...). Page 477 He translateth the word (...) in the Council of Ancyra, having
been received, whereas it signifies having received, or having obliged
themselves with promise, or having undertaken. Page 484 He did not understand
the word (...) in the Council of Nice, which signifies not uxorem, but
associatam, or adjunctam, and that without marriage. Page 485 (...) he
translateth, a Priest that has been married, whereas it signifies a married
Priest. Page 488 He has ill translated the word (...). Page 490 (...) he
translateth, that has been composed, instead of that is composed. Page 718 He
mis-interpreteth a place of Theodoret out of ignorance of the Greek phrase.
Page 725 (...) in Theodorets Dialogues he translateth a beggar, whereas
Theodoret means a contributor, or one that pays his shot. Page 734 (...) he
translateth consecration, whereas it signifies in the Fathers, the showing of
the bread unto the people. Page 774 (...) he translateth then, whereas it
signifies wholly, or altogether, and sometimes lately. Page 775 By (...),
which signifies a sacred ceremony, he understands the Sacrament, and by the
Sacrament he understands Christ. Page 791 (...) he translateth swallowing,
which signifies consuming or spending ibid. (...) he translates impiety,
instead of ill thoughts, or ill counsel. ibid. (...) he translates are
presupposed, instead of assumed. ibid. Posteri he translates posteriours
instead of posterity. Page 236 Convenire ad Ecclesiam, he translates to agree
with the Church, instead of coming from diverse parts unto the Church. Page 224
Suffragator he translates a giver of advice, whereas it signifies, one that
helps with his vote or intercession. Page 420 He knew not that in the figure
of Grammar called (...), one of the substantives is put for an adjective. Page
671 He understood not the signification of Architriclin. Page 705 Ignorance in
expounding this verse of Virgil, Crimine ab uno disce omnes. Page 742 He
confounds (...) with (...). Page 798 Ignorance in Chronology. He took the
second convocation of Bishops at Constantinople for the first. Page 308
Ignorance in Geography. He says that Idumea is seated at the West of Judea.
Page 385 He puts Babylon in Assyria, whereas it is in Chaldea. Page 233
Ignorance in Hebrew. He discerned not that sarbet sarbancel are words that
signify nothing in Hebrew, and that we must read in Origines Shebet sar been
el, that is, the scepter of the Prince of Gods children. Page 203 Onias he
interprets the strength of the people, whereas it signifies, God is my
strength. Page 191 Rabbi he interprets many, whereas it signifies Master and
Doctor. Page 321 He was mistaken when he put Sammai before Hillel. Page 156
Ignorance in the Fathers and Church History. He affirms ignorantly, that
before Hieroms time none of the Latin or Western Church rejected the Book of
Maccabees. Page 196 He mistakes a particular Council assembled in Italy for the
Council of Sardica. Page 300 He mistakes the Council of Rome under Damasus for
that of Constantinople, and Theodosius for Gratian. Page 306 He affirms
falsely that Flavianus and Paulinus were cited to Rome by the Pope. Page 316 And
that Chrysostom appealed to Innocent the I. by Letters. Page 320, 321 He
understood not that word of transmarinas Ecclesias in the 162. Episte of St.
Austin. Page 304 He thought that the Councels of Christians gave Laws to the
Pagans. Page 405 That Christ spoke Greek, and used the word (...) among his
disciples. Page 5 That in the ancient Church an inferior could not
excommunicate one greater then himself. Page 244 That all the Churches of the
Empire were called suburbicary. Extreme ignorance! Page 273, 274 He mistakes
one Alnulfus for another. Page 330 He falsely supposes that the Council of
Sardica was held part, or an Appendix of the Council of Nice. Page 298, 334 And
that the Roman Church cited the Canons of Sardica, as belonging to the Council
of Nice. Page 334 Great ignorance in History, to believe that the Bishop of
Rome in St. Austins time had the power to send bands of soldiers into Africa.
Page 336 He says that a Bishop of Alexandria was absent, when the same was
dead, and his See vacant. Page 371 Ignorance about the names of Emperors, set
in the title of Imperial Laws. Page 363 He confounds the whole History of
Sylverius and Vigilius, and makes the Eutychian letters of Vigilius to be
written before the death of Sylverius, though they were written a long time
after. Page 385 He was ignorant of the origin of Lent, and of the sense of the
word Quadragesima. Page 517 He knew not what women were those Associate or
Adjoined, that are mentioned in the Council of Nice. Page 485 Against all
reason and likelihood he makes the first Council of Constantinople, which was
universal, to be but an Appendix of the Council of Rome, which was particular.
Page 306 Images of God made by the ancient Heretics. Page 39 Images of God.
The old Heathen Romans had no Images of God, for the space of 170. years. Page
436 It is but lately that the Roman Church has begun to make images of God.
Page 437, 438 Impious excuses brought for that. In what habit God is
represented. Page 438 The Emperor Adrian built Churches without images for
Christians. Page 441 The Heathen excused their images with the same reasons as
are used now in the Roman Church. Page 39 The Heathen called Images the books
of Idiots. Page 39 449, 450. The attire of Images is derived from Paganism.
Page 51 Of the words Image and Idol. Page 437 The Jews have abhorred Images
ever since they returned from the Captivity of Babylon. Page 439 The ancient
Christians had neither Images nor Painters. Page 440 The Eliberin Council
prohibits Images, and is therefore taxed by Melchior Canus of imprudence and
impiety. Page 441 They are condemned also by the Council of Franckford. Page
445 And by that of Paris. ibid. Eusebius calls the images of Cesarea a Pagan
custom. Page 442 Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierom, Austin, condemn images, Page 442,
etc. We object the same things as the Fathers did against the images of God and
Saints. Page 442 The second Council of Nice commands the adoration of Images.
Page 445 Paps of flesh grow upon the image of the Virgin Mary. Page 635 The
eighth Council of Constantinople commands that the image of Jesus Christ be
adored. Page 27 The Doctors of the Roman Church will have us to adore the Cross
with the cult of Latria. Page 446 Birth and progress of Images. Page 451, 452
What moved the Popes to be Patrons of Images. Page 452 Image of Jesus Christ in
Cesarea of Philippi. ibid. Reasons of the Roman Church for the adoration of
Images. Page 448 Custom of covering images in Lent, whence it came. Page 771
Why Images were removed from the Temples of the Reformed Churches. Page 811,
812 Immortality of the soul, proved out of the five Books of Moses against Du
Perron. Page 160 Impossibility of being without sin, does not excuse the
sinner. Page 474 Incense in Churches, Lactantius and Arnobius despise it and
jear it. Page 444 Of Indulgences and treasure of the Church. Page 463, etc.
Horrible abuse in Indulgences. Page 464 What a plenary indulgence is. ibid.
Indulgences disgrace and clip the benefit of Christ. Page 467, 468 Many Doctors
of the Roman Church confess that the doctrine of Indulgences is new and unknown
to Antiquity. Page 466, 467 Why the Ancients speak so seldom of Indulgences,
and the new Doctors so often. Page 466 Signification of the word indulgence in
the ancient Church. Page 568 Indulgences to the dead by way of suffrages. Page
579 Judgment of Cajetan, Roffensis, and Navarrus about Indulgences. Page 580
Effect of Indulgences. Page 621 Innocent the first, Bishop of Rome, did not
make himself judge of the cause of Chrysostom, and could not help him. Page 320
His Deputies to the Emperor are sent back with contempt. ibid. He never
excommunicated the Emperor Arcadius, nor Eudoxia his wife. Page 321 He
excommunicates Atticus Patriarch of Constantinople, who kept his place nothing
the less. Page 323 His Epistles inserted among those of Austin, are absurd and
suspected of falsehood. Page 342 Error of Innocent about the necessity of
administering the Eucharist to infants, Page 343, 344 His ignorance and his
Decretal forbidding Clerks to marry. Page 207 Innocent the third Excommunicates
John King of England, deposes him and puts England in interdict; bestows it
upon Philip August, upon condition of conquering it. He receives homage from
King John, and makes England a Fee of the Roman Church, and the King his
vassal. Page 636, etc. He publishes the Croisada between the Waldenses and
Albigenses. Page 638 He excommunicates the Barons of England. Page 639 He
assembleth the Council of Lateran where Transubstantiation is established, and
the power of dispossessing Princes is attributed to the Pope, and a degree of
glory in Paradise is given above other Saints to them that should cross
themselves for the voyage of Syria. Page 639. 28, 29 His ignorance in deriving
the word Pascha from passion. Page 168 He says that the suffrage of Saints is
necessary to us. Page 418 He did not believe the absolute necessity of the
Baptism of water. Page 670 Innocent the fourth his Wardrobe is burnt, and in it
his Charter of England. Page 649 His arrogant words against the Kings of France
and England. Page 649 He makes a Sermon at Lions. ibid. He deposes the
Emperor Frederick the second. Page 650 His death. Page 657 Intention requisite
in him that conferreth the Sacrament. Page 108, 109, 576, 674 Intention
habitual or virtual. Page 802 What the Interdict is in the Roman Church. France
put under an interdict, by Pope Julius the second. Page 33 An Interdict put
upon Normandy by Walter Archbishop of Roven for the space of two years. Page
635 The person of Lewis the seventh of France put under an interdict by Pope
Eugenius. Page 632 An interdict put upon England. Page 636 The Roman Church is
not an infallible interpreter of Scripture. Page 64. etc. Two sorts of judges
of the sense of Scripture. Page 65 Many things in Scripture need no
interpretation. Page 64 Seven differences between our interpretations, and them
of the Roman Church. Page 67 Impious and profane interpretations of the Roman
Church. Page 68 Investitures causes of great troubles under the Papal Empire.
Page 33. 629, 630, etc. Pope Paschal yields the investitures to the Emperor
Henry the fifth. Page 632 Invocation of Saints. See Saints. Du Perron
confesses that in the Fathers before the first Council, no invocation of
Saints is to be found. Page 409. 388 Difference between the Intercession and
the invocating of Saints, and that Du Perron confounds those two things. ibid.
Paction of Cyprian with Cornelius that the first deceased should pray for the
outliver. Page 393 That Saints must not be invocated, Page 402, etc. Invocation
of Saints condemned by the Fathers. Page 406, etc. Especially by Origin. Page
407, 411, etc. Chrysostom contrary to it. Page 420, etc. Some places in
Chrysostom falsified to establish the invocation of Saints. Page 422, 423
Athanasius contrary to praying to Saints and Angels. Page 423, etc. Austin
contrary to the invocation of Saints. Page 424 And Epiphanius. Page 425, etc.
And Hierome. Page 426 John King of England quarrels with Pope Innocent the
third, about the election of an Archbishop. Page 636 John deposed by the Pope,
and his Kingdom given to Philip August for the remission of his sins. ibid.
King John humbles himself, and makes his Crown tributary to the Pope. Page 637
He makes homage to the Pope. ibid.
Kneels before the Archbishop to obtain absolution. Page 638 Sends to Admiral
Murmelin Mahumetan to crave help against the Popes oppression. Page 638 He
makes a second Homage, and gets the Charter renewed, which is sealed with gold.
ibid. Pope John the tenth, a man of prodigious wickedness. Page 101 John the
twelfth deposed by the Emperor Otho for his crimes. Page 101 Taken in
adultery, and so beaten by the Devil, that he dies of it. ibid. Creates
infants Bishops; Drinks the Devils health, etc. ibid. John the fifteenth,
having killed two Popes, gets the Popedom by violence and bribery. Page 102
John the eighteenth buyeth the Popedom. ibid. John the two and twentieth,
electeth himself Pope. Page 106 Denies that souls see God before the
resurrection. Page 106 He is excused by Bellarmine. Page 393 John the three and
twentieth, deposed. He denied the immortality of the soul. Page 99 John of
Antioch deposes Cyrillus of Alexandria, and Cyrillus in revenge deposes him.
Page 349 Josephus makes Hercules, the Monster killer, son in Law to one of
Abraham's daughters. Page 187 Irenaeus, some of his opinions not approved by the
Church of Rome. Page 136 Du Perron in the fifth chap. of the fourth Observation
against King James, p. 719. says that Ireneus said such things, which had he
said in our days, he should be held an Arrian. ibid. A man is irregular if he
cannot drink wine, or if he be gelded, not if he be a Sodomite. Page 564 The
Jubilee was instituted by Pope Boniface the eighth. Page 29 It is the most
famous, and the most lucrative Fair of Babylon. Page 29 The Book of Judith is
fabulous. Absurdities of the said Book. Page 178, etc. It is not Canonical.
ibid. Julius the first, Bishop of Rome, chosen Arbitrator in the cause of
Athanasius against the Oriental Bishops, abuses his authority. Page 290, etc.
The Oriental Bishops rebuke him for his audaciousness. Page 291 And tell him
that all Bishops are equal. Page 291 Justin Martyr his opinions, in which he is
dissenting from the Roman Church. Page 131 Justin the Emperor makes the
Patriarchs of Constantinople to bow under the Bishop of Rome, and causes the
name of Acacius to be rased out of the Diptychs of Constantinople. Page 379
Justification by faith alone, is odious to the Roman Church. Page 132 The
Emperor Justinian made many Laws and Constitutions about Christian Faith and
Ecclesiastical Policy. Page 380
K.
OF killing Kings rather then reveal a Confession. Page 542. etc. Kings and
Emperors degraded and deposed, and their Crowns enslaved by Popes. Page 545
The Council of Constance speaks not of Kings, and secureth not their life. Page
546 The power of Kings is of divine institution. Page 548 By the Kingdom of
heaven often the Church is understood. And the keys of the Kingdom of heaven
are the power to Govern the Church. Page 556, 557 Two sorts of keys in the word
of God. Page 556, 557 The key of the Kingdom of heaven signify the Government
of the Church. Page 557 Abuse of the keys in the Roman Church. Page 573, etc.
The power of the keys is given to all the Apostles. Page 224
L.
LActantius his opinions in which the Roman Church dissents from him. Page 142
He condemns Images. Page 441 He calls them great puppets before whom incense
is burnt. Page 444 Latria and Dulia, in what sense St. Austin us^t^ that
distinction. Page 431 The Roman Church in the Psalter of the Virgin Mary
deferreth unto her the service of Latria. Page 434 Absurdities of the
distinction of Latria and Dulia. Page 446, 447 The Narrative of Lazarus and
Dives is not an History but a Parable. Page 399 Lent is not instituted by God.
Page 515 Texts of Scripture upon which Du Perron groundeth Lent. Page 515, etc.
True origin of Lent. Page 516 Diversity of customs about Lent. Page 517, etc.
Lent is little observed by the Pope, and Cardinals. Page 521 The Emperor Leo
makes a Law that the Church of Constantinople be the first of all Churches.
Page 363 Leo the ninth Pope is overcome in battle, and taken. Page 103 Liberius
Bishop of Rome submits himself to Athanasius. Page 301 He is sent into exile
by the Emperor. ibid. He fell into the Heresy of the Arians, and subscribed
their confession. ibid. The Limbus of infants came from the Pelagians. Page 44
Confutation of Limbus. Page 669, etc. A Bishop of Lincoln calls the Pope
Antichrist, and detesteth the Roman Court. His Letters to Pope Innocent the
fourth. Words of indignation of the Pope against him. Being dead he appears
by night to Pope Innocent the fourth, who dies out of fright at that
apparition. Page 656, 657 Linus first Bishop of Rome after St. Peter. Page 240
Liturgy of Ethiopia described out of Alvarez. Page 775 Lewis the seventh of
France, excommunicated by Pope Eugenius, and his person put under an interdict.
His oath upon relics. Of which oath he is absolved by Bernard Abbot of
Clervaux. His unfortunate voyage into the Levant. Page 632 He passes into
England to visit the relics of Thomas Becket. Page 635 His vows and prayers to
Thomas to avoid the perils of the sea. ibid. Lewis the eighth of France, son to
Philip August passes into England to the help of the Barons. Page 640 Lewis
the ninth stops the moneys levied in France by the Pope. Page 646 He buyeth
with a great sum of money the crown of thorns from Baldwin Emperor of
Constantinople, and from the Venetians a piece of the true Cross. Page 446 He
meets with Pope Innocent the fourth at Clugny, and another time at Lions,
whence the King returns with great indignation. Page 650, 651 The Pope gives
him leave to levy upon the Clergy the tenth part of their revenue. And he to
requite him, gives the Pope leave to levy the twentieth part for three years.
Page 652 He prohibits the Popes exactions, and sends back his Legates with
division. Page 653 He imbarques himself at Marseille for the voyage of the Holy
Land. Ill success of his affairs. His imprisonment. The mourning of France,
which at the same time is exhausted with the Popes exactions, who thereby
hinders the Kings relief. Page 654, 655 Lamentation of the French people.
ibid. Lewis the ninth commands that the Pope be expelled out of Lions. Page
655 Lewis the twelfth assembleth a Council at Pisa against Pope Julius the
second. Page 33 Lewis Vives complains of the superstition of Christians about
serving the Saints. Page 429 The Moral Law is nothing else but the Law of
Nature. Page 439 Confutation of the Looking Glass in the essence or face of
God. Page 388, 389
M
THe Book of Maccabees is fabulous, and full of absurdities. Page 185, etc. St
Paul excuses not the lowness of his style, as the Author of the second book of
Maccabees. Page 190 Opinion of Gregory the first, about the Maccabees. Page 207
Christ, Joh. 6. speaks not of the Sacrament, or of oral manducation. Page 705
Comparison between the corporal and the spiritual manducation. Page 708 The
oral manducation exposes Christ to contempt, and is full of contradictions.
Page 708, 709 All the Fathers acknowledge a spiritual manducation of Christ,
and reject the corporal. Page 751 St. Austin more then any. Page 752, 753 The
wicked eat not the flesh of the Lord. Page 754, 755 The Fathers of the Old
Testament ate the same meat as we do. Page 760 The Fathers acknowledge the same
participation to the body of Christ in Baptism, as in the Lords Supper. Page
767 The Spiritual manducation is real. Page 791 Christ in the Communion is
eaten and apprehended by faith in the Sacrament as dying for us. Page 790
Reason why the Fathers never speak of eating the Godhead. ibid. Manfred Son to
Frederick the second, defeats the Popes Army, who causes the Croisada to be
preached against him. Page 657 St. Margaret never was in the world. Page 400
Marosia and Theodora, Harlots, have long ruled the Papal See. Page 99 Marriage.
See Celibat. The dissolution of Marriages sprung from ancient Heretics. Page
50 They that have not the gift of continence, ought to marry. Page 469 etc.
Prophets and Apostles married. Page 470. etc. M^rriage cleared from the
disgrace which Du Perron puts upon it. Page 470, 476 Marriage of Clerks
approved by the Council of Nice. Page 484 Baronius and Du Perron confess that
in the time of the Apostles, Bishops were married. Page 478 Marriage of Clerks
approved by the Eliberin Council. Page 487 And by that of Gangra. Page 488 And
by the Emperor Constantine. Page 488 And by Syricius, Socrates, Hierome. Page
488, 489 And by Epiphanius Page 489, 490 And by Athanasius, Theodoret, Austin,
Pope Pelagius, Isidorus. By the Council of Anjou, and by that of Trulla. And by
Pope Gregory the first. Page 490, 491, 492 Examples of Bishops married. Page
492, etc. Synesius Bishop of Cyrene married. Page 493 Confession of the
Adversaries. Page 494, 495 The marriage of Clerks is hold less tolerable in the
Roman Church then fornication and Sodomy. Page 479 St. Martial a supposititious
Saint that never was, is put in the number of the Apostles by that intruder and
wicked Pope, John the twentieth. Page 103. 399 Pope Martin the fifth, his proud
titles. Page 32 Another Martin is the plague of England, the executioner of the
Popes horrible exactions and extortions in England. Page 648 The Mass is
contrary to Christ's institution. Page 37 Impious prayer in the Mass. Page 413
One cannot tell what the Priest breaks in the Mass. Page 696 Nor what is poured
in it. Page 698 Of the two cups. Luke 22. Page 699, 670 Opposition of the Mass
with the Lords Supper. Page 701 Examination of the Mass by the Institution of
the Lords Supper. Page 702, etc. That Mass which is called Secret, was unknown
in the ancient Church. Page 146 The Sacrifice of the Mass serves only to remit
the temporal pain of sins already pardoned. Page 683 Why part of the Mass is
said in a low voice, and with a deep silence. Page 747 Why the Mass is said in
Latin. Page 828, etc. Clauses of the Mass which would offend the hearers if
they were understood. Page 828, 829, etc. In the Mass Christ is compared to a
beast. Page 829 The Canon of the Mass is contrary to transubstantiation. Page
730 Efficacy of the Mass ex opere operato. Page 802 Private Masses are contrary
to Christ's institution, to the practice of the ancient Church, to the Canons of
the Roman Church, and to the very words of the Mass. Page 804 Shameful
traffic of private Masses. Page 804, 805 Miracles are no marks of the true
Church. Page 114 Of the miracles of Heretics. Page 114 Of false miracles. Page
115 The Government of the Universal Church must not and cannot be Monarchical.
Page 211. etc. Monks, when the Monastical profession began at Rome and in
Gauls, and by whom. Page 318 Monks of Syria and Egypt Anthropomorphites. Page
501 Their origin and discipline. Page 500 Their rules grounded upon Scripture
curiously applied. Page 501 They durst not piss without leave. Page 501 Were
beaten by the devil. ibid. Their beginning at Rome. Page 501 The people of Rome
abhorred them. Page 502 The Montanists were authors of austere fasts. They
disputed with the Orthodox Christians with the same reasons that the Romanists
use against us. Page 507 The multitude and large extent is not a mark of the
true Church. Page 111 Du Perrons reason against us for it. Page 113, 114 The
mystery of the Sacrament was hid to the Penitents and Catechumens. Page 146
The Church ought not to be troubled about a question of meats. Page 505
Abstinence from meat is a weakness. Page 506 Distinction of meats abolisht by
the Apostle. Page 506, 507 Yet we must use it to edification. ibid. Ancient
Heretics excused their distinction of meats with the very reasons of the Roman
Church. Page 508 Of the prohibition of blood, and things strangled. ibid. The
Council of Ancyra forbids abstinence from flesh. Page 509 Meats unclean by the
Popes judgment. Page 512
N.
Navarrus his judgment concerning Indulgences. Page 579 Nectarius is created
Patriarch of Constantinople without the advice of the Patriach of Rome. Page
308 He abolisheth the Penitentiary Priest and the secret Confessions without
the advice of the Bishop of Rome. Page 311 Nestorius being Patriarch of
Constantinople, governs the Church of all the world. His heresy and his
condemnation. Page 346 He is banished by the Emperor by the advice of John of
Antioch. Page 352 Nicolas the first Pope denies the truth to be in the
multitude. Page 112 He falsifieth a Canon of the Council of Chalcedon. Page 359
He abuses Scripture to maintain the Popes primacy. Page 360 He attributes to
Christ infirm actions. Page 504 Pope Nicolas the second, reduces the Church of
Milan to his obedience, and takes from the Clerks their wives, Anno Christi,
MLVIII. Page 314 Novatus and Novatianus, both of them Schismatics. Page 247
Novatian chosen Bishop of Rome by a clandestine election. Page 247, etc. He
admits not those that are fallen to a public penitence. Page 661 An
Interdict put upon Normandy, for the space of two years by Walter Archbishop of
Roven. Conditions of agreement between him and King Richard. Page 635
O.
THe Ambrosian Office different from the Roman. Page 313 And was more esteemed
then the Roman for a great while: till the year 771. when Pope Adrian condemned
the Ambrosian Office. Page 313 A trial of both the Offices by a miracle. ibid.
The Ambrosian office lasted till the time of Charlemain. Page 845 The
Mozarabick Office abolisht in Spain about the year, MLXXX. and the Roman
established. Page 314, 845 Oath. The Roman Church swearing by the Creatures,
imitateth the ancient Heretics. Page 44 The ancient Christians did not swear
at all. Page 128 The Pope dispenses from Oaths. Page 27, 99 How religiously an
oath ought to be kept. Page 100 Oath of Bishops in their consecration. Page 37
Offerings of the people upon the holy Table, and how they were disposed. Page
768 The Form of the Ordination of Readers in the Roman Church. Page 825 The
holy Orders in the Roman Church, how uncertain, being grounded upon the
intention of him that conferreth them. Page 108 Origin is against the
invocation of creatures. Page 411 Judgment of the ancient Church about Origin.
Page 411, 412 None of his adversaries ever blamed him for rejecting Images, and
Transubstantiation, and invocation of creatures. Page 412 Praises of Origens
Books against Celsus. Page 413 He rejects Images. Page 441 And
Transubstantiation. Page 723 Du Perron is very sharp against him. Page 411, 724
The Ossenian heretics taught to pray in dark words. Page 810, 811
P
PAganism and Papism how like. Page 52, 53 God never forgiveth the fault, but
he remits the pain. It is false that in sin there is both poena and culpa. Page
595 Three sorts of pain. Page 592 Pain of loss, and pain of sense. Page 669 How
the Archiepiscopal Pall is made, and for how much it is sold. Page 110 Council
of Paphnutius Bishop of Thebaid, about the marriage of Priests, followed by the
first Council of Nice. Page 484. In what sense Pastors forgive sins. Page 551,
etc. The repenting sinner has obtained pardon of God before he presents
himself before the Priest. Page 552 Pastors cannot forgive sins in Gods
judgment. Page 555 Confession of the Adversaries. Page 563, 570 Testimony of
Fathers. Page 567, etc. Pardon of sins in the Roman Church is separated from
the preaching of the Gospel. Page 577 Pardon upon condition of committing some
wicked act. Page 587, 588 God pardons not by halfs. Page 593 Parish. What
that word signifies in the ancient Church. Page 366, 367 Pope Paschates the
II. his cruelty to Henry the IV. How Henry the V. used him, and made him quit
the investiture. Page 104, 632 Four Patriarchs equal in power, pretending that
to each of them belonged the care of all the Churches of the Empire. Page 295
Each of them qualified Head of the universal Church. Page 295 All of them
together held for one Head of the Universal Church of the Empire. Page 296 What
the Patriarchs were. Page 366, 341 Their Order changed in the I. Council of
Constantinople. Page 308 And in that of Chalcedon without the advice of the
Bishop of Rome. Page 367 Paulin and Flavian competitors of the Bishopric of
Antioch. Page 316 Popery imitates Pelagianism. Page 43 Africa troubled by the
heresy of Pelagius and Celestius. Page 324 Signification of the word Penitence
in holy Scripture. Page 658 etc. In the Fathers the word Penitence is found in
the singular number only. Page 661 The Fathers call public penitence
exomologesis, and a second plank after the shipwreck. ibid. The Fathers take
the word Penitence two ways. Page 660 Four degrees of Penitence in the ancient
Church. Page 524, 525. The ordering of public penitence in the ancient Church.
ibid. The penitence of the Ancients how different from that of the Church of
Rome. Page 353, 610, 611, 146, 147 The Fathers speak not of secret absolution.
Page 553 When bodily penance was first exchanged for pecuniary. Page 104
Extravagant penances. Page 585. etc. To whip ones self singing. Page 586
Penitence without satisfaction. Page 587 Redeem satisfaction with money. ibid.
The way how to be dispensed from penances imposed by the Priest. Page 612 Leo
the X. condemns Luther for saying that a new life is the best penitence. Page
659 Amendment of life is better then bodily penances. Page 659 The Novatians
admitted not those that were fallen to public penance. Page 661 Tertullian and
Ambrose were of opinion that penitence can be done but once. ibid. Impious
penances. Page 587, 588 Of the Sacrament of Penitence. Page 555 It is very
lucrative to the Church of Rome. Page 673 Du Perron placing the Sacrament of
Penitence in the Absolution only, contradicts the Councels of Florence and
Trent. Page 533 The parts of the pretended Sacrament of Penitence are no
Sacraments, nor parts of a Sacrament. Page 534 David's penitence was no
Sacrament. ibid. There is no Sacrament of penitence. Page 635. etc. In the 20.
of Joh. ver. 23. Whose sins soever you pardon, etc. the Sacrament of penitence
is not instituted. Page 552, 553 The Jesuit Pererius opposes the consent of
the Fathers upon the point of Predestination. Page 127 Du Perron his Journey to
Rome. Page 109 His behavior in the States of Paris. Page 544 Summary of his
Speech to the States. Page 545 His ignorance in correcting Erasmus and Calvin.
Page 232 His ridiculous distinction between the negotiating and the judiciary
person of the Pope. Page 329 He says that God marketh or seals the Elect,
not in them, but in himself. Page 9 He says that the merit of Faith is
greater, where there is less intelligence. Page 46 He confesses that by the
communion under one kind, the signification of the Sacrament is diminished.
Page 802 He makes bold to condemn all the Bishops of Africa, among whom were
those holy men, Aurelius and Austin. Page 335 He blames the Emperor
Constantine for not deferring enough to the Pope. Page 339 The absurd
interpretation which he gives to the 8th. Canon of Chalcedon. Page 372, 373
Notorious absurdities of Du Perron upon the prayer for the dead in the Mass.
Page 458 He frames an absolute Faith and a relative Faith; a Faith
Theological, and a Faith not Theological. Page 433 He alleges Scripture in
derision of Lent. Page 515, 516 His absurd proofs for St. Peter's Primacy. Page
235, 236 He says that the word substance signifies the accidents. Page 727 He
speaks of St. Austins Treatises upon St. John with contempt. Page 758 He
disputes against St. Austin. Page 762 He proves by the Quatrains of Pibrac,
that the Apostles sitting at the Table adored the host. Page 776 He holds that
the spiritual manducation is done without the soul. Page 789 His manner of
disputing, and what controversies he avoids with all his power. Page 550, 551
He says that God, after the Consecration, preserves the bread in the
universal latitude of being. Page 720, 721 To excuse that Prayer on the Mass
for the souls that sleep in peace, he says that they sleep in peace, not in
regard of themselves, but in regard of the Church. Page 458 He calls Purgatory
a Metaphorical fire. Page 460 He accuses Scripture of absurdities. Page 160 He
says that the greater the ignorance is, the greater is the merit of Faith.
Page 812 Impious doctrines of Card. Du Perron. His impious Exposition of the
Text Tu es Petrus, etc. Page 221 He accuses the Apostles of ignorance. ibid.
He says that this proposition, The Church is founded upon Christ, is not a
proposition of perpetual truth, and that it was not from the beginning. Page
221, 222 He makes two sorts of Christian Faith, absolute and relative. Page 404
He accuses the Fathers of dissimulation and hypocrisy. Page 413 He says that
one should suffer his King to be killed, yea and Christ himself, rather then
reveal a Confession. Page 543 He maintains that the Church has authority to
change the Commandments of God, and to dispense from them 70. Page 795 797 And
that the Church may add unto Scripture. Page 148, 149 He makes two sorts of
redemption of our souls; the one original, the other applicative. Page 691 He
maintains that in the Books of Moses the immortality of the soul is not to be
found. Page 160 He has gathered all the absurdities that he could pick out of
Scripture. Page 175 He maintains that the precept of the Apostle, Let the
Bishop be husband of one wife, was but for a time. Page 478 In the same manner
as in his Speech to the States of Paris, he maintained that the Apostles
command, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, was but provisional.
Page 548 He says that the Sacraments of the old Testament were but vain
monuments and cenotaphia. Page 763 St. Peter had no Successor in his power over
the Universal Church. Page 95 Comparison of St. Peter and the Pope. Page 97.
etc. St. Peter had no power of jurisdiction over the other Apostles; and in
what sense he was the first among them. Page 214 Authorities of Fathers upon
that subject. Page 216, etc. Examination of the Text, Thou art Peter. Page 218.
etc. And of this, Simon love thou me? Page 224 How St. Peter is the
foundation of the Church. Page 220, 221 Of St. Peter's fabulous combat with
Simon Magus. Page 227, 228 Fables about the death and form of punishment, and
burial of St. Peter. Page 230 Athanasius says, that his throat was cut, not
that he was crucified. Page 230 The next successors of St. Peter at Rome are
doubtful. ibid. Absurd proofs of Du Perron for the Popes primacy. Page 232,
etc. It matters not for the Popes primacy, whether St. Peter was at Rome, or
died there. Page 226 Reasons that make us doubt of St. Peter's abode at Rome.
Page 227, etc. The time of his abode at Antioch and Rome cannot be found. Page
232. 233. Three Chairs of St. Peter, and all three equal, by the confession of
Gregory the first. Page 226 St. Petronel St. Peter's daughter. Page 470 Petrus
Rubeus raises three thousand pounds for the Pope in Scotland. Page 647 Popery
imitates Pharisaism. Page 42, 43 Pharisees and Scribes were not the same order.
Page 156 Philip August King of France has England given him by Pope Innocent
the third, for the remission of his sins, upon condition of conquering the
same, with his own costs and danger. Page 636, 637 He raises for that end a
powerful Army, but is prohibited to go on that work by the Pope, who does not
defray his charges. Page 637, 638 His generous language, upon that the Pope
called England his patrimony. Page 638 Against the Popes will he sends his son
Lewis to help the English Barons. Page 640 The Emperor Phocas peferreth the
primacy to Boniface the third. His parricide approved by Pope Gregory the
first. Page 381 Pope Pius the second acknowledges, that in the first Ages the
Roman Church was little regarded. Page 245 He confesses that the ancient
Councils were convocated without the Popes authority. Page 251, 252 His opinion
is, that wives should be restored unto Clerks. Page 495 Polycarpus Bishop of
Smyrna comes to Rome and conferreth with Anicetus Bishop of Rome. Page 242
Being dead a Martyr, the Jews fear lest he be adored by the Christians. Page
406, 407 Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus resists Victor Bishop of Rome. Page 242
The title of Summus Pontifex was one of the titles of the Pagan Emperors:
Gratian the Emperor quits it. Page 311 True source and origin of the Popes
primacy. Page 367 Usurpation, and proud titles of Popes. Page 584. Arrogant
titles of Martin the fifth. Page 32 Aurelius Bishop of Carthage is called the
holy Pope, and his Holiness. Page 329 The Popes power over the temporal of
Princes established by the Council of Lateran. Page 28 In what time the Pope
began to raise his temporal power. Page 323, 324 By what means the Popes have
increased their temporal Empire. Page 629 The Popes dispense from keeping
oaths. Page 72, 99, 100 The title of God ascribed to the Pope, and the right of
Canonizations, and the kissing of his feet, come from the Pagan Emperors. Page
50 The Popes give a glory to some above the other Saints, and bear themselves
as accusers in the day of Judgment. Page 29 They dispense of the precept,
Poenitentiam agite. Page 575 They dispense against the Apostle, and change the
commandments of God. Page 37, 71, 564 The Pope is called the foundation of the
Church. Page 97 He assumeth the power of adding to the Symbol. Page 148 Impious
titles that Thomas Aquinas gives to the Pope. Page 573 Why the Popes would
never be present at Universal Councils. Page 349 Why Popes entering to the
Popedom, and taking a new name, never take the name of Peter; yea if one had
the name of Peter before he was Pope, he leaves it. Page 98 Two Popes,
Liberius and Felix, sitting together without a Schism, in the Bishop of Romes
Chair. Page 302 The Pope is not Successor of St. Peter in the quality of
Apostle, or head of the Universal Church. Page 95, 96, 213, etc. The first
Bishops of Rome were elected by the suffrages of the people. Page 240
Comparison of the Popes of this time with the ancient Bishops of Rome. Page 98,
99 All the Countries that Princes conquer to the Christian Faith by force of
arms, are challenged by the Pope as his. Page 632 Popes deposed by the
Emperors of Germany. Page 101 Three Popes deposed in the Council of Constance,
An. 1414. Page 107 Height of the greatness and glory of Popes. Page 98 Two
Popes, Adrian the IV. and Marcel. II. confess that a Pope cannot be saved. Page
108 Popes excommunicated by other Bishops. Page 360, 361 The Pope dying asks
absolution of his Confessor. Page 565 The Pope forgiveth himself. Page 574
Impiety of Navarrus, saying that the Pope may sell the remission of sins. Page
578, 579 Popes Heretics, erreneous, Idolaters. Liberius and Felix Bishops of
Rome, Arians. Page 302 Innocent the I. erreth in his opinion that the Eucharist
is necessary to infants. Page 99 Boniface by his Legates brings forth false
Canons in the VI. Council of Carthage. Page 329, 330 Pope Leo's Legates bring
forth in the Council of Chalcedon a falsified Canon of Nice. Page 369 A false
and supposititious Epistle of the Council of Chalcedon to Leo forged in the
Popes favor. Page 374 Real Presence in the Eucharist, and Transubstantiation.
Exposition of these words, This is my body. Page 701 How many figures the
Romanists forge in this matter. Ibid. Circumstances of the action of the Lords
Supper contrary to Transubstantiation. Page 702, etc. The end of the Sacrament
overthrown by Transubstantiation. Page 709 Testimony of the Fathers. Page 710,
723, etc. The word Transubstantiation established in the year 1214. Page 723 Of
what change the Fathers speak. Page 723 Canon of the Mass contrary to
Transubstantiation. Page 730 The Fathers call the consecrated bread and wine,
signs, figures, ties, and Symboles. Page 572 Councels contrary to
Transubstantiation. Page 745 A Canon of the third Council of Carthage contrary
to Transubstantiation. Ibid. The seventh Council of Constantinople contrary to
Transubstantiation. Page 746 The High Priest of the Church of Israel was a
figure of Christ our High Priest. Page 212 The calling of Priests. Corruption
of their charge. Page 89, 94 A Priest being in mortal sin, may yet give
absolution. Page 565 Priests have not the power to impose bodily or pecuniary
pains. Page 611 The penitentiary Priest abolisht by Nectarius. Page 528 Du
Perron did not understand that History. Page 529 We are sooner heard by our
prayers then by the intercession of others. Page 423 What Prayer is. Page 814
Prayer must be made with faith and intelligence. Page 814, 815 Excellent art of
the Prayer that Christ gave to his Disciples. Page 815 Prayer for the dead in
the ancient Church was done for another end then to fetch souls out of
Purgatory. Page 455, etc. The ancient Church prayed for the Saints, Martyrs,
etc. Page 456, 457 Epiphanius expounding the utility of prayer for the dead,
says nothing of Purgatory. Page 457 The prayer in the Mass for them that
sleep, and how Du Perron excuses it. Page 458 End for which the Ancients
prayed for the dead. Page 458, 459, etc. Ancient prayers for those whom they
believed not to be in torment. Ibid. Prayers for a deceased Cardinal, speak not
of Purgatory. Page 462, 463 Prayers in a language not understood. See Tongue.
Prayers in a barbarous language and dark words come from the Ossenian
heretics. Page 46, 810, 811 Prayers of private persons in a tongue not known
to themselves. Page 813, etc. Absurdities which they fall into, that pray in
Latin which they understand not. Page 813, 814 Prayers in an unknown tongue
condemned. Page 814, 815 They are contrary to the practice of the Church of the
Old Testament. Page 822 In the Ancient Church every one prayed in his own
tongue. Page 816 The ancient custom of praying standing from Easter to
Pentecost, is contrary to the custom of the Apostles. Page 163 Pope Julius the
first pretends to primacy by virtue of a Canon which forbids to make ordinances
for the Church without the Bishop of Rome. That Canon is examined. Page 292,
293 That Canon overthrows the Popes primacy; And the following Popes have
renounced it. Page 293 Athanasius and Meletius governed the Church of all the
world. Page 302, 345 Gregory Nazianzen wished that there had been no Primacy in
the Church. Page 302, 303 The Bishops of Gauls, called head^. Page 305 Basil
deferreth the primacy to the Insular Bishops. Page 304 Prohibition by the
fourth Council of Carthage to call any Bishop Prince of Bishops or Sovereign
Bishop. Page 338 What was the primacy and order among Bishops in Austins time.
Page 340 Law of Theodosius the second, contrary to the primacy of the Bishop of
Rome. Page 341 Leo the first, in his Epistles takes no other title but that of
Bishop of the City of Rome. Page 362 The Emperor Leo decrees that the Church
of Constantinople have the primacy over all other Churches. Page 363 The 28.
Canon of the Council of Chalcedon equals the Patriarch of Constantinople with
that of Rome in all things, even in Ecclesiastical matters. Page 368 Procession
of the Holy Ghost; the dispute about it with the Grecians, proceeds out of
animosity. Page 163 Purgatory came from the Pagans. Page 46 That Purgatory
which the Fathers speak of, is the fire of the day of Judgment, through which
they make the Saints to pass, even the holy Virgin Mary. Page 459 Du Perron
seems to laugh at Purgatory, calling it a Metaphorical fire. Page 460 The
Fathers hold that souls separated can suffer no punishment. Page 461 Purgatory
of Gregory the first, in Baths and River^, and at the wind. Page 461, 462
Roffensis acknowledges that among the Ancients there was no mention of
Purgatory, nor of indulgences to the dead. Page 580
R.
THe Romanists exalt in hyperbolical words the ransom that Christ paid, that
they may more speciously debase it. Page 594, 595 Bellarmine esteems not that
the satisfaction of Christ be actual. Page 594 He says that Christ did not
satisfy for our whole pain. Page 594 What words are used in the ordination of
Readers. Page 825 Reading of Scripture forbidden by the Doctors appointed by
the Council of Trent, confirmed by Popes. Page 35, 167 Herein the Roman Church
follows ancient Heretics. Page 45 Order taken by the Council of Trent to
hinder the reading of Scriptures. Page 167 God has commanded the reading of
Scriptures. Page 168 Reading of Scripture recommended by the Fathers, to women,
artificers, etc. Page 171, 172, etc. The abstinence of the Rechabites makes
nothing for the Fasts of the Roman Church. Page 508 In what sense a man may
redeem his own sins. Page 615 Du Perron makes two sorts of redemption, the one
original the other applicative. Page 691 That applicative redemption is a
Chimaera. ib. False Religion loves obscurity; the true, lays open her
doctrine. Page 810 Another difference. Page 811, 812 When Christian Religion
was spread in Gauls. Page 843 The Roman Religion holds things for good, which
in Civil conversation should be held unreasonable. Page 814 Relics for the use
of women with child, came from the Pagans. Page 51 Pope Innocent the 4th.
having drained England of money, sends them in recompense a bottle full of
Christ's blood. Page 654 Lewis the ninth, buyeth the Crown of thorns and a piece
of the true Cross. Page 646 In old time the remnant of the sacred bread was
either burnt, or given to little children to eat. Page 773 Reservation of the
Sacrament was forbidden. Page 774 Rest of Esther contains things contrary to
the Book of Esther. Page 184 Earl Richard, brother to K. Henry the third of
England, crosses himself for the voyage of Syria. He detesteth the Popes
wickedness. Page 545, 646 Riculphus was the forger and inventer of Decretals.
Page 263, 246 How the Romans were clad according to their diverse qualities,
Page 187 The Roman was the Language of Country People in Gauls. Page 843
Whether Rome be called Babylon by St. Peter. Page 233 The Roman Church must not
be called universal. Page 117 Ruffinus is injuriously handled by Du Perron.
Page 244 Du Perron misuseth him wrongfully about the word suburbicary. Page
273, 274
S.
SAbbath changed into Sunday, even in the Apostles time. Page 162 How the word
Sacrament is taken by the Fathers. Page 731, etc. Several significations of the
word Sacrament. ibid. Du Perron calls the Sacraments of the Old Testament, vain
monuments, and cenotaphia. Page 763 To look upon the Sacrament was forbidden to
Catechumens and Penitents. Page 769, 770 Sacrifice. See Mass. What are the true
Sacrifices. Page 425 The Sacrifice of the Eucharist. Page 680, 681 In what
respect the sacrifice of beasts was propitiatory. Page 616 The Sacrifice of the
Mass was not instituted by Christ. Page 681, etc. In what sense, and for what
reasons the Fathers called the Lords Supper a Sacrifice. Page 687, 692 etc. Du
Perron wandereth from the question. Page 680 An absurd proof of the Sacrifice
of the Mass in the Council of Trent, by these words, Hoc facite, Do this. Page
681 The death of Christ is the only propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins. Page
682 Of the commemoration, and application of the Sacrifice of Christ. Page 686,
etc. Opposition of the Mass, with the Sacrifice of the Lords death. Page 691
Sacrifices or oblations for sins are no more necessary. Page 683 The difference
between Sacrifice and Sacrament. Page 805 Holiness in doctrine, which the
Romanists put among the marks of the Church, cannot serve the turn of the Roman
Church. Page 84, 85 Difference between the holiness, and the truth of a
doctrine. ibid. The doctrine of the Roman Church is not holy since it teaches
vices. ibid. Saints. See Invocation of Saints and Canonization. Before the year
of Christ 375. there was no Invocation of Saints. Page 428 The titles and
offices attributed unto Saints, are an imitation of Heathens. Page 51 The
Saints know not our hearts. Page 388, etc. Texts of Scripture upon that
Subject. Page 389, etc. Places of Fathers. Page 391, etc. Doubt of Gregory
Nazianzen about this question. Page 393 Imaginary Saints, that never were, are
worshipped in the Roman Church. Page 103, 399, etc. Old Saints are contemned,
and the late ones more esteemed. Page 402 They that are not yet admitted
Saints, are declared Beati, which is a degree and expectative of holiness. Page
401, 402 The Roman Church is not contented to call upon Saints, but makes them
also our Redeemers. Page 429 Some condemn not invocation of Saints, but think
it to be unnecessary. The true honor which ought to be given unto Saints. Page
429 The incredible fervency of the Roman Church, about the worship of Saints.
ibid. Lewis Vives complains of it. ibid. Bellarmine says, that the Saints are
in some respect our Redeemers. Page 594 Opinion of the Fathers, that all Saints
must pass through the fire of the last judgment. Page 392 What knowledge
Saints have of things done in the world below. Opinion of the Fathers about
that: Chrysostom and Austin vary about that question. Page 391, etc. And
Gregory Nazianzen. Page 393 Du Perron says, that the Church has not yet
determined any thing about that. Page 392 Saracens abolish the Kingdom of the
Goths in Spain. Page 845 Some kinds of Satisfaction very gentle. Page 586 Some
Satisfactions are crimes. Page 610. 587, etc. Two kinds of Satisfaction. Page
590 The Roman Church holds, that we can satisfy God with our own merit, ex
condigno, by equality, and equipollence. Page 591, 605, etc. And that God
exacteth of us more satisfaction then the rigor of Justice requires. Page 606
Unjust Satisfactions. Page 607 Exchange of bodily Satisfactions into pecuniary.
Page 609, 586 Uncertainty of the Satisfactions of the Roman Church. Page 611 A
sinner may say to a Priest, I will have none of thy penance, for I choose
rather to satisfy in Purgatory. Page 612 A sinner may say to God, Thou will
pardon me wholly by Christ, etc. But I will not have so great a liberality,
etc. Doctrine of Bellarmine. Page 467, 468 Means to be dispensed from
satisfying. Page 612 Christ's satisfaction is not applied by our satisfactions.
Page 613 Gregory of Valentia despises satisfactions, Page 620 None can
satisfy for another. Page 621 In what sense the Fathers take the word
satisfaction, and that they make two sorts of them, the one toward God, the
other toward the Church. Page 662 Satisfaction is made to God by humility, and
by craving pardon. Page 663 In what sense St. Paul says that he suffers, that
which is wanting to the sufferings of Christ. Page 623 Places of Fathers to
that purpose. Page 624 Confession of Estius, Doctor of Doway. ibid. The Pope
affirms himself to be the Keeper and Steward of the Treasure of the
super-abounding satisfactions of the Saints. Page 30 Saturninus Preaches the
Gospel at Tolosa, An. Dom. 252. Page 844 Satyrus brother of St. Ambrose not
baptized, hangs the Sacrament at his neck, and throws himself into the sea.
Page 769 Scotland will not receive the Popes Legate, saying that never Legate
entered into it. Page 644 But soon after, another that bore not the title of
Legate, entered into it, and exhausted the Kingdom of money. Page 647 Prohibition
to read Scripture. Page 35, 167, 90 Scripture is contrary to the Church of
Rome. Page 36, 37 Scriptures authority above the Church. Page 55. Invectives of
the Romanists against Scripture. Page 57, 61 They compare it to dumb men, and
to actors of dumb shows. Page 61 The Church gives no authority to Scripture.
ibid. The pretended authority of the Church to interpret Scripture infallibly.
Page 64, etc. Perfection of Scripture. Page 152 Testimonies of the Fathers for
that purpose. Page 157, etc. It is wrongfully accused of obscurity. Page 173
The Fathers affirm that it is clear. ibid. And that it expounds it self. Page
174 Vindication of the purity of Scripture against Du Perrons accusations and
falsifications. Page 175 Wonderful Arts of Satan to suppress Scripture, or
take all authority from it. Page 209 Blasphemy of Nicolas the first against
Scripture. ibid. And of Cardinal Ximines against the Hebrew and Greek texts of
Scripture. Page 172 Epithetes which the Roman Church gives to Scripture. Page
149, 150 Confession of the Doctors of the Roman Church for the perfection and
authority of Scripture. Page 158 Whether the learned only ought to read it.
Page 168, etc. Sixtus Senensis says, that to give Liberty to Shoo-makers,
Fullers, etc. to read Scripture, is casting holy things unto Dogs. Page 170 Why
the people of the Roman Church are frighted from reading Scripture. Page 811 It
ought to be read by all sorts of persons, and in a known tongue. Page 828, etc.
In the ancient Church the Holy Scripture was set on the Table at the entry of
Councils. Page 352 Instead of that it is laid at the Popes feet in the entry of
the late Councils. ibid. Pope Gelasius the first, alleges Scripture in
derision. Page 377 And maintains that the word of God in the Scripture is not
always fulfilled. Page 378 Scripture wickedly alleged by Pope Hormisdas. Page
379 Schisms in the Popedom. Page 101, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107 Schisms between
three Popes, Gregory the twelfth, Benedict the thirteenth, and John the
twenty-third. Page 107 Schism between Eugenius and Felix. Page 108 Schism
between Damasus and Vrsicius, with much slaughter. Page 302 Schism between
Boniface and Eulalius. Page 327 Description of Schism and Schismatics: And
whether Schismatics can be saved. Page 13, 14 How God marketh his Elect with
his Seal. Page 9 Papism imitates Semipelagianism. Page 44 Septimania, The
Romans called so in Languedoc, and a little part of Guyenne. Page 844 Serenus
Bishop of Marseille breaks Images. Page 451 Gregory the first chides him for
it. ibid. The brazen Serpent was not an Image of Christ, and was not
worshipped. Page 439 Public Service was spoken aloud in the ancient Church.
Page 146 Why it is celebrated in an unknown tongue by Heretics. Page 811
Public service in a tongue not understood, contrary to the word of God and
reason. Page 817 And to the practice of the Church of the Old Testament. Page
822 Public Service must be celebrated with a clear voice. Page 820 The Ancient
Christian Church over all the world used an intelligible Language in the
public service. Page 823 In Russia and Moravia Divine service is celebrated in
the Dalmatick Language. Page 826 Among the Abyssins in the Ethiopick tongue.
Page 826 In Greek in Greece. Page 825 Why Divine Service is said in Latin.
Page 826, 827, 828 How the Latin Service got into France and Spain. Page 843
How it got into England and Germany. Page 846 And into Africa. Page 849
Sidonius Apollinaris, Of him and his Epistles. Page 363
In all his Epistles to the Bishops of Gauls no trace is seen of the Popes
primacy. ibid. He attributes to Lupus Bishop of Troyes the titles which the
Pope assumeth. ibid. He preaches at Bourges, and complains of the decay of the
Latin tongue. Page 844 Two sorts of signs according to Du Perron, some of a
thing absent, some of a present which appears not. Page 743 All signs are
helps to know, not hindrances and coverings. Page 743, 744 Two Simeons
Stilites, and their prodigious lives. Page 500 Statue erected at Rome to Simon
Magus. Page 227, etc. He caused his Statue, and that of his concubine, to be
worshipped by his Disciples. Page 39 Simoniack Popes, and therefore unlawful
by the Rules of the Roman Church. Page 99 Why Heresy and Idolatry, and
Atheism, and scorning, are not set among mortal sins in the Roman Church. Page
538 St. Paul had the power to lead about with him a sister, wife, that is, a
Christian woman joined to him in Marriage. Page 471 Ridiculous distinction of
Du Perron, who says that a man that sleeps not in respect of himself, may
sleep in respect of another. Page 858 Socrates the Historian is wrongfully
charged with Novatianism. Page 321 Spiridion a married Bishop. Page 492, 493 He
serves pork before a stranger in Lent. Page 511 Spittle in Baptism came from
the Pagans. Page 53 Of the Suburbicary Countries and Churches. Du Perron did
not understand that word. Page 274 Succession of Chairs, that it is not a mark
of the true Church. Page 85, etc. In what sense Tertullian and Irenaeus prove
their doctrine by the succession. Page 87 Of the succession of the Pastors of
our Churches. Page 89, etc. The Papal chair was vacant, and without successor
for two years. Page 105 And a little after, two years and a half. Page 106
Succession of the Papal Chair interrupted for many years, in which, of three
contending Popes, one could not tell which was the Lawful. Page 106. 107
Succession of the Popedom broken under Eugenius. Page 107, etc. The first
Bishops of Rome are uncertain. Page 230 The Succession of the Church consists
in the Conformity with the Doctrine of the Apostles. Page 86 Succession of St.
Peter in the Primacy is not of Divine Right, according to Bellarmine. Page 211
Examples in which Superstition changes the precepts of piety into exterior
gestures. Page 658 Superstition counterfeiteth true Religion, but cannot attain
to the purity of conscience, nor to the brightness of truth. Page 626 Lords
Supper. vide Coena. Pope Stephen the eighth condemned by Baronius. Page 100
Stephen Bishop of Rome calls Cyprian false Christ, and false Apostle. Page 249
The Book of Susanna is fabulous. The absurdies of the same. Page 183, 200
Sylverius, he is deprived of the Popedom by Vigilius, who bought it of
Belizarius. Page 99 Sylvester the second, made Pope by a compact from the
Devil. Page 102 Sylvester the third made Pope, being ten or twelve years old.
Page 103 Symmachus recommends Pagan Religion for the Antiquity. Page 119 (...),
that word signifying an associate or adjoined person, was not understood by
Cardinal Du Perron. Page 485, 486
T.
IN old time there was but one Table or Altar in a Church, and that Table of
wood, which might be removed. Page 768 Telesphorus Bishop of Rome, ordains
the Fast of Lent for the Clerks of Rome. Page 242 To none but God temples must
be consecrated. Page 777 Our bodies are Temples of God. ibid. Tertullian, many
of his opinions rejected by the Church of Rome. Page 155 He condemns
Zepherinus Bishop of Rome. Page 246, 278 He calls the Roman Bishop, Bishop of
Bishops; but it is in scorn. ibid. He is contrary to Transubstantiation. Page
733 How Du Perron corrupts an excellent Testimony of Tertullian. ibid.
Opinions of Theodoret not approved by the Church of Rome. Page 140 Places of
Theodoret against Transubstantiation. Page 724, 725 Vindication of Theodoret
against the accusations of Du Perron, and Gregorius de Valentia. Page 726
Theophania or Christmas day was celebrated in the Church upon the sixth of
January. Page 340 Theophilus of Alexandria a persecutor of Chrysostom. Page 319
He was not subject to the Bishop of Rome. Page 323 Thomas Aquinas, his reasons
examined about the judiciary absolution. Page 570 He accuses Christ of
importunity. Page 573, etc. He applies to the Pope that which is said of
Christ, Of his fullness we all receive. Page 574 He says that the Pope can make
a new edition of the Creed. Page 71 Thomas Becket, being Lord Chancellor, is
invested by King Henry the second with the Archbishopric of Canterbury. Page
633 He retireth to Sens. Excommunicates all that maintain the Kings Rights.
Page 633 In his reconciliation with the King, he makes him twice hold his
horses bridle. Page 633 He is slain by four of the Kings Servants. Page 634 He
is Sainted by the Pope. His relics do miracles. Lewis the seventh of France
comes to worship them. Page 634, 635 Pope Alexanders Letters whereby he
commands him to be worshipped. Page 406 Thuanus, in the first Book of his
History describes the abuse of Papal Indulgences. Page 463, 464. He makes a
memorable Narrative of Cardinal Simia, and Pope Julius the third. Page 109
Tinel is a custom at Rome to give the posie about, and make the Banquet to go
from house to house. Page 521 Tobit is no Canonical Book. Absurdities of the
same. Page 178 Old Heretics grounded themselves upon Traditions, and upon the
unwritten word. Page 38 Of Traditions, and the power of the Church to add to
Scripture. Page 148, etc. In the Roman Church Traditions are of greater
authority then Scripture. Page 149, 209 etc. Why Traditions are preferred
before the holy Scripture. Page 150 Moses gave not unwritten Traditions to the
people of Israel. Page 153 What Traditions ought to be received. Page 151 What
Traditions the Fathers admit. Page 162, 163 Traduction of the Bible. See
Version. The Roman Church praying in a tongue not understood, imitates the
ancient Heretics. Page 46 The ancient Church over all the world used an
intelligible tongue in Gods service. Page 128. and seq. A strange language is
rather a mark of a curse then of a blessing. Page 819 The Latin tongue was once
more usual in Gauls, then that of Gauls. Page 843, etc. By what means the Latin
tongue came to be used in the Divine Service in France, and Spain. ibid, etc.
When and how Latin was corrupted. Page 844, 845 The Latin tongue once usual and
familiar in Spain. Page 845 The Jewish tongue though degenerated from Hebrew,
is yet called Hebrew in the New Testament. Page 822, 823 Traffic of
Absolutions and dispensations. Page 35, 557, etc. And of the remission of sins.
Page 577, 609 Shameful traffic of holy things in the Roman Church. Page 578
Cardinal Tolet excuses it. Page 578 Infamous plundering and exactions of the
Pope in England. Page 644, 645, etc. Merchandise under color of a Croisade,
and dispensing from the vow. Page 647 A no^orious precedent of sordid exaction.
Page 653, 654 Ancient Heretics believed Transubstantiation. Page 49 The sixth
Council of Carthage contrary to Transubstantion, falsified in the Latin Tomes.
Page 338
V.
LEtters of the Emperor Valentinian the third, deferring the primacy to the
Bishop of Rome. Page 362 Vices and baseness of that Emperor. Page 361 The
Emperor Theodosius despises the Letters of that Monster, written in the
behalf of Leo the first, Bishop of Rome. Page 362 These Letters were extorted.
Page 362 He constrains Hilary Bishop of Arles to yield to Leo. ibid. The
Emperor Valentinian died without Baptism. Page 670 Varro condemns Images of
the Gods. Page 436
The Vulgar version authorized by the Council of Trent, is false and full of
corruptions. Page 34 It cannot be comparable to the Hebrew and Greek originals.
Page 171, 172 Anciently the Bible was translated into all Languages. Page 170,
171 Horrible blasphemy of Cardinal Ximenes, comparing the Hebrew and Grek Text
of Scripture to two thieves, and the Vulgar Latin version to Christ. Page 172
The vulgar Latin version has falsified the words of the institution of the
Lords Supper. Page 35. 695 That falsification troubles the sense. Page 698
Eight thousand texts corrected in the Latin Bible. Page 34 In the end of the
third chapter of the rest of Esther, the Vulgar version clips a clause, as
contrary to the kissing of the Popes Feet. Page 35 Other corruptions. ibid.
Veronica, or Christ's face on a cloth being carried in Procession, turns it self
the beard upwards. Page 641 Praying to that cloth. Page 641, 446 Victor the
first Bishop of Rome separates all the Oriental Churches from his Communion for
the question about Easter day. Page 242 The Oriental Bishops, and Irenaeus
resist him. Page 242 His excommunication was without effect. Page 242, 243
Victor the second and third poisoned in the Chalice. Page 103, 104 Of the
adoration of the Virgin Mary among Heretics. Page 41 St. Epiphanius sharply
rebukes those that worship the Virgin Mary, and those that call her Queen of
heaven. Page 426 Blasphemy of some that in the Virgin Mary was fulfilled that
which Ahasuerus promised to Queen Esther, to give her half his Kingdom. Page
433 Blasphemies of the Romanists, under pretense of honoring the Virgin Mary.
Page 434 She was not free from sin. Page 129, 130 Pope Vigilius excommunicated
by the Bishops of Africa. Page 244, 335 He usurpeth the Popedom with money.
Page 99 He kills Sylverius his predecessor. ibid. Villa Vincentius, an
Augustinian Monk, censureth the Fathers. Page 125 Vincentius Lirinensis. Page
82, 83 Virginity, the advantage of it above Matrimony. Page 469 Whether the
Church be always in sight. Page 15, etc. The Visigeths in Spain observed the
Mozarabick Service. Page 845 Union, it is not a mark of the true Church. Page
116 The word unus in Latin, as also (...) in Greek, signify one alone, or
only. Page 430* 705, etc. Vocation of Pastors. See Succession. In the time of
Christ and his Apostles, many have preached without ordinary calling, as
Aedesius and Frumentius in India. Page 90, 91, etc. Difference between a
charge, and the ways to enter into it. Page 92 Our advantage in this cause
above the Roman Church. Page 93, 94 An Archbishop of five years of age, Page
101 Of the creation or election of Popes. Page 108 109 Means how Cardinals, and
other Prelates, attain to their charges. Page 109 How Archbishops receive the
Pall. Page 110 How and how far vows ought to be kept. Page 473. etc. Rashness
of the vow of Celibat. Page 474 Form of the vow of a Novice Dominican when he
becomes a Profess. Page 475 Urban the second usurpeth investitures. Page 631
Vrsula, an imaginary Saint, that never was in the world. Page 390, 400
W.
THe Ancient Church used not a round wafer upon the holy Table, but a good
quantity of bread for the whole Congregation to communicate. Page 768 Scripture
takes often the word washing for the remission of sins, and for regeneration.
Page 551, 552 Whip ones self. See Flagellation. Of the Widows servants of
Churches, and of their vow. Page 473 The Roman Church puts good works among
penances. Page 608 They are not meritorious. Page 616, 617, etc. Wisdom of
Solomon, the book so entitled, is Apocrypha, and falsely attributed to Solomon.
Page 181 Absurdities and untruths in it. Page 181, 182 Austin reprehended for
alleging it. Page 199 It is held to be made by Sirach. Page 199 St. Austins
opinion about it. Page 204 Whole habitual, there is no such thing, it is a
conceit of Du Perrons invention. Page 82
Z.
POpe Zachary declares many sorts of meats unclean. Page 512. Zepherinus
Bishop of Rome reproved by Tertullian. Page 246
FINIS.

