AN APPEAL OF All the Non-Conformists in ENGLAND TO GOD, And all the
Protestants of EUROPE, In order To manifest their Sincerity in point Of
Obedience to God and the King.

To which is added A Sober and Unpassionate REPLY To the AUTHOR Of the Lively
Picture of Lewis du Moulin.

By Dr. LEWIS Du MOVLIN, Late History Professor of Oxford.

London, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Ally in Paternoster Row.
MDCLXXXI.

A Notice to the Reader,
ALthough these Papers to thee are Posthumous, (the Author of them departing
this Life three or four days since,) yet the Doctor himself both saw, and
corrected all the sheets save one before his sickness.

October* 23, 1680.
Page 20. line 5 read Conformist for Nonconformist.

AN APPEAL OF All the Non-Conformists in ENGLAND to GOD, and all the
Protestants of Europe, in order to manifest their Sincerity to GOD and the KING.
HAving in some late Treatises given a short Account of the Advances of the
Church of England toward Popery, from the beginning of the Reformation, I am
obliged to mention some Particulars over again, which leads me to some other
Considerations very material for the Design in hand.

1. That the First Reformers in the days of E. 6. though of several Judgments
about the External part of the Government, were all of honest Principles and
Sentiments in their Doctrine; and had the same mind and design to purge the
then present Church of its Idolatry, Superstitions, and gross Errors, and to
bring in the same pure Doctrine that was professed by Calvin, and the Reformed
Churches in France, and which has been and is still retained by the
Non-Conformists that were and are now.

2. That the said first Reformers being divided in their Opinions about
retaining that which was good, and taking away whatsoever was amiss in the
Romish Church, as to the outward Governmnt, the Opinion that the Reformation
could not be thoroughly done for matter of Government and Externals, as it was
possible for matter of Doctrine, prevailed so far with Bishop Hooper, Rogers,
and others that wished it had been otherwise, as to make them forbear any
further urging of a complete Reformation, in hopes that when the people that
were instructed in the true, saving Doctrine, should be more numerous, the
opposition to a through Reformation in all points would be less.

3. That this rude draught of Reformation, suitable to that time, had very bad
Success; because the Conformable Party prevailed still with the Sovereign, and
the Grandees of the Realm, to have it a standing Law, that was not to be
repealed nor altered, and which drawing along with it Non-Residency, plurality
of Livings, a mere form and garb of Religion and Piety, outward pomp and
grandeur, best suited with a Worldly interest; whilst the other Party, who
were then Puritans, and whom we now call Non-Conformists, retained, and do
still to our days, a desire, and longing after a through Reformation, and they
have endeavored by Conferences, Remonstrances, and Writings, to have it
introduced.

4. That yet the Conformists were not all of one mind, there being still a
Party among them very peaceable and Orthodox, and at less distance from the
Non-Conformists, especially among the Gentry, that were no Courtiers, and in
great Towns, Cities, and Corporations; whilst the other Party, made up of
Conformists, grew corrupt, and so far from hearkening to a further Reformation,
that they made nearer advances toward Rome.

5. That Jealousies and apprehensions daily increasing, and fears of inclining
to Popery, and the Troubles in Scotland intervening in the Years 38, and 39;
and the Discontents rising up in England, the King was forced to call a
Parliament, which began in 1640.

6. That that Parliament, both Lords and Commons, was most, if not all,
composed of such Peaceable, Orthodox Church of England men I have but now
mentioned, and all conforming to the Rites, Ceremonies of Episcopacy and
Hierarchy, but yet greatly averse to Popery, Tyranny, and the Corrupt Party of
the Church of England that inclined toward Rome; Witness the many Speeches in
Parliament they made, as of the Lord Faulckland, Sir Benjamin Rudyer, Digby,
and others, with whom Good and Honest Bishops joined.

7. That the Ground and Rise of the Civil War in 1640, and 43, was in
opposition to such as Bishop Laud, and other bad instruments.

8. That the Lords and Commons in 1642, and 43, were all in perfect Conformity
to the Church of England; so was the Army too that they raised; for the
General, the main Body of the Army, the Officers and Captains both by Land and
Sea, were all conformable to the Church of England, and none of them Puritans,
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Sectaries, or Conventiclers.

9. That likewise, the Assembly of Divines in Westminster, chosen by the
Parliament, were all Conformists, and none of them Silenced Ministers, except
8. or 9, and 4 Scots.

10. That the first Intentions of the Parliament was so far from subverting the
Government of Church and State, established by Law, and from taking away the
House of Lords and Bishops root and branch; that it was only to reform the
abuses of both, and to settle such a Model of Church Government as was
recommended by the Pious and Learned Bishops, Usher, and Hall, and which did
not much differ from that which our Gracious Sovereign that now is, recommended
to his Parliament in his Declaration 1660. about Ecclesiastical Affairs.

11. That the Parliament had no thoughts of bringing in the Covenant into
England, had not the necessity of their Affairs forced them to join with the
Scots.

12. That no man was obliged by it to take away Bishops, but only as they are
in Conjunction with the English Hierarchy.

13. Neither was it the Intention of the Lords and Commons, at first, to take
away Deans and Chapters, but to make them more serviceable and useful, to take
away Pluralities, Non-residencies, and to settle a more proportionable
Maintenance for Ministers.

14. That the Change, or Subversion of Government, the taking away the Lords
House, and with them the Bishops, and excluding the greatest part of the House
of Commons, and last of all, the taking away the King, and all the Confusions,
and Disorders, that happened thereupon, did arise from a third Party, viz. The
Army, that was neither for the King, nor Parliament; Neither for Conformists,
nor for Non-Conformists, but was an Enemy to them all, and sought their
absolute ruin and destruction.

15. That the Non-Conformists, who usually now go by the name of Presbyterians,
Fanatics, Independents, Rebels, Sons of Belial, etc. by the corrupt
Church-Party, that have been always making advances toward Popery, were so far
from being the first in Arms in opposition to the King, our late blessed
Martyr; and being contrivers of his Death, and of taking away Monarchy; that on
the contrary, it was the only Party (while the others of the King's Friends
sat still) that appeared before, and since 48, in his behalf, to the hazard of
their Lives (witness Mr. Love,) and that in 1660, had a chief hand in restoring
our gracious Sovereign Charles the II. to his Throne; for which never enough to
be valued Benefit and kindness, although it was but duty, no Party has been
more severely persecuted by the Corrupt-Party of the Church of England; But of
this, more anon.

16. That the Declaration of the King, mentioned in the Tenth Consideration,
was a confirmation of another former Declaration.

17. That whereas, when the King came over from the Hague, there was a great
expectation that his Printed Declaration for Ecclesiastical Affairs, would be
sufficient to compose all differences and heats, and unite all Parties, by
taking away the stumbling block of subscribing to those Ceremonies that were
not warranted by the Word of God; but just on the contrary, the Clamours of the
Corrupt Party of the Church of England at length prevailed for restoring of
those Ceremonies. All which good Bishop Brownrig foretold, a little before his
Death, in saying, That there would continue the same Confusions and
Animosities, that were before; and, with them, the same spirit of Persecution
which the Corrupt Church-Party before 1640, was the cause of.

18. That the Zeal and Fervor of the prevailing Corrupt Church-Party in
England at this present juncture of time, in writing so many Books against the
Papists, and standing up, so stoutly against the Horid Attempt upon the King's
most Sacred Life, and introducing of Popery, and hearkening to some terms of
Reconciliation with the Non-Conformists, to make the opposition the stronger
against Papists, does no way seem to be the effect of a Christian Moderation,
but a mere worldly Interest, like the zeal of Jehu, the union of Aristides, and
Themistocles, two Mortal Foes against the Common Enemy: Or like that of
Augustus, Brutus, and Cassius, against Antony: It Is the goodness of a stubborn
Boy, just so long as the Rod is over his Back; for had another spirit moved the
corrupt Party of the Church of England, than a Worldly one, it would have
appeared above these 100 Years; when (alas!) no such attempts were made by the
Papists against their Lives, and Livings, when a Hundred Remonstrances were
made to them, with Prayers and Tears, for the removing of the offending Rites
and Ceremonies; and of the great inclination they had for Popery, in
depopulating England, by driving men away to Colonies abroad: but could never
be heard.

21. Things being thus stated, one may rationally and strongly conclude, That
it is a most horrid untruth, and calumny to make the Presbyterians and
Conventiclers, or Non-Conformists, not only the first authors, and abettors of
the Civil Wars, and of the first taking up of Arms in opposition to the Evil
Counselors about the King in 42 and 43, but also the Murderers of King
Charles the First; when as they have been, and still are the great preservers
of the King's Person, Life, Honors, Dignities, and Prerogatives; the best
Christians, the best Reformed, and the best Subjects of the King.

22. And the false and unworthy stiling of these Restorers of the King, Rebels,
Fanatics, Sms of Belial, etc. does carry along with it the same devilish
Malice; which makes it now become a common Proverb in the Mouths of this
corrupt Church of England-Party, That they had rather be Papists, than
Presbyterians; and that were there a Turn of State, (as God forbid) they would
sooner turn Papists, than Presbyterians.

23. Besides, the idle, foolish, senceless, but also malicious mistake, to make
the holiest of the Non-Conformists to pass for Presbyterians, who, though they
love their persons, and the holiness of their Doctrine, and Lives, yet either
they are wholly averse to the Presbyterian Government, or else they do not very
well know what it means; Since the Well-affected follow their Preaching, and
imitate their Lives, but yet by no means upon any account of their Government.

24. That the worst thing in the carriage of the Conformists toward the
Non-Conformists, is their rash, uncharitable, and unchristian judging of the
Hearts and Insides of men, (which are only known to God Almighty, who is the
Searcher of Hearts,) as if they were made up of Deceit and Hypocrisy; and
alike construing their unblameable behavior and carriage, as if it were but
formal, and extrinsecal, and of the pure, Orthodox Doctrine of their Sermons
and Writings, though never so much summed up in Scripture phrases, as if all
was but Cant and Tone, and taking of God's Name in vain; when they make a quite
different Judgment of the Conformists, both of their Lives and Doctrines, and
when they make use of the same Scripture terms as the others do; for in their
esteem they are looked upon as true; sincere, and holy Christians, though their
outward deportment do somewhat differ from that of the other.

This I intend, by God's assistance, to make clear to you in a larger
Discourse, from the Testimony of Dr. Patrick, who doubtless cannot, in handling
of the Nature of Justification by Faith, but agree with the Non-Conformists, in
making use of the same Scripture-Expressions, and commend such as Bishop
Davenant, Downam, usher, Hall, and Hooker, all Conformists, for doing the like,
and who will tell us, that this Justification by Faith is a Recumbency of a
poor Sinner upon the Lord Jesus Christ; a casting of our selves upon him,
relying on his Merits, laying hold on him, closing with him, going to him, and
shrowding our selves under the Robes of his Righteousness: Most of which are
Scripture phrases: But yet for all this, the very same Expressions, being
uttered by such Non-Conformists, as Mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen, Manton, Annesly,
Jacomb, Bates, Mr. Jenkins, Alsop, Cradock, Silvester, Watson, and Others, for
the better setting out the nature of Justification by Faith, are looked upon by
Dr. Patrick, as mere Imposters, Charms, Incantations, artificial Jugglings,
Terms of Modish and Courtly Faith, by which this Doctor makes good the saying
of Pliny the Younger, Epist. 21. Multum interest quid a quoque; fiat, Eadem
enim facta claritate aut obscuritate facientium, aut tolluntur altissime, aut
humillime deprimuntur.

That such a prejudice against the Generation of God's Children, that make it
their grand design to get an assurance of Heaven and of Eternity, as are, not
only many of the Peaceable and Moderate Conformists, but such as they miscall
and nickname Puritans, Presbyterians, Independents, Rebels, Sons of Belial,
and worse than Papists. That such a prejudice, I say, is the great distemper of
that corrupt-party of the Church of England, who have for these 100 years been
making their advances toward Popery.

I shall insist very particularly upon some very considerable Inferences and
Conclusions which I shall draw from some Hypotheses that I have already taken
notice of, but which cannot be too often inculcated; the truth of which is
known sufficiently by those that are most Eminent in Piety and Holiness of
Living, and in Learning, of the Church of England, by the Bishops Hooper,
Smith, Rudd, Carleton, Grindall, the two Abbots, usher, Hall, and by other
Doctors that were as Conformable as those Bishops.

1. That though the first Reformation in the time of Edward the 6th, was
extremely pure as to its Doctrine, it was notwithstanding very defective and
imperfect as to the exterior Government, because it was adjusted to that
present time where the Papists were Twenty, for One, that was reformed in
England.

2. That the first Reformers imagined, that when the People, converted to the
true Faith, should be more Numerous, and more disposed to receive a more
perfect Reformation, The Successors of the first Reformers would apply
themselves to it with more Earnestness and Zeal.

3. But it never came into their thoughts, that their Successors would be
guilty of so great a fault, as to act the quite contrary to such a good Project
and Design, in persuading both Princes and Parliaments to bring the first Rude
Draught of Reformation into a standing Law: but only to have it established for
a certain time, until they themselves should see they were able to effect a
more perfect Reformation.

4. That the Practice of these Successors of the first Reformers has been
unreasonable, wicked, impious, and cruel; in the Imposition of several things,
which they themselves have owned not to be necessary, and at best but
indifferent, under pain of deprivation ab officio and beneficio; although all
the Conformists have not been equally guilty, for some among them have approved
of these measures they have taken toward the Non-Conformists, but yet have
connived at them either by their submission, or their silence, and have not
vigorously enough set themselves against the Corruption that so much prevailed.

From all these Hypotheses, I gather these Conclusions, which naturally follow
the aforesaid Premises.

1. That several Bishops and Doctors of the Church of England, as Dr. Floyd,
Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Patrick, that are acknowledged by the
Non-Conformists to be Persons of great Learning, Worth, and Piety, but who are
Extreme Admirers of the Episcopacy of England, and all its Consequences, and
who have also preferred its Government to all other Establishments in Europe,
have by an unlucky accident, contributed more toward the Reputation of the
English Hierarchy, and its Practices, and toward the perpetuating the Feuds
and Quarrels between the Conformists, and Non-Conformists, than it has been
possible for any other Corrupted Party to do by all their Irregularities, and
advances toward Rome.

2. That it may be said of these good Bishops and Doctors before mentioned,
what the Politic Sages have observed of Anselme, Bernard, Thomas Aquinas,
John of Salisbury, and Gerson, That by their great repute of Piety, and
Learning, they have contributed more to the strengthening of the Pope's
Tyranny, and Religion, in the Minds of the People, than a hundred such as
Gregory the VII, and Boniface the VIII. were able to effect by their Tyranny,
and the wickedness and impurity of their Lives, for the discrediting of the
Pope and his Religion.

3. That it is not to be believed how much the Non-Conformists of England
suffer in the Esteem of our Great Men of the Protestant Party in Europe; who,
hearing people talk of the Learning and Piety of so many English Bishops and
Doctors, all Conformists, and who resemble those four Doctors I have just
before named, say aloud, that the Non-Conformists must needs be very
unreasonable, and of a very nice and fantastical Piety, for refusing to Conform
to the Church of England, after the Example of those four Doctors.

4. That how good soever the Intentions of some of the Bishops and Doctors of
the Church of England may be, that are of the same temper of spirit with these
four Doctors, and what kindness soever they may have for the Non-Conformists;
it is impossible They should ever come over to them, and consent to terms of
Reconciliation and Moderation, so long as they remain in this Judgment and
Opinion, That of all the Established Ecclesiastical Governments in Europe, that
of the Church of England is the most excellent, and the most Apostolical, and
that there is nothing of defect in it; and so long as the multitude of their
Benefices, and the great honor they are in, in the World, blinds their
Judgment, there being no likelihood, nor hopes, that those, who are raised so
high, and that live in honor and abundance, richly, and fatly, (unless they
will imitate good Dr. Floyd, who bestows most of his Church-Revenues on the
Poor,) will diminish any thing of their greatness, both as to their Retinue, or
their Kitchen, and will descend from high to low; and that a Bishop, who now
goes before the Barons, will quit his Place, to be only a poor simple
Moderator, and Watchman over a small company of Priests, such as were St.
Cyprian, and St. Austin: For this Eminence of Fortune and Dignity does
absolutely shut up the door to all the Overtures of Reformation, which we learn
from Mounsieur Claude in his Defense of the Reformation of the Churches of
France, where he tells us, That the Cardinal du Prat, for this very reason, was
the most violent of all men, and the most enraged against Luther's Reformation,
because he was provided of Five Bishoprics, and I know not how many other good
and fat Benefices.

That for these Reasons, Methinks, it might be expected from these good Bishops
and Doctors, that by a Christian condescension, they would endeavor to incline
their Brethren the Non-Conformists, to abate something of their heat and
vigorousness against the Non-Conformists; but so long as they themselves are
neither sensible of any error or defect in their Church, it is not to be
expected, or hoped for from them, that they should go about the doing of any
such good work, how great and eminent soever they be, no more than it ought to
be expected from the Romish Doctors, so long as they do look upon, and verily
believe, their Church to be infallible.

And therefore it cannot be considerately imagined, that the perfect day of
hope, of the Church of England's Reformation, and of the Reconciliation of the
Conformists to the Non-Conformists, should break forth from these good Bishops
and Doctors, nor from any of the Clergy, but from KINGS, and the Princes of the
People, whose hearts are in God's hands, and who holds them as the Rivers of
Waters.

25. As for the Odium that is cast upon the Congregational Way, and those who
are called Independents, as being the more immediate authors and abettors of
the King's Murder, and of taking away Monarchy, it can be easily wiped off,
and made out, That Oliver Cromwell's Army, like that of King David's in the
Wilderness, was a Medley or a Collection of all Parties that were discontented,
as some Courtiers, some Episcoparians, few of any Sect, but most of none, or
else of the Religion of Thomas Hobbes, and Dr. Scarborough, not mentioning the
Papists, who had the greatest hand in the Death of King Charles the First; the
success of which made them so daring and impious, as to contrive another most
Damnable and Hellish Plot to cut off the Life of his Sacred Majesty that now
is, his Royal Son, and our most Gracious Sovereign.

26. That since the Non-Conformists were a generation of men, either of the
first date (as it is most likely,) or, at least, that rose in England at the
same time as the Conformists did; and since they were for number and quality,
as great, or rather greater, and more considerate than the other, and who, in
their Judgment, came nearer, as to the outward Government, and Purity of
Worship, not only to the first Reformers, Zuinglius, Luther, and Calvin, but
also to the Apostolical Practice; and who, indeed were the TRUE PROTESTANTS,
most Conformable to that Party in Germany, who so styled themselves
Protestants, in opposition to the Imperial Edicts of Worms and Spire, it must
needs be a great wickedness and cruelty too in the Conformists, because they
had all the while the Countenance of Princes, and the longest Sword, to
persecute the Non-Conformists, and to deprive them of the liberty of setting up
Purer Ordinances in Conventicles, and of sharing in the Public Maintenance for
the Ministers.

27. That it is a most barbarous, improper, uncharitable, and unchristian
language in the Corrupt-Party of the Church of England, to style themselves the
only true, and properly so called, PROTESTANTS, and to discard all others in
Europe, from the right to that name, for want of such Episcopal Ordinations as
are in England: as if that 500 men possessing the three parts of the
Church-Revenues in England, should better deserve to be called Protestants,
than the first so called in Germany; whereas what ever Bishop Bilson, Andrews,
Dr. Floyd, Dr. Tillotson, and Dr. Stillingfleet, could say in the behalf of the
Government of the Church of England, (as being the most Apostolical and
Primitive,) there is none more opposite, not only to that of the first
Protestants, but also to Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity.

28. These being the Material Heads, or a Summary Idea of the whole, to be more
largely and particularly handled hereafter, (if God gives Life and Time to the
Author,) I shall excerpt much from the Scrinia of the Reverend and Learned
Divine Mr. Richard Baxter, but yet so, as to take the liberty to follow my own
Method and Genius, as to the menage of it.

29. So then the main design of the Subsequent Book, whereof this is a brief,
but full Specimen, shall be to show, prove, and make clear to You, the
unreasonableness, unconscionableness, and consequently the ungodliness of
retaining, urging, and pressing the things in debate between the Conformists
and the Non-Conformists, and of persecuting those, that refuse to submit to
them, or at least to approve of them.

30. That Dissenters could not, cannot, ought not, neither in reason, nor in
Conscience, to submit to them, at least for the assenting, and consenting to
them, and the approving of them.

31. That those Conformists, whom I call Peaceable, and Orthodox men, such as
were the Members of the Parliament of 1640, and those of Westminster assembled,
and their Predecessors, and all others, however otherwise, most upright,
sincere, Orthodox, holy, and well-minded persons, since the first Reformation
in King Edward the Sixth's days, and Lovers of the Non-Conformists, that have
hitherto been Conformists, were all guilty of prevarication, and of a-sinful
yielding, complying, assenting, and subscribing to a Church Way, which
doubtless is sinful.

32. And therefore, that the Non-Conformists, who ever since King Edward's
days, in Conformity to the true Doctrine of those of the best sort of
Conformists, kept gathered Churches, and Meetings out of the Parishes, had
right Reason, and Scripture on their side, and walked with a purer Conscience,
were the best reformed from Popery, and those that preserved the true
Apostolical Doctrine, Worship and Government, and conveyed it to Posterity.

33. The Author may Incidently speak of the nature of the Church, Synods,
Associations, and Fraternities by a confederate discipline, but cannot by any
means hear of a National Church-Tribunal, independent on the Magistrate, to
whom only he allows the setting up of a National Worship, by Persuasion and
Commendation, but not in the least by forcing men to it, by penal Laws, except
they be Papists, or disturbers of the Public Peace.

FINIS.
A SOBER and UNPASSIONATE REPLY TO The Author OF The Lively Picture OF LEWIS DV
MOVLIN.

Gal. 4. Verse. 16. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the
truth? LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, 1680.

A Sober and Unpassionate REPLY, etc.
I AM very sensible, that My late Book, viz. A short and true Account of the
several Advances the Church of England has made toward Rome, etc. has raised
up very great and fierce tempests against me, as well from some of my Friends,
as from those that are most otherwise to me; especially from those who can very
calmly, sedately, patiently, and without any disturbance in the world, see the
publication of Mr. Hobbes's Books, and such others that are much what of the
same stuff with them, that are good for nothing but to instruct People either
in Atheism, or, at best, in an indifferency as to Matters of Religion; but who
are highly provoked, if any One comes but near their Noli me tangere, either to
make a Seasonable Discovery, or, in Love and Friendship, to bring them the
wholesome Application of Remedies; such as is this Truth, That the Papists
would never have been engaged in such a design as to introduce Popery into
England, by Massacres, and other ways of the highest cruelty; if they had not
been very well assured, that, though the Corrupt-Party of the Church of
England, who are the most prevailing now, be not in a disposition to give their
Consent to such Massacres, (the thoughts of which are alone sufficient to
strike a horror into the worst of them,) yet, they are all of them, (I mean
the Corrupt Party) pretty inclinable to, or (which is not a jott less) not very
much against, embracing the Religion of Rome.

I WILL begin with the Heat and Passion of my Friends against me, and with the
Judgment which they make upon my Short and True Account, etc. they say, That
that Book is altogether now unseasonable, When as Persons of great Learning,
Piety, and Merit, and who, at the bottom, are very Sincere and Upright in the
Church of England, such as Dr. Floyd, Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, and Dr.
Patrick, to whom I might join Professor Burnett, are making it their business,
as they think it their duty, to reunite the Two Parties, the Conformists, and
the Non-Conformists, and when they are most industriously employed in reducing
to Practice the Means of Peace and Concord, according to Mr. Richard Baxter's
Model; and that instead of lending them my helping hand, and assisting them in
so good a Work, I am doing what I can to divide both Parties, and to exasperate
and imbitter them one against the other.

BUT, Methinks, these Gentlemen either have not read my Book at all, or else
have no mind to understand the design of it, which is to dis-ingage, and free
all honest Persons, such as are the abovementioned Doctors, from the Corrupt
Party of their Church, to join and confederate themselves with that of the
Non-Conformists, that so those two Parties might Consolidate in one, and
consequently, (for vis Vnita fortior,) be more capable to act with greater Zeal
and Vigor against the third Party, that are making their Advances toward Rome.

ALSO My design in that Book is, to make those honest Persons and Doctors
understand, who, on one hand, do perfectly agree with the Non-Conformists in
Matters of Faith and Doctrine; and, on the other, with that Corrupt-Party of
the Church of England, in Matters of Government and Ceremonies; My design, I
say, is, to make them understand the truth of these following Corollaries.

THAT seeing this former Agreement ought to be much otherwise the foundation of
the Communion of Saints, and the cause which should engage and bind their
Hearts, Affections, and Interests together, than the latter; those good and
honest Doctors are incomparably the more obliged in Conscience to adhere to the
Non Conformists, who agree with them in Matter of Faith, than to those who do
only agree with them in matter of Ceremonies: and they will find that they are
obliged to it so much the more, if they will but take upon them the trouble of
insisting upon some Obstacles, which have, for above these hundred Years,
hindered, and, as I may say, staved off the reunion of the Conformists with
the Non-Conformists.

THE first Obstacle, is, the Aversion which the Conformists, as well the good
as the bad, have always had, even in, and since the time of Edward VI. down to
our days, until the Conformists were awakened by this last most Damnable and
Hellish Plott of the Papists, to take away the Life of our Sacred Sovereign,
CHARLES the Second, to Subvert the Government, and utterly to abolish the
Protestant Religion and Name among Christians; the aversion, I say, they had to
hearken to any terms of Reconciliation.

THAT this Aversion has especially appeared in the Corrupt-Party of the Church
of England, who have evermore turned a deaf ear to the Cries, Clamours, and
Remonstrances, which the Non-Conformists (whereof the Chief was Bishop Hooper,)
have made, to be freed and discharged from the heavy Yoke of Ceremonies, and to
persuade and bring over these obstinate and restive men, to pass on, from that
first but rude draught of Reformation made in the time of King Edward VI. which
(that so much Contemptible and despised Man now a days by them, but, I say,
honest) Mr. Calvin calls tolerabiles ineptias, to a more perfect Establishment,
according to what the last mentioned great Man, Calvin, (for I cannot speak his
Name but with a becoming reverence) expresses of it, Sic ergo a talibus
rudimentis incipere licuit, ut doctos, probosque; et graves Christi Ministros
ultra eniti, et aliquid limatius et purius quoerere consentaneum foret.
Epistola ad Anglos Francofurtenses,

THAT these Obstinate Men of the Corrupt-Party of the Church of England, have
been always so remote from harkening to, and answering the requests of the
Non-Conformists, that they have been just the contrary; and they are so much
the more violent and inflexible, as they have been making their continual
advances toward the Doctrines and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome.

BUxT I find, that the greatest Obstacle to the reunion comes from these
honest, upright, and sincere persons whom I mentioned before, and from whom we
ought to expect, that they should come over three parts of four of the way to
this Reconciliation; but from which they are, and will be, very remote, so long
as they do openly and loudly maintain, That that first Establishment of
Government in the time of Edward VI. is not a rude draught, and, much less, as
Calvin would needs have it, tolerabiles ineptioe; but that it is a Model of
Government in the last perfection, a Masterpiece that cannot be made better,
and which, of all the Governments that are in the World, comes nearest to that
of the Apostles.

THAT so long as the Government which the Non-Conformists would have, has no
agreement or affinity with that of the Church of England, it is not to be
hoped, that Two Parties, who both do verily believe themselves to be in the
right, can ever be persuaded to come to any agreement of a middle way, which
cannot be, at least in their accounts, but wrong and vicious; though, according
to the belief which I have of, and the esteem I bear to them both, they do each
lie under Error, and a gross and vicious extremity, I do not at all question,
if they would each of them be willing to abate something of their pretended
right, but that both Parties might meet in a just Middle, and an equal
temperament which somewhat resembles that Virtue, that keeps the balance even
between two Vices, and the good and handsome husbandry, which is the Medium
between Avarice and Prodigality.

THAT all these Obstacles hindering and keeping off the reunion of the
Conformists with the Non-Conformists, it would be therefore a most Excellent
and Christian Design, and a blessed Work, to labor to undeceive all honest
persons, as well Episcopal, as Presbyterian, of those mighty great, and
unaccomptable prejudices, which each of them are prepossessed with, and which
makes them so hugely stand up for the pretended Excellency of their Government;
without* which good Work, this desired Reconciliation is not feasible, it
being, as Jesus Christ says, impossible, that those who think themselves
whole, should ever be cured of their disease.

BUT of all my Friends who treat me ruggedly, there is One especially, that
violently carries himself out against me, for having condemned the manner of
Dr. Patrick's usage of the Non-Conformists, upon the Justification by Faith;
which, he says, I have done merely from a spirit of malice and revenge, for
his having denied to give me the Sacrament in his Church in Covent Garden,
because I relused to take it kneeling: But I protest before Almighty God, (who
is the Searcher of hearts, and knows that I speak the truth,) that I have not
the least ill resentment of it, nor indeed can I make any tolerable handsome
pretense to have one, because, after he had so denied me, that Doctor came to
my Lodging, and desired my excuse, and made me a very obliging and extreme
satisfaction: but it is the Cause of God, which carries me forth to repel the
wrong and injury he does to the honestest persons in the World; Which yet,
methinks, might be pardonable, if he was not so -- hardy, as to put himself in
the place and stead of GOD, in judging of their inward intentions, as when he
assures us, that all those Expressions (of Downham, Davenant, and R. Hooker,
which are those of the Holy Scripture, upon the subject of Justification by
Faith, and which without doubt he highly approves of in the Mouths of the holy
Apostles, and of those three Doctors,) are the words of a false and
hypocritical heart, when they are spoken by the Non-Conformists.

AS for the downright Thames Street way of Railing against me, which, I am
sure, none of my Friends would use, and all others, of any improved Civility,
or good Manners, do nauscate and abhor; (but pure Streams cannot flow from an
impure Fountain; and so I am satisfied.) I do not value them, nor can they
prejudice any, but the persons from whom they issue: they that will be flinging
up dirt, do manifestly show themselves of a dirty humor, and much good may do
them, whosoever they are, with such their beloved Nastiness: but, methinks,
they are greatly like those of the Lawyer, whom Suetonius speaks of, that
thought he had very solidly basfled, and overthrown the cause of his Adversary,
because his Lawyer had committed a gross Soloecisme in his Plea. All the
Arguments of that Insignificant Rayler, that has drawn the Lively Picture of
Lewis du Moulin, as he thinks, to the worst and beastliest advantage, and it
may be therefore conceals his Name, because he is ashamed to own the ugliness
of his daubing; I say, all the Arguments of that Insignificant Railer resemble
those of that Orator, who would needs have the cause of Vatinius to be the
worst, because he had crooked Legs; or are like to Origen's Enemies, who
finding themselves unable to refute those pretended errors, thought, to be
sure, they should acquit themselves bravely, by running him down with the
Judgments that other people made of his Person and Writings; for, without ever
entering into the merits of the cause, he alleges Mounsieur Daille, and Mr.
Baxter, speaking to my disadvantage. He might also, if it had but once come
into his unthinking, but rash head, have added the Testimony of Dr.
Stillingfleet, who calls me Wretch, and Wicked, and blackens me after a strange
and unworthy manner, only because I have said of him, (and I believe, did I but
sincerely appeal to his Conscience, it could not upbraid me with a lie) that
the Judgment which he makes at this day of the Church of England, when it
lavishly pours upon him I know not how many great Ecclesiastical Preferments,
is quite contrary to that Opinion he was of concerning it about Twenty Years
ago, when he was not so well provided and lined with them: Except he be
somewhat nettled, because I have so plainly laid open the weakness of his
Argument, to make out the unreasonableness of the Non-Conformists for denying,
viz, That all things that are not expressly forbidden in the Word of God, are
sufficient to justify those who submit to them, when the Command of the
Magistrate intervenes. Such great men as He, and as Mounsieur Daille was, are
oftentimes like to Rivers, that raise themselves to so vast a height, that they
overflow their Banks, and the Bounds of decent moderation: such was once
Mounsieur Daille, when he flew out against me in such violent heats for having
taken it ill, because he unhandsomely and ungenerously treated my Father.

AS to what this Author of the Lively Picture, etc. says of Mr. Baxter, and of
the sinister Judgment he makes of me; he is much gone astray (like a lost
Sheep) from the truth; for not many years ago, did this same Mr. Baxter
dedicate a Book to me in these words, Mr. Baxter's Difference between the
Powers of Magistrates and Church Pastors, etc.
TO MY LEARNED, SINCERE, AND WORTHY FRIEND, Lewis du Moulin.

To be short, The way which the Author of the Lively Picture takes, to expose a
Person to the Laughter, and Scorn of all the World, and to make him pass for an
Ignorant Noddy-peeks, a Liar, and a most impertinent Scribler, who knows
neither what he says, nor what he writes, very well, ought not to be that of
alleging the Judgment which such Persons as Mounsieur Daille, and the Dean of
Windsor make of him; but he should, if he had been able, have quoted those
Writings, and Sentences, wherein he might convince the World, that they were
the product of a man, that had neither Brains to make a Judgment; nor Learning,
nor Style, nor that had any thing of truth in him.

AS to the CELEVSMA, of which he makes me the Author, I absolutely deny it: but
If I were so, I might, (what he will never have any occasion to do) without
vanity, boast, That I had made one of the best Pieces that ever had yet been
extant in the World; I mean, in the behalf of the Non-Conformists, and where
there is neither Truth, nor Judgment, nor Learning, nor good Language, nor any
thing else wanting that is requisite to give a Book applause. If I was of his
humor, I might wire-draw upon him substantially far beyond his length; but I
had rather speak a great deal of truth in a few pithy words, than to be, like
him, scandalously false, tedious, and railing, and never know in reason when to
come to a

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to take notice, That the Author since the printing of
the Appeal, would needs have this added as a Supplement to it.
NOTE that, When they that are loose in their profession of Christianity, do
persecute those that outwardly and formally prosess it with great Exactness,
without any certain knowledge whether or no the inward disposition and sincerity
be answerable; they have certainly a secret hatred to all Religion and Piety,
and wish that there were neither a God, nor a Life to come, nor an Immortality
of the Soul: for were they sure that none of these were, they would be induced
rather to pity and commiserate these strict professors, than hate and persecute
them.

To this I may add, that the persecuting pirit of those Men, that, either in
pretense, or in reality, do profess an exact practice of Piety and Devotion,
comes from a secret kind of Atheism and Aversion to all manner of Religion;
when the purest is the greatest Eyesore to such Spirits; as is so much the
more apparent and manifest, by how much it is evident that they would not be
seen to act against Profaneness, debauched courses, Drunkenness, or Popery;
because those disorderly ways and courses have a great Sympothy and
agreeableness with the profane spirits of the World.

Dr. Sands, first Bishop of London, and afterward Archbishop of York, was, in
his lifetime, so much for Tolleration, and a dispensation of Rigor and
Subscription, that he would needs have it set down in his Will: He also
expressed in the same Will, that the intention of the first Reformers was to
suite and accommodate the Reformation to the posture of things at that present
time, when Papists were numerous, and the Protestants but few; and that it was
not possible then to make a through Reformation.

There may be Laws to keep men out of the Church, but there are none to compel
them in.

The Violent pressing of Ceremonies has been, I humbly conceive, a great
hindrance to many in their embracing of them: Men fearing the intention therein
to be far worse than really they are, and therefore they abhor them.

We are not to communicate with a persecuting Church, how Orthodox soever it be
in Faith. Martyn, the Bishop of Tours, would not communicate with Orthodox Men
that persecuted HERETICS; much more would he have refused to communicate with
those that persecute good men.

The People of Constantinople refused to communicate with the Expellers of
Chyrsostome, and with the Bishop placed by Endoxia.

FINIS.

