Abraham 's Faith Stated and Applied.

A SERMON PREACHED FEBRUARY 16. 1695/6.

By GEO. DUNCUMB, M. A. Rector of Albury in Surrey.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Queens-Head against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCVII.

TO HIS PARISHIONERS, THE Inhabitants of ALBURY.
Beloved,
IF one may make a Judgment of Men's Principles and Opinions by their most usual
Practices, nothing is more apparent than that the generality of Christians are
persuaded, That a Right Faith will Atone for an Irregular Practice; for
otherwise it is hardly possible that Persons who are Orthodox in their Creed,
should so easily separate the Commandments from it. Wherefore that you may not
be deluded and fatally misled by any such false Notion, which makes our Faith
a matter of Speculation; I do earnestly recommend the following Discourse to
your Serious Perusal, in hopes that by God's Blessing accompanying it, it may
prove a means to convince you effectually what little Reason there is to boast
of having Abraham for your Father, by living under the Profession of a most
Holy Faith; unless you likewise approve your selves his faithful Children, by
leading a Godly, Righteous, and a Sober Life. This is my Aim; and if I may but
be so happy as to succeed in it, I shall not matter what Strangers say of it in
passing any uncharitable Censure on it. The Publication indeed is somewhat
unusual; for though what you lately heard from the Pulpit comes now from the
Press, it is altogether a Voluntier. If this render it contemptible to other
Readers, as proceeding from an overweening Opinion of a plain Sermon, it ought
not to be the less acceptable to You for being a Freewill-Offering humbly
presented and put into your Hands by

Your faithful Minister, Geo. Duncumb.

JAM. II. 23. And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: And he was called the friend
of God.
AS very Excellent Things are spoken of Faith, and many Noble Acts have been
done by it; so there is none in whom this Saving-grace was more eminent than
the person Characterized in my Text, even Abraham, who has the high Honor to
be Entitled, The Friend of God: And since he seems to be set forth as a
Pattern and Precedent for our imitation, I shall,

1. Enquire what kind of Faith or Belief Abraham's was. And,

2. Show particularly what ours must be in order to be justified.

Though probably the Scripture here referred to, may principally respect the
Special Promise of God made unto Abraham touching a numerous Issue when
stricken in Years; according as it is written in Genesis 15. where, upon this
assurance when Sarah his Wife was naturally past Childbearing, it is said ( v.
6.) That he believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteousness: I
say, though Abraham's thus believing in hope against hope, may be reckoned or
counted the ground of his justification; yet is it not sufficient to support
the confidence of such presumptuous Believers as rely upon a speculative Faith,
expecting to be justified and saved by it. For this passage is not to be
considered singly and alone, but must be taken in conjunction with an
antecedent and a subsequent Act, with what went before it, and what followed
after it; whereby Abraham gave full proof of his Faith's being no less
Obediential than Fiducial; I mean no less forward to observe God's Precepts,
than to depend on his Promises.

You must note then, that besides God's knowing the sincerity and stedfastness
of Abraham's Faith at the time when he counted it to him for righteousness,
upon his not staggering at the strange Promise through Unbelief, He had already
experienced it; God had long before made trial of it by a Command of some
difficulty, even that of leaving his Native Country, and going into a strange
Land, with which he complied without the least hesitancy or reluctance; he did
not hang back and object its being a hard case to quit a certainty for an
uncertainty; but made haste and delayed not to fulfill the Commandment of his
God; not scrupling to part with his present possessions, in considence of God's
provision; he readily forsook his Kindred and his Father's House, thereby
approving himself the friend of God, under whose conduct he took his journey,
and followed, not knowing whither he should be led, as we read in Genesis 12.

This was such a signal instance of his resignation to the Divine Will in an
entire dependence upon God, that the Inspired Apostle ranks it amongst the most
worthy fruits of a true Faith, saying ( Heb. 11.8.) By faith Abraham when he
was called to go into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance,
obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went. That is, he believed God,
that he would be as good as his word, and in consequence of such belief, was
not disobedient to the heavenly Voice; but did as he was bidden, and repaired
to the place appointed, though he had no knowledge of it; no Kindred or
Acquaintance in it.

After he had long dwelt; or rather sojourned here in the Land of Promise as in
a strange Country, the word of the Lord came unto him in a vision, saying,
(Genesis 15.1.) Fear not, Abraham: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
reward; which is as if he should have said, Let nothing daunt or discourage
thee, forasmuch as I will still stand by thee, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee; but will surely defend thee, and always plentifully provide for
thee. Abraham it seems had already more wealth than he well knew what to do
with, having no Son to inherit it: So that a Child was the only Blessing that
he wanted; and therefore he takes this occasion (not out of any diffidence, but
from a longing desire to see the accomplishment) I say, he takes this occasion
with humble confidence to put God in mind of a former Promise thitherto
expected by his Servant, even that of giving him a Son: Whereupon this Ancient
promise was graciously renewed; and notwithstanding Ahraham was now grown old,
and his Wife both barren, and also past the Age of Childbearing; yet, being
not weak in Faith, he considered not his own Body now dead, when he was about
an Hundred years old, neither the deadness of Sarah's Womb; but, knowing him to
be faithful that promised, and able also to perform it, he believed God, and it
was imputed [or accounted] unto him for righteousness.

Not that we are to look upon this single act to be in it self the sole ground
of Abraham's justification; for unless he had justified this his professed
Faith by a suitable action in time of trial, we have no reason to think he
would have been justified by himself. Had he refused to obey the Special
Command of God, requiring him to Sacrifice his Son, his only Son Isaac; his
bare believing the Promise could never have been imputed to him for
righteousness.

There was no need that God (to whom all things future are present, and so may
well be called by him as though they were) should wait the issue and event; and
therefore he foreseeing certainly at the time when Abraham believed the Promise
concerning receiving a Son, that he would readily resign him up, or frankly
surrender him back by making an Oblation of him whenever he should call for
him; I say, this being as perfectly known unto God then, as at any time
afterward, he might very well make the imputation beforehand.

And now that God has really an Eye to this very thing in imputing
righteousness unto Abraham, is very evident from the words immediately
foregoing and following my Text: So that we have an infallible Interpretation
to warrant the Application; for in the Two Verses next before the Text, we read
expressly that Abraham our Father was justified by Works, and that particularly
when he had offered his Son Isaac upon the Altar, whereby his Faith was made
perfect. Whence the Apostle makes this Inference or Conclusion: And the
Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
to him for righteousness. How was the Scripture fulfilled? how did it receive
its completion? By the bare believing the Promise? No; but by his Expression of
Obedience to God's Command, in being ready to offer up his only Son.

The Design of St. James is to prove, That Christians are justified by Works,
and not by Faith only: For which purpose he alleges the Example of Abraham,
the Father of the Faithful, affirming that he was therefore justified because
he obeyed: Ye see then (says the Apostle just after the passage cited in my
Text) how that by Works a man is justified, and not by Faith only: Which is as
much as to say, It Is apparent from the forementioned Example, that Obedience to
God's Commands, as well as Belief of his Promises, must concur to the making
any person accepted or approved of God.

So that either the Apostle did not rightly understand the Saying of Moses;
Either he mistook the meaning, and misapplied it (which no good Christian can
say), or else it must be taken as you have heard it now explained; namely, in
conjunction with that after-Act which God saw would be performed in its season,
in the proper time appointed for it.

But because it may be objected, That St. Paul seems to have been of another
mind, and in his Relation of it to put a different, or rather a clean contrary
construction upon it; it is necessary I should attempt a clear solution of this
difficulty, by showing their real Concord, notwithstanding this appearing
contradiction. The Apostle of the Uncircumcision having declared in Romans 3.28.
That a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law; he proceeds in
the Fourth Chapter to illustrate this point at large; where at the 3d v. he
cites the same passage that St. James does here in my Text, and thence argues
against the boasted righteousness of the Jews, in observing the Mosaic Law,
especially the discriminating parts of it, which they were wont to press as
necessary to Justification, and shows that as Abraham was justified without
them, so shall his Seed be after him: But in all this there is nothing
inconsistent with St. James's assertion; for St. Paul does not exclude Works,
or suppose that Abraham's Faith was not approved by them: But he only rejects
those Legal deeds, which the Jews obtruded and cried up for righteousness; such
as Circumcision, Sacrifices, the Mosaic differences of clean and unclean
Meats, as also their setting up a mere human Righteousness, in consisting in
outward Acts, and the like. These he knew would never commend any man to God;
these therefore he condemns, as superseded or set aside by the Gospel: And that
these are what he means by Works, is evident from his declaring to those who
laid so much stress upon them as to trust wholly to them, that Abraham's
righteousness was imputed when uncircumcised; and consequently could not be on
the account of any such Works as were before specified: But rather such as he
would have Christians, or all that believe in God, charged carefully to
maintain, Tit. 3.8.

The Law of Moses being the Law of their Commonwealth, whose breaches were
triable in their own Courts, the manner of the Jews was to esteem themselves
righteous in the Eye of their Law, as the World does in case of other Political
and State Laws, when they are not liable to be brought in trouble, or indicted
upon them before any of their own Tribunals: Hereupon measuring themselves only
by external Acts (which alone are cognizable in human Courts) the orderly
Livers among them made no more scruple of asserting their Righteousness in the
Eye of their Law, than any good Subjects do in pleading their innocence as to
the Laws of their respective Countries. As we find St. Paul himself did in
setting off his Jewish Confidences; saying, That touching the righteousness
which is in the Law he was blameless; that is, had done nothing that could be
alleged against him before any of their Tribunals, Phil. 3.6.

So that upon the whole matter, when St. Paul affirms that Abraham was
justified by Faith, and not by Works, without all peradventure he means such a
lively Faith as did constantly demonstrate its sincerity by suitable affections
and actions; a Faith working by love, and so made acceptable to God through
Christ the Promised Seed, even without performing perfect unsinning Obedience,
and without Conforming to the Rites of the Mosaic Precepts: Which are the Two
things that St. Paul certainly means by Works, wherever he explodes them, or
sets up Faith in opposition to them, and particularly in the instance before us.

Agreeably hereunto, it is observable, That when the same Apostle speaks of
Abraham's Faith in another Epistle, where he makes it his business to magnify
and extol it exceedingly (and so cannot be thought to have omitted what was
most praiseworthy,) he takes no notice of his believing the Promise, but makes
mention only of his obeying the Command; as may be seen in Heb. 11.17, 18. By
Faith [saith he] Abraham, when he was tried offered up Isaac: and he that had
received the promises, offered up his only-begotten Son: Of whom it was said,
That in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

The Story is related more fully in Genesis 22. and the Substance of it is this.
It seems some time after the Promise to Abraham was fulfilled, in that Sarah
his Wife conceived and brought forth a Son, it pleased God (as he had purposed
of old) to make a further trial of his Faith, such as might deserve to be a
standing Monument throughout all Ages to the end of the World. God said unto
him, (v. 2.) Take now thy Son, thine only Son Isaac whom thou love, and get
thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offering upon one
of the mountains which I will tell thee of. Abraham did not more easily believe
the strange Promise, than he readily obeyed this hard Command; for, instead of
murmuring (like those of whom we read of in Mic. 6.7.) and saying, Shall I give
my firstborn for my transgression? the fruit of my Body for the sin of my
Soul? Instead of halting between Two Opinions, or expostulating, doubting, and
disputing whether he should not destroy the Promise, by obeying a Command which
seemingly put him upon cutting off the hopes of a numerous Posterity with his
own hand: Behold! he presently prepared to set forth upon this unwelcome
Expedition, with the same forwardness as he had done formerly when he quitted
the Land of his Nativity, upon the prospect which his Faith in God gave him of
that Inheritance which he now enjoyed, together with the Heir of Promise. For
we read ( v. 3.) That Abraham rose up early in the Morning, and Sadled his Ass,
and took Two of his Young Men with him, and Isaac his Son: Moreover he clave
the Wood for the Burnt-Offering; and when they drew nigh unto the place of
which God had told him, he laid the Burden of Wood upon Isaac his Son, and
laid him on the Altar upon the Wood; and having so done, he stretched forth his
Hand, and took the Knife to Slay his Son. But the Angel of the Covenant
interposed with a Counter Injunction, and so stopped the Execution; declaring
that God was so well satisfied with his real Purpose, and holy Resolution, as
to accept the Will for the Deed. For though Isaac was not actually offered or
Slain by his Father; yet since it was verily intended by him, who had done so
much toward it as to make all things ready for it; who had gone so far in it,
as to come to the very last act of it, Abraham received this Testimony from
Heaven, ( v. 12. of the forecited Chap.) Now I know that thou fear God,
seeing thou have not witheld thy Son, thine only Son from me: Which may be
Paraphrastically expressed thus; Thou have given abundant proof of thy pious
impartial regard to the Commands of God, and so may fairly be discharged
from the Obligation of proceeding any further in the prosecution of this
particular Order.

We are not to imagine, That Abraham was acted by any such Enthusiastic
Principle as that which influenced those who made their Children pass through
the Fire to Molech, offering their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils: He
could have no other Motive or Inducement (in a Country where this piece of
cruelty was never practiced) save only his heart's desire to please God, by
declining no instance of Obedience, but endeavoring to do all that he should
say, of what kind soever.

And here I cannot but observe to you, the several remarkable Circumstances
which occur in this matter, and do so mightily heighten or enhaunce the Worth
and Excellency of that admirable Faith which Abraham showed in performing such
a singular instance of Obedience; and in which you may see how far a true
lively Faith in God will carry a good man. For here was a Command to do that
with which the loss of Money, or indeed of Life it self in a good Cause is not
to be compared; nay, that from which Nature most abhorred, and Carnal Reason
would have dissuaded; namely, That a man very Rich and in great Authority, who
earnestly desired an Heir, which was born to him, when (by the course of
Nature) he could have no hopes of one; that such a man should so overcome his
natural Affection to him (which must needs be exceeding great) as to forego all
the mighty Expectations he had from him, and consent, after a journey of Three
days, to Slay this Son with his own hands. Surely this was one of the greatest
things that ever mere man did!

If he had done it instantly, or in the Moment that he received the Command, it
might have been interpreted the sudden, precipitant, inconsiderate Act of one
terrified with a Dream, or scared with a Vision: But to do it so many days
after the Command was given by Him who has undoubtedly an uncontrollable
Dispensing Power (and consequently a right to suspend the Sixth or any other
Commandment at pleasure); I say, to do it upon such mature deliberation, is an
evident proof, or clear demonstration of his unreserved Obedience, and that too
proceeding from a principle of pure love to God. For he did not make haste to
Slay his Son out of any fright he was in lest God should have Slain him, or
stripped him of his Estate if he had disobeyed: But took time to consider of it,
that he might show to all men what we ought to do in Obedience to God, even
where there is no fear of Temporal Punishment, nor hope of Worldly Reward; for
it is plain he Sacrificed his dearest Comfort, his greatest delight on Earth, to
the Will of his Father in Heaven.

Thus having given you an ample account of our Father Abraham's Faith, which
was imputed to him for righteousness; and shown you that the Two Apostles,
notwithstanding their seeming Difference, are at a perfect Agreement, it is now
high time that I enquire into ours, and let you see what is required in it, in
order to a Christian's being justified by it; which was the Subject of my
Second General.

2dly. Faith being in it self one part of the condition of our Happiness, and
also instrumental to work the rest, it is no less than necessary to be
thoroughly informed what it is, and to understand well wherein it consists. For
though it be above 1600 years since it was first preached, it is still needful to
be inculcated and explained, especially in an Age when too many who are such
loose livers as to have little or no fear of God before their Eyes, would pass
for True Believers, barely because they retain so much of the Form of
Godliness, as to stand up at the Creed, and with their Lips profess to believe
every Article, saying Amen to the whole; whereas if this be all, if no more
were required to constitute a right Faith, than thus to believe in God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as the Maker, Redeemer, and Sanctifier of Mankind,
the most dissolute Person, one that is abominable, disobedient, and to every
good work reprobate, might look to be justified.

But the case is otherwise; every Article is to be made practical, and the
Faith that justifies must influence our lives. As there is no coming to God
without believing that he is, so no Faith can bring us to him, or give us hopes
of receiving the promised Reward from him, but what is fruitful in good Works;
for without holiness no man shall see the Lord; without Holiness no man's Faith
shall be imputed to him for righteousness. We read indeed, That the just shall
live by faith: But still this Faith must be justified by such actions as are
most proper and agreeable to it.

Faith or Belief in general, is nothing else but an assent to something
credible upon the Testimony or Declaration of another: And the Christian Faith,
is our believing the Gospel and all things therein contained concerning God,
our Selves, or a Future State in another World, upon Christ's Authority, whom
we acknowledge to be the great Author and Finisher of our Faith. But before
this can render us acceptable in God's sight, or be available unto
Righteousness, it must deeply impress us, or suitably affect us, by working in
us such godly purposes and practices as may justly be expected from persons
under such persuasions. This might easily be evinced by an Induction of
particulars, but since the time will not permit me to enlarge, I shall confine
my self to one or two Generals.

God who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the
Fathers [as by Visions, by Voices from Heaven, by the coming of his Spirit upon
the Prophets, and the like], has [since that] spoken unto us [more fully] by
his Son: Who came down from Heaven to reveal his Father's Will, so far as we
are concerned to know it: And this Revelation is Recorded in the Gospel, to
remain as a standing direction for us, in full force, or of the same Authority
with us, as if we now heard God speaking with a loud Voice out of the Clouds to
us.

In the Gospel we have exceeding rich and preclous Promises of an ample
Reversion, we are assured of an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in Heaven as a Recompense of Reward for the
Righteous, for all that shall live godly in Christ Jesus, passing the time of
their sojourning here in fear, such fear as is productive and perfective of
Holiness, by cleansing us from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit.

Now if we believe this as firmly as Abraham did that which was but a Type of
this, it will certainly incline us to do as he did, who knew no more of Canaan
than we do of Heaven; I say, if we be as verily persuaded of what we read, as
he was of what he heard, we cannot choose but express the same care and
forwardness to observe what is written, as he did to comply with what was
spoken, as necessary to get into it, or to be duly qualified for the fruition
of it. That is to say, We shall be effectually disposed to live like Strangers
and Pilgrims upon Earth, behaving our selves as it becomes those who profess
that we have no continuing City here, but are seeking one to come, and that
with such assiduous diligence as is proper to secure it.

Abraham's steadfastly believing the Promise, put him upon following the
Commandment of God, and so he came to be instated in the Inheritance: In like
manner our believing the Promise, which Christ has made us of entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven, must prompt us to obey the Precepts which he has given us
conducing to it, before we can be admitted to sit down with Abraham in it. Yea,
the very hardest of them (should we be called to it) even that of forsaking All
to follow him, or for adhering to him; whether houses, or brethren, or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands. All must be left for
Christ's sake, if we mean to inherit Everlasting Life, Mat. 19.29. That is, We
must abandon our Possessions and nearest Relations, when they can be no longer
enjoyed with a good Conscience; we must choose rather to part with them, than to
depart from any Article of Faith, any Essential Point of Christian Doctrine, as
an irrefragable proof or sure token of our loving, fearing, and trusting in God
above all things. And that this is not a Precept of Perfection, but of
necessary Obligation, our Savior himself has clearly determined, or positively
declared, saying, (Luke 14.26.) If any man come to me, and hate not his father
and mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life
also, he cannot be my disciple. Which is as if he should have spoken thus, In
case any man that is listed under my Banner, be not so disentangled from the
Affairs of this World, as to prefer me and my service before all secular
Interests whatsoever, he is not meet to be partaker of the Inheritance with the
Saints in Light here, or Glory hereafter.

If this seem very difficult, or be thought above our ability, let us remember,
That all things are possible to him that believes, and nothing is too hard for
a Faith which looks at the things which are not seen and are Eternal. You have
heard of the Faith of Abraham, or his believing God, and how that in Virtue of
that belief, at God's Command he left his Country, his Kindred, and his
Father's House, Traveling (though he knew neither the place nor the way to it)
in search of that Seat which God had chosen for him. Wherefore since we know
that when our earthly house of this tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building
of God, an house not made with hands, eternat in the Heavens, methinks we
should never scruple the utmost pains, nor decline any hardships in striving
for it; it being more easy to overcome than to overlook the greatest
difficulties that can occur in the passage, from the inviting, the ravishing
transporting Prospect of that provision which Christ has made for us in his
Father's House, where there are so many Mansions, and those too such as will
continue for ever.

2dly, To dissipate our fears, and animate our hopes in the most perilous
Times: We read expressly, That the Church is Founded on a Rock, and are assured
by the All-powerful Head of it, That the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against it. Now if we hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering,
though black clouds and thick darkness should be round about her; though the
Heathen should rage, or the Kings of the Earth take counsel together, and with
one consent be Confederate against her to destroy her, 'twill not so fill us
with fear as to drive us to Despair, but we shall still rest satisfied with
God's promise of Protection; being confident that they must needs imagine a
vain thing in consulting to make havoc, where Salvation is appointed for Walls
and Bulwarks.

This Faith will so perfectly cast out all fear, even in the midst of imminent
dangers from the most furious attacks, as to enable us to say within our
selves, God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed, God
shall help her and that right early. Had the Church no Nursing Father, none
other to Fight for her but only God, surely her Sons could have no reason to
fear the power of any Adversaries; for since He and He alone, can Govern the
unruly Wills and Affections of sinful Men; since he has full Power instantly to
make the Church's Enemies to be at Peace with her, or else to put them down
that rise up against her; did we but unfeignedly believe this, we should not be
so prone to crucify our selves with the fear of being hurt by any Persecutions
through those Evils which the Malice of Men or Devils may at any time devise:
Or put the case they should be permitted to ride over our Heads awhile, and
lay trouble upon our Loins, yet if we believe verily that he who Orders all
Events, and brings good out of Evil, will cause the very worst to work together
for the good of his People, a lively Faith will dispose us to pass our time in
rest and quietness, as also in all our troubles and adversities whenever they
oppress us; to put our whole trust and confidence in God's Mercy, abiding
patiently upon him till he turn again and refresh us, as he did David and his
Chosen Generation, after he had showed them great troubles. Whatever come upon
us, this Faith will keep us steadfast and unmovable, make us always abound in
the work of the Lord; nor shall we behave our selves frowardly in his Covenant.
Our heart will not be turned back, neither will our steps go out of his way;
no, not when he has smitten us in the place of Dragous, and covered us with the
shadow of death; as the Royal Prophet speaks in Psalm 44.18, 19.

So that should the Sword be unsheathed with a seeming Commission to pass
through the Land, as in Ezekiel. 14. Since He that stayed Abraham's hand when the
knife was at Isaac's Throat, can with the same ease put a stop to the progress
of the destroying Angel in a moment; every one that has, indeed, Abraham for
his Father, will say with Holy Job, Though he slay me, yet will I put my trust
in him; or in the A postle's Language, I will not cast away my confidence,
which has great recompense of reward, but will still commit the keeping of my
soul to Him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

If then any be apt to torment themselves before the time, by formidable
apprehensions of threatening Evils, they would do well to consider the passage
of our Savior in Mat. 8.25, 26. where we read, that whilst Christ was in a
Ship at Sea with his Disciples, there arose a great Tempest, which filled the
Disciples with so much dread, as to make them conclude they must needs be
presently swallowed up of the deep; whereupon they ran hastily to their Lord as
he lay asleep, and awoke him, by crying out, Lord save us, we perish! and he
said unto them, why are ye fearful, O ye of little of faith? then he arose and
rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.

Now since Christ (who is gone up on High and there invested with Power to save
unto the utmost all that call upon him) has promised, saying, Lo, I am with you
always, even to the end of the world: If we have Faith to believe it, nothing
can be wanting to make us live quiet from fear of Evil, even though the Earth
be moved, and though the Hills be carried into the midst of the Sea; though the
Waters thereof rage and swell, and though the Mountains shake at the tempest of
the same; for the Rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the City of God,
the holy place of the Tabernacle of the most Highest. If the Kingdoms be moved,
Christ who is very high exalted, does defend his Church, as it were, with a
Shield.

Thus have I done my true endeavor to make you thoroughly sensible what kind of
Faith is expected from you; showing plainly, how that it consists not only in
believing that there is a God, and that his Son Jesus Christ was made manifest
in the flesh; for thus far the Devils themselves went, who confessed, saying,
We know thee, who thou art, even the Holy one of God. But a right Faith
consists in so firmly and unfeignedly believing the whole Will of God Revealed
in the Scripture, as to act in all things according to it, and that with so
much steadiness, as never to swerve from the Commandments upon any the most
specious pretext; never presuming to set aside a known Duty upon the pretense
of Necessity, or by the plea of Providence, but (by the Example of Abraham)
still to do the thing which God Commands, and leave the issue and success to
Him; nothing doubting, but that if in all our ways we acknowledge Him by ruling
our selves after his Word, he will surely bring it to pass, effecting what is
best; for the right hand of the Lord has the pre-eminence, and does in all
places whatever he pleases.

To Conclude then, Let us not Believe in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed
and in Truth, Obeying from the Heart the Form of Doctrine delivered to the
Saints, and walking in the steps of our Father Abraham; so shall we receive a
Blessing from the Lord, and Righteousness from the God of our Salvation, even
the Lord Jesus Christ:

To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be Glory and Honor, Thanksgiving
and Power, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Errors of the Press to be Corrected thus:
PAge 5. l. 2. dele by. and l. 19. for has read had. p. 6. l. 5. for the r.
his. p. 7. l. ult. del. in. p. 9. l. 18. r. Agreeable. p. 10. l. 16. or 17.
del. of.


