Arcana Aulica: OR WALSINGHAM's MANUAL OF Prudential Maxims, FOR THE Statesman
and Courtier.

To which is added Fragmenta Regalia: OR, Observations on QVEEN ELIZABETH, Her
Times, and Favorites.

By Sir Robert Naunton.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Gillyflower at the Spread-Eagle in
Westminster Hall, 1694.

queen attended by women bearing masks and snakes ARCANA AULICA


TO THE Reader.
THE Reader will here find TWO Choice Manuals Drawn into ONE; That is to say,
Walsingham's Arcana Aulica, and Sir Robert Naunton's Fragmenta Regalia: The
Former a Compendium of Politics for the Ordering of a Court-Life; The Other, a
Judicious Collection of Great Examples, that have Acted in Conformity to Those
Precepts, and made themselves Famous to Posterity in their Respective Stations.
These Two Pieces have already, and long since, been made Public in Three
Impressions Each, and in Several Forms; to the Universal Satisfaction of All
Men of State and Business. So that I might leave this BOOK to speak for it
self, without an Advocate, upon the Foundation of its Own Worth, and Merit, if
it were not that betwixt the Corruption and Lazyness of This Last Age, wherein
Men have attended their Pleasures, and their Interests, more than their Duty;
not only These Papers Themselves, but the very Subject of them has, for some
time, lain Neglected and Forgotten: But being now fallen into a World of a more
Active, Enterprizing Humor, when, in truth, Every Plough-Jobber sets up for a
Politician, and the Secrets of Government are become the Common Topic of
Christendom, I reckoned that I could not do my Countrymen a Better Service, or
make them a more Acceptable Present, than in the Revival of These Two Copies,
which are in Effect but One Epitome of what is fit to be Known, and fit to be
Done upon the Matter in Question; the One serving only for a Rule, or a Lesson
to the Other.

Now as to Walsingham's Arcana, the READER is to take This along with him, That
it is a Tract of Policy, not of Morals, and as well Instructive, what Courtiers
are Not to do, as what they Are. It sets forth the True Reasons, Methods, Rise,
Progress, and Event of Things, in such a way, as serves both for Direction, in
order to the Attaining of Honest and Honorable Ends, and for Precaution,
toward the Avoiding of Snares and Temptations, and Detecting the Impostures
that Occur in a Court-Life. And to show the Reader, that These Researches of
his have somewhat more in them than the Vain Images of Speculation and Fancy,
he Backs all his Discourses and Opinions with the most Pertinent and Venerable
Authorities that History could afford him, either upon Observation, or
Experience. By the Benefit of This Mixture, he Joins Profit with Delight;
First, by setting the Understanding Right in all the Circumstances of the
Question; and then by Engaging the Will, and Inclination, to an Assent to That
Rule. To speak all in One Word; the Whole Tract is but so many Political Maxims
Orderly Digested under so many Articles or Heads in the Nature of an Essay, for
the Common Benefit of All those that propound the making of their Fortunes by a
Court-Application.

Here is enough said already to Justify the Publication of This Little BOOK,
with a Respect to the Time, the Place, the People, the Argument, and the
Present Occasion; for it seems to be a very Proper, a Seasonable, and an Useful
Work to All These Intents: Not but that I have had Other Obligations upon me of
Civility, and Good Manners, as well as of Discretion in Submission to several
Powerful Recommendations from Men of Quality, Virtue, and Good Letters, for the
Committing of it to the Press. And I have dealt so Faithfully upon the Whole
Matter too, that it comes into the World now just as I Found it, without
Altering, Adding, or Diminishing, so much as one Single Syllable: referring the
Reader to the Author himself to Expound his Own Meaning upon any Ideas he may
have had of Persons and Cases.

As for Sir Robert Naunton's Fragments, I shall need say no more of them, to
the Reputation they have had in the World, than that they have been Highly
Esteemed, as an Authentic Collection of Curious Remarks, by the Generality of
Men of Place and Business: Insomuch, that since the BOOK was out of Print, it
has been the Constant Work of Diverse Clerks in PARLIAMENT, and Term-time, to
Transcribe Copies of it for the Use and Service of the Lovers of ANTIQVITIES,
and State-HISTORY; And These COPIES had the Honor afterward to be Treasured up
among their Choicest MANVSCRIPTS.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Fol. 1 THe several Ends of Courtiers, and the Means to obtain them.

CHAP. II. Fol. 3 The Ways to Obtain the Prince's Favor.

CHAP. III. Fol. 4 The Ways to become Known to the Prince.

CHAP. IV. Fol. 7 The Humor and Inclinations of the Prince, and His Familiars
are to be Known.

CHAP. V. Fol. 11 The Prince's Affections, whether, and how to be Complied with.

CHAP. VI. Fol. 15 The Scarcity and Condition of Honest Men, in Corrupt and
Vicious Court. The Swarms of Ill Men, and their Arts of Ingratiating themselves.

CHAP. VII. Fol. 19 Whom, when, and How we ought to Flatter; the Nature of a
Free and Tolerable Flattery, and the Necessity of it in Court.

CHAP. VIII. Fol. 21 How to Manage the Counsels of a Prince.

CHAP. IX. Fol. 26 The Sudden Resolutions of Princes, How to be Moderated.

CHAP. X. Fol. 31 The Several Natures, and Tempers of Princes, How to be
Handled; with the Art of Courtiers in Introducing their Companions.

CHAP. XI. Fol. 39 That Age, Business, Custom, and Sickness, alter the Temper
of the Bodies and Constitution of the Minds of Princes.

CHAP. XII. Fol. 43 How much Impostors are able to Do by Flattering Princes;
and How a Prince is to beware of Them.

CHAP. XIII. Fol. 46 Of the Familiars and Servants of the Prince, and the Ways
to Win them.

CHAP. XIV. Fol. 49 Four kinds of Noble Courtiers; how to be Handled, and Made
use of; How warily we ought to Deal with Unconstant Princes.

CHAP. XV. Fol. 54 The Three other Kinds of Noble Courtiers; How they are to be
Dealt with.

CHAP. XVI. Fol. 58 The Meaner sort of Courtiers, How they are to be Handled;
as also Such as are Enemies to us, for the sake of Others, to whom we Relate.

CHAP. XVII. Fol. 61 How we are to Treat with those Enemies that Hate us for
our Own Sakes; also concerning threats and Injuries.

CHAP. XVIII. Fol. 65 The Injuries of the More and Less Powerful, How to be
Avoided, and Handled; the several Artifices of Reconciliation.

CHAP. XIX. Fol. 69 Of Envy, How it is to be Overcome.

CHAP. XX. Fol. 73 Of Emulation, the Sister of Envy, and the Remedies of it.

CHAP. XXI. Fol. 76 How to avoid a Threatening Ruin; and When it is upon us,
How to make the Best use of it: Examples of the Fall of Great Men.

CHAP. XXII. Fol. 88 Boasting, Presumption, Arrogance, too much Familiarity,
Pride, and Perfidy, Noted with Examples.

CHAP. XXIII. Fol. 91 How we must, not only take Care to Preserve the Prince's
Favor, but also that of Those in Power about him.

CHAP. XXIV. Fol. 94 Pride even in the Meanest Persons at Court, Noted with
Examples; as also Treachery in betraying the Prince's Secrets.

CHAP. XXV. Fol. 97 The Causes, Kinds, and Examples of Conspiracies with the
Prince's Enemies.

CHAP. XXVI. Fol. 98 That our Courtier must not be the Author of Hazardous
Counsels, the Variety of Errors, whereby the Prince's Favor is Lost.

CHAP. XXVII. Fol. 101 Of the Arts whereby Courtiers are Supplanted by Others;
and First, under Pretense of Specious Employments Abroad, or of Calling them
from their Commands, to Attend upon the King's Person.

CHAP. XXVIII. Fol. 105 How Calumnies are used to make Men Suspected, or Hated
by the Prince.

CHAP. XXIX. Fol. 114 Examples of other Treacheries in Suborned Witnesses, and
Forged Letters.

CHAP. XXX. Fol. 117 Confirmation of Slanders under the Color of a Feigned
Friendship; and the Inclinations of the Prince to the Accuser.

CHAP. XXXI. Fol. 120 The chief Arts and Ways of Slanderers.

CHAP. XXXII. Fol. 121 The Deceits and Danger of Court-praises, and Masqued
Courtiers. Lastly, The Third way of Oppressing our Courtier by Force.

CHAP. XXXIII. Fol. 127 Sometimes the Prince's own Ill and Cruel Nature,
Envying the Deserts of his Servants, is Cause of the Courtier's Fall; and This,
How it is to be Handled.

CHAP. XXXIV. Fol. 130 How to Preserve our Favor and Office, with the
Succeeding Prince

CHAP. XXXV. Fol. 134 Ostentation of the Prince's Favor, to be Avoided:
Something also Concerning our Friends and Followers.

CHAP. XXXVI. Fol. 136 How to Manage and Dispense the Prince's Favor, Advices,
and Comforts in Adversity, with other Rules.

CHAP. XXXVII. Fol. 140 How to make a Judgment of the Constancy, or Change of
the Prince's Affection to us.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Fol. 141 The Prince's Favor to Women: Instructions for the
Prince's Mistresses; Benefits Conferred on Princes, often make those persons
hated by them, with other documents.

CHAP. XXXIX. Fol. 145 Sundry precepts concerning the Pleasures, and
Inclinations of the Prince, etc.

CHAP. XL. Fol. 149 Concluding with many choice, and necessary Admonitions.

Arcana Aulica: OR, Walsingham's Manual Of Prudential Maxims for the Statesman
and the Courtier.
CHAP. I.
The several Ends of Courtiers, and the means to attain them.

IT is necessary that all Men, who desire with Prudence and Order, to Govern
their Affairs, do in the first place, propose unto themselves, an End whereunto
all their actions must tend. Those that look toward the Court, do not all fix
upon the same Ends; some the Hope of Gain, and others the Desire of Honor,
leads; the Ambition of Rule, draws not a few; and very many steer that Course,
merely out of a ^sie inclination, to the Engrossing, Crossing, or interposing
in other men's affairs; whilst the number of those is very small, who
Primitively intend the Honor, Safety, and Advantage of the Prince.

But though their Ends be diverse, yet the way to attain to whatever End any
man there has pitched upon, is but one, and Common to all that move in that
Sphere, to wit, the Favor of the Prince; in obtaining which the industry, and
labor of all Courtiers is employed. In order whereunto it is in the first place
necessary, that you be known unto your Prince; and then either by your
Behavior, your Parts, your Actions, or some other laudable means, that you
make your self Grateful in his eye; yet there are those for whom the Splendour
of their Family, the Authority of their Office, or Convenience of their
employment (whether it be high, or low, come unto them by inheritance, or got
with money) has prepared an access unto the Prince's person; so that they
being hereby exempted, from the toil of seeking how to become known unto the
Prince, find half their work performed unto their hands; whilst those to whom
these Introductions are denied, find their greatest difficulties in their first
beginnings: But when they are once known unto the Prince, as he judges them sit
for his Service they are often preferred and trusted before others; by reason
that being Raised from a low Condition, or a mean Fortune; they are more
addicted and subject to the Prince's will whom they submissively Reverence, as
the only Author of their Advancement.

It is otherwise with Courtiers that are born Great, for upon those the Dignity
either of their Employment, or their Family, imposes a necessity of having a
regard unto their own Honor, and of Preferring sometimes their own to the
Prince's opinion; who besides is more often unwilling to promote These through a
certain Emulation, or Fear least their Swelling Greatness should insult at last
against him that is the Author of it; and he not able to repress them without
danger to Himself and his Kingdom; whilst on the other side, the Oppression of
him that rises from a mean Condition, is far more easy; only let the Prince
turn his back upon him, or abandon him to the Great ones who for the most part
look with envy upon such) and he is Lost. I intend here only those wise Princes
that have known, how to limit within due Bounds, the Power of those they love
and advance; not conferring all the authority and trust of his Kingdom upon one
of these men, in subjecting even the Peers unto him which having been done by
some Princes, did seldom or almost never succeed well.

CHAP. II.
The ways to obtain the Prince's Favor.

THe ways whereby Courtiers get into Authority and Favor with the Prince, are
two, above all other most usual and frequented. The one is of those that seek
after Public Offices and Dignities, Climbing up the stairs of honor till they
come within a stage of the Favorite himself. The other is of those that follow
the Court, sedulously seeking all occasions of being employed in the secret
affairs of the Prince, and made use of in business of the Greatest Trust.

The Last of which ways, is without doubt the shortest, and traced with their
steps, who have lived in the greatest Favor with their Princes; as Mecaenas
was to Augustus, and Sallust both to him, and his Successor Tiberius, of whom
Tacitus, Annal. 3. Sallust, although the ways of honor were easy unto him,
imitating Mecaenas, without the Senatorial Dignity, outwent in Power many that
had been honored, both with Triumphs and the Consulship, and varying from the
custom of the Ancients, through his delicacy, and neatness, seemed prone to
nothing but the Plenty and abundance of luxury; although he had indeed a
vigorous mind, capable of the weightiest business; by so much the more sharp
and active by how much the more he made show of dullness and sloth.

Like to him was Mella, of whom speaks the same Tacitus, Annal. 12. Mella born
of the same Parents, that Gallio and Seneca were; through a Preposterous
ambition laid aside all pretense to public Honors; to the end, that being
only Roman Knight, he might equal in power Those that had been Consuls;
Besides, he believed it the shortest way to the getting of Money, to be
employed in Agencies, and Soliciting the Prince's business.

CHAP. III.
The ways to become Known to the Prince.

THe ways of becoming Known and Grateful to the Prince, are various, according
to the Diversity of the Courtiers, and the Times; there are some that make
themselves known by their Actions signally, either Profitable, or Glorious; or
else by a more than Common Virtue, and Honesty. The Commendation of others
gives to many, both Access to, and Interest in the Prince, which is indeed the
most usual way of all. For Princes live in such a degree of eminence above
others, and are so Hedged in with the number of Peers and train of Veterane
Courtiers, that a Stranger can hardly thrust in amongst the throng that stand
in his way, unless either there be some one to take him by the hand, and make
his passage, or else that himself, by some extraordinary enterprise do attract
the Eyes of all men upon him, and, amongst others, those of the Prince.

And here the Fact of the Architect Dimocrates, or as some call him
Stasicrates, is very memorable. He desiring to become known unto the Great
Alexander, when all the Courtiers had refused to bring him to the King,
bethinks of a way of presenting himself all naked, anointed with Oil, a poplar
Crown on his head, upon his left shoulder a Lyon's Skin, and holding a great
Club in his Right hand: And thus Accoutred, he comes into Alexander's Presence,
as he was sitting on his Throne. The novelty of the thing drew the Eyes of all
upon him, and moved Alexander himself so far, as he caused the Man to be
brought unto him; and though he approved not of what he propounded, yet he
commanded he should be Enrolled amongst his Family.

I do not bring this Example to persuade any body with the like Foolery, to
insinuate himself into the Prince's Favor, but to the end I may demonstrate,
That those who are Strangers and unknown, unless they be assisted by some one
in great Authority, can hardly Scrue themselves into so great a train, as do
Surround the Prince, except either by some memorable Action, as we have said
before, or by some unusual Accident, they deserve, as the Poet says, With
fingers to be pointed out,
For some strange thing amongst the rout.


CHAP. IV.
The Humor and Inclinations of the Prince and his Familiars, are to be known.

OUr Young Courtier, who desires to be Known and Loved by the Prince, must
observe well the Manners and Conditions, not only of the Prince himself, but
also of such of his Followers, as he most Trusts and relies upon; together with
the Peers, and all others who may either afford him any Help or Countenance; or
else on the contrary (stirred up either with Emulation, Fear, Envy, Hate, their
own, or their Friends concernments) work him any prejudice. It is chiefly
necessary that he make a full discovery of the Inclinations and Customs of the
Prince, that for the most part follow the temperature of his body; which though
by wary Princes, they be much Concealed and Smothered, yet it seldom happens
but that sometimes they break out, and as it were laying aside disguises, show
themselves. Since all their Actions are so exposed to the eyes of Men, it
cannot be, but Some one or other, must observe whereunto their Inclinations
tend. Sometimes they are so Oppressed and Vexed with the weight of Business, that
forgetting their Artifices, they betray their dispositions; Tiberius himself,
although a most skilful Master in Dissembling, could not set so good a face
upon it, but that Time would by little and little, bring all his Arts to light.

But since Those of other Men are so many, the Propensions of Princes must
needs be Diverse, and almost Infinite; yet they may be reduced to two Heads.
The one of which, includes all that tends to the Greatness of his State; The
other his Personal Pleasures; His Greatness consists either in his Fame and
Authority, or in Riches; the duty of his Subjects; or lastly, in the Strength
and Faithfulness of his Armies. In these things he ought to accommodate his
Endeavors to the Nature, and Disposition of the Princes affairs; which he that
shall with Dexterity and Skill perform, provided he be neither suspected nor
hated for other Reasons, cannot fail of becoming Acceptable unto the Prince.

Make the same judgment of the Pleasures, and vicious Affections of the Prince.
If he be Diffident, and of a Fearful Disposition, believe that a Bold Informer
will be grateful unto him, who sticks not at the displeasure of the Great ones,
and is ready to Execute the Prince's commands, whatsoever they be; as Tacitus
Describes Sejanus. He had a body (says he, Annal. 4.) patient of toil, a bold
mind; he was a close concealer of himself, and a rash accuser of others:
Composed he was of a mixture of flattery, and pride, with an exterior face of
modesty; and yet inwardly fraught with an excess of Ambition.

If the Prince delight in Drunkenness, he will also take pleasure in men
addicted to the same Vice; for which cause Tiberius loved Pomponius, and Lucius
Piso, of whom Suetonius, Cap. 24. de Tiberio. After this, the Prince, to the
corruption of public Manners, spent two whole days and nights, eating and
drinking with Pomponius Flaccus, and Piso; to one of which he gave immediately
the Province of Syria, and to the other the Government of the City, calling
them in his Letters, his most pleasant and familiar Friends. The same Tiberius,
as Suetonius relates, preferred a most ignoble Fellow to the Questorship,
before many Noble pretenders, because at a Banquet, where himself was drinking,
he drank off Nine Gallons of Wine.

Their society in their Lust, did indear Tigellinus to Nero. Tigellinus was
more Powerful (says Tacitus, Annal. 14.) in the bosom of the Prince, as being
admitted to his most Private Lusts. So Petronius, that Master of elegance (for
those are the Historians words, Annal. 16.) was taken in, amongst few, to the
Familiarity of Nero; who thought nothing Pleasant or Sweet, but what Petronius
Approved of. And according to this example, did Commodus and Heliogabalus,
confer all the Dignities of the Empire upon men for Lust and Licentiousness,
most like unto themselves.

Mutianus was not beloved by Vespasian so much for his Fidelity, Duty, and the
Merit of his passed Services, as that because he was more dexterous than others
in Feeding his Avarice. To Isacius Angelus, who after the death of Theodorus,
got the Empire, the same Avarice endeared a certain Boy, who though he scarce
knew how to Write, kept the Accounts of his Exchequer, out of hope only of
sharing in the Bribes, which were given him largely, from all those that used
his assistance.

Manuel Commenus, also Emperor, seeking some Rough Exactor and Crafty raiser of
his Tributes, that might supply his Prodigality with Money, chose John Pucius,
a rude unsufferable Man, difficult of access, and intolerable harsh. Whose
Language, and his looks did well
His Nature and his Office tell.
And not content with this, lifted him up to that Authority, that he did not
only Excel all others in Dignity, but also would Dare to violate the Edicts of
the Prince, and Orders of the Senate; abrogating, under pretense of increasing
the Treasury, some of the greatest and most necessary Offices of the Empire:
Such as was the Commander of the Galleys, the chief strength and defense of
that Imperial Monarchy.

CHAP. V.
The Prince's Affections, whether, and How to be complied with.

BUt that they who desire to become Acceptable to the Prince, ought to Sooth
him in all his Inclinations, is not only a thing publicly granted, but also
authorized by the daily practice of Courtiers. An honest man will wonder at it,
and think that by this Rule that teaches us to Humor all the dispositions of
the Prince, he is shut out from Court; since Princes often run courses much
astray from the paths of Reason and Justice. Truly, he that desires to lead a
life altogether Innocent, and Remote from the conversation of men addicted to
vice, and to their own Corrupt Inclinations, shall in my opinion, do very well
to absent himself from that great Courtezan, the Court (if I may so call it)
that sometimes Corrupts men of the greatest Integrity and Innocence.

Let us see an example or two of this Corruption. Festinus the friend of
Maximinus, during Valentinians's Reign, governed Asia with a wonderful repute
of Gentleness and Modesty; being a sharp reprover of the Violence and Cruelties
of Maximinus, and of the Calumnies and Frauds, wherewith he circumvented many:
But at last observing that his Companion by these means had gotten the command
of the Praetorian Bands, next in dignity to the Emperor himself, he changed
his manner of life, and imitating Maximinus, did many unjust and cruel things.
John Pucius (whom I mentioned but a little before) administered for a time the
Affairs and Treasures of the Emperor Manuel with great integrity; which
caused, that the Emperor's pride and inhumanity was in some sort tolerable to
those that were well disposed amongst the Subjects: but at last (as Nicetas
witnesses) giving himself over to the desire of wealth, he was in covetousness
inferior to none, that ever had born those offices before him; exhorting his
very friends and servants, to imitate his example, as many of them did; and the
rest, though better, and incorrupted themselves, yet were fain silently to
suffer others to be depraved, for fear of the danger that hung over those that
should oppose him.

Aristides the first, both in name and nature, being by the Athenians made
Treasurer; In the first place, according to his own Disposition, and the duty
of an Honest man, went about to hinder all those that were under his charge,
from robbing the Treasury; whereupon they presently accused him of Cheating,
and Bribery, as one of the corruptest persons that ever bore that office;
insomuch, that he had like to have been condemned: But being at last quit, and
his office still continued, he determined to imitate his Predecessors, and wink
at the thefts of his Companions; by which means, he presently reobtained the
name of a Good man, in the opinion of all.

Such things often fall out in the Courts of Princes, either through the Malice
of those that are in most Authority, who can endure no man more virtuous than
themselves; or else through the Folly and Imprudence of the Prince. The
preservation of our integrity in Court, I confess, is therefore very difficult:
yet if any, either through the necessity of his Fortune, the Eminence of his
Birth, the Dignity of his office, or the desire of serving, either his Friends
or Country, is lead unto it, or called thereunto by the Prince, shall undergo
this kind of life; and as occasion shall require, seek to do thereby good unto
himself, and serve his Friends; in my judgment he may persist therein, without
prejudice to his upright heart, at leastways for a time.

I speak of the Courts of the worst Princes; for to live in the Court of a Wise
Prince, that loves Honest and virtuous men, the difficulty is not so great. In
times past, good men did not always undergo Public employments with a desire
of doing service to their Country, so much as merely to keep wicked and
corrupt men out of those charges: And for the same reasons, ought they to seek
access unto Tyrannical, and voluptuous Princes; to the end, That if they durst
not directly, at least obliquely, and as much as in them lay, they might impede
the evil, and pernicious Counsels of the Prince; either by framing delays, and
contriving difficulties in his way, or by offering unto him more Mild and
Plausible resolutions.

Burrhus and Seneca, who according to the Rate of those times, were accounted
not only good Courtiers, but virtuous men also, when being made Governors of
Nero's youth, they observed the humor of this Prince apt and prone to Lust and
Pleasure; lest he should break out to the Rapes of the Noblest Women, they
permitted him a Mistress, whereby for a time they kept him in order: Who took
into his Familiarity Annaeus Serenus for a cloak unto his Lust, Who feigning to
be in love with this freed Woman, did openly own those gifts to be his (says
Tacitus, Annal. 13.) which the Prince in private bestowed upon her. This must a
good man do, who not being able to master the Luxury, Liberty, and Perverseness
of the Prince, must at least divert them, and bend them other ways, whence
there is least danger like to arise, either to the Public, or the Prince's
honor.

CHAP. VI.
The Searcity and Condition of honest men, in Corrupt and Vicious Courts; The
Swarms of Ill Men, and their Arts of Ingratiating themselves.

Perhaps some one will say, that it seldom falls out, that a Tyrant, or a
dissolute Prince, will take into his Favor an Honest Man; I do not deny but it
is very rare, but yet I must affirm there are few Princes Courts, in which
there are not some good men found; if not called thither by the Prince, at
least drawn thither by their own desire of doing good to others, and infringing
the power of evil men: Who stand their ground there to that end, through the
assistance of the best disposed Courtiers, and through the friendship and
patronage of some Great man, observing carefully there, that wholesome rule of
Lepidus, whom Tacitus (Annal. 4.) brings for an example of a Good and wise
Courtier, who neither with an unseasonable Contumacy did exasperate the Prince,
nor with a sordid flattery Sooth him in his vices. The same Tacitus for these
reasons commends Capito and Labeo. That age (says he) had at once two
Ornaments of peace; But Labeo was of a more incorrupted liberty, and therefore
more esteemed, whilst Capito's pleasing humor was more acceptable to the
great ones.

I do not deny, but a Courtier's life will be far more difficult to an honest
man than to another; But withal I must affirm, that the advantage of Glory and
content of Mind, that will arise from thence, will much recompense the trouble
of it. Since that, if he carry himself wisely, and accommodate himself to those
things that he sees, he cannot change nor overcome; I dare say, he will at last
become acceptable to the worst of Princes, and dearer than others that are of a
worse repute; who seldom manage the Prince's business with a due fidelity and
care; or at least not equal to that he might easily promise to himself from the
hands of a virtuous and honest man. And hither tends the Counsel of Sallust and
Mecaenas, whereby the first recommended to Julius Caesar, and the latter to
Augustus, the choice and friendship of Good men. Because Conscience and care of
their Reputation restrains these more powerfully from dishonest things, than
the fear of punishment, or the want of Power does others.

But as I have said, the vicious are always in Court in greater throngs; who
chiefly by two ways do Ingratiate themselves with the Prince; first by
Flattering and Fulfilling whatever he shall please to command; and that by so
much the more servilely, by how much the more their hopes of gain are greater.
Next for that Princes are pleased to have those about them, in comparison of
whom, themselves, though bad God knows, seem to be good. Some there are that
think also their lives more secure in the company of those that are most like
unto themselves. Dionysias the Tyrant, being requested to expel out of his
Court one, who for his villainy was hated by all men, answered, No, he would
keep him, lest otherwise he himself should become the most hateful person in
the Court. It is natural to those who find themselves obnoxious to any vice, by
comparing themselves to those that are worse, to seek to purchase to themselves
some show of Probity; And it has been an Old trick of Princes, on purpose to
choose unlikely Successors, to the end their own acts and virtues might appear
better and more illustrious: For Tacitus is of opinion, that for no other
reason did Augustus adopt Tiberius, whose arrogance and cruelty he knew full
well; nor Tiberius choose Caligula.

It is principally necessary, that a good man be very Sober and Circumspect in
his discourse; for Princes seldom or never love an unwary and careless liberty
in any kind of men, how virtuous soever they be. Neither did Plato's freedom
with Dionysius succeed well, for therefore was he delivered up to a needy
Mariner, and sent to be sold in the Isle of Creet; whence being redeemed by
certain Philosophers, he was admonished either to abstain wholly from the
conversation of Princes, or to speak plausible things: With the like advices
did Aristotle furnish his Cozen Callisthenes, then going to attend upon
Alexander, to wit, That he should very seldom speak, and then never but
pleasing things, to him upon whose Tongues-end lay the disposal of his life.

CHAP. VII.
Whom, When, and How we ought to Flatter; the Nature of a free and tolerable
Flattery, and the necessity of it in Court.

THough it be Inconsistent with the strictest rules of Morality and Virtue, yet
of Necessity, if you live in Court, you must sometimes so Flatter the Prince,
as may gain him unto you. But all manner of Flattery is not Tolerable, a Base
and Servile one was displeasing even to Tiberius himself, of whom it is written
by Tacitus, Annal. 3. that going out of the Senate, he was once heard to say of
those Flattering Senators in Greek; O Men born to slavery. There are
circumstances wherein Flattery used, is as prejudicial, as when it is wholly
omitted; For it happens often, that be whom we Flatter too grossly, suspects
deceit. It is requisite still that Flattery have something of truth, and some
show of liberty mixed with it, (it is the opinion of Aeschines and Plutarch)
whereby we may persuade not only the Prince, that we speak heartily, and as we
think, but others also, and so preserve our Credit.

Croesus, who whilst he was a King himself, had learnt well the humor of
Kings, and what would either please or displease them: When upon a time
Cambyses, King of the Persians, demanded of those that were about him, What
they thought of him in Comparison of his Father Cyrus: They all affirmed, That
he was greater than Cyrus, as who unto his Fathers Kingdoms had added Egypt,
and the dominion of the Sea. When Croesus (then a Captive) came to speak, he
affirmed, That he was much inferior to his Father, by reason that he had as
yet begotten none equal to himself. This answer had some taste of freedom, and
therefore was more pleasing to Cambyses's-vanity, than all the rest had said.

That Flattery is very notable of Valerius Messalla, recorded by Tacitus Annal.
1. Messala Valerius added, That it was convenient the Oath of Allegiance should
every year be renewed in Tiberius's name; who being demanded by Tiberius,
whether he had any commandment from him to give that advice, he answered, That
he spoke it of his own accord; and that in what concerned the Commonwealth, he
would use no man's advice but his own, whatever the offense or danger were:
Which was a wonderful unpractised kind of Flattery.

Like unto this, is that which the same Author relates of Ateius Capito, Annal.
3. Lucius Ennius, a Gentleman of Rome, was accused of Treason for melting the
Image of the Prince, and making it into Plate; Caesar commanded he should not
be prosecuted for it: Ateius Capito openly complained with a seeming liberty,
that the power of determining in such a case ought not to be taken from the
Senate, nor so great a Crime pass unpunished; and that he was slow in resenting
his own, least he should also punish an injury done to the Commonwealth. It
were easy to bring more examples of this kind, but these are sufficient to
instruct those upon whom there is imposed a necessity of Flattering, that they
may take heed, lest their Flattery bring upon themselves, or others, any
Private or Public damage; it is sufficient that it be such as may sometimes
satisfy the Prince's vanity.

CHAP. VIII.
How to Manage the Counsels of a Prince.

OUr Courtier ought to beware how he engages himself (though called) in the
Counsel of a Proud and Violent Prince; for such as those do ask Counsel in no
other sort, than as Xerxes did when he went to invade Greece: He called
together the Princes of Asia, as it were to deliberate with them about the
Conduct of the War; but they being come before him, he said, Lest I should seem
without your advice to act all things according to my own will; I have called
you my Lords to Counsel: yet I would have you know, that I expect here from you
obedient minds, and not troublesome debates. Cambyses, the Predecessor of
Xerxes, being about to Marry his Sister, demanded of his Counselors, whether
any Law of the Persians prohibited such a Marriage; They perceiving the King
did not ask this question, so much to resolve himself of any doubt, as to Sound
the dispositions of the Nobles, answered, That truly there was no Law that
warranted expressly this that the King was about to do; but there was one that
affirmed, that whatever the King thought fit to do, was Lawful. Thus out of the
Humor of the Prince, and the Nature of the affair, we must first make a
judgment, whether it be fit, or safe, when he asks our Counsel, to deliver
freely our opinions; or to humor him in his inclinations.

You have Royal examples of this already, I will now bring you one of a man,
who though he were not a King, yet bore the Office of a King; not above an Age
ago in Spain: Ferdinand being dead, the Pope and Maximilian the Emperor,
exhorted Charles of Austria, then in Flanders, to take upon him the title of
King of Spain; although his Mother Joan, Ferdinand's daughter, were still
living, but wholly unfit for Government, by reason of her want of health. The
States were hereupon assembled, and before them Cardinal Ximenes, to excuse the
novelty of the thing, discoursed excellently of the reasons of what was done.
The Grandees more observant of ancient customs, and the Queen, than was fit
against a King that was shortly to succeed of Course; Protested very
obstinately against it. Ximenes being angry, rises up and tells them, the thing
that was treated of, was not to be called in question; neither was there any
need of their advice in the case: That Kings being to enter upon their
Kingdoms, are not to expect the consent of their Subjects; that they who were
assembled, were not called out of any necessity, but that they might have
occasion by the Promptitude of their suffrages to endear their Prince unto
them. But since they interpreted that as a due, which was only a favor, they
should see that without their approbation he would proclaim King Charles at
Madrid; which example all the rest of the Cities quickly followed.

Such a manner of proceeding, not only in these cases, but mostly in all others
do Princes use; scarce asking any man's advice, but either to the end they may
Countenance their own resolutions with the consent of many, or else to discover
the disposition of the person they advise withal, as Tacitus witnesses that
Tiberius often did. The Courtier must therefore Sollicitously sift into the
Prince's mind, lest otherwise he should chance to give offensive Counsel. If
the Prince's inclination in the thing debated be doubtful unto him, let him
seem to discuss the matter, and so laying down arguments both for the one, and
the other side, let him leave the Prince to his own election: Who (if the thing
advised of, be not unalterably resolved upon already) having heard the reasons
that may be brought against it, if he be discreet, will change his Mind.

Neither in this case will there be any ground for that bashfulness (of
blushing, to seem so much inferior to any body, as to follow their Counsel)
which though it be very hurtful and unbecoming unto them, is very familiar
amongst Great Men; for having said what you can, you leave the freedom of
determining all to the Prince's Prudence, whereby you will also avoid the
danger that many times Counselors are obnoxious unto, if their Advices succeed
ill. And if the Prince following his first resolutions meet not with success,
he will, by so much the more acknowledge and esteem the prudence of that
Courtier, who foresaw the Approaching misfortune, when it was yet avoidable.

If you be Pressed to deliver your opinion in an unlawful matter, either seek
some pretense of delay, or else entreat that some third person may be called
for the better discussing of the business; whereby the case being more maturely
weighed, it may appear what is most for the dignity and safety of the Prince.
By this means Burrhus defeated Nero's first attempt against his Mother's life;
Promising that himself would kill her if she were found guilty; But since it
was afforded unto every other person, a trial could not be denied unto his
Mother. Whilst the examinations are taking, Nero's fury asswages, and his Fears
grows less, so that his determination, though it was not quite altered, yet it
was laid aside to another time.

But this manner of proceeding takes not place upon all occasions, being proper
only in desperate and ambiguous cases. Moreover, before we adventure upon it,
we ought to know, whether the Nature of the Prince is compatible with delays:
for there are some so headstrong and impatient, that there is no means more
certain of incurring their displeasure, than by using delays.

CHAP. IX.
The Sudden Resolution of Princes, How to be Moderated.

WHen (as it often falls out) our Advice is not asked in the resolution, but
for the manner of executing what is resolved upon already; if the business do
seem inconsistent with reason and honesty, we must propose the remotest means
we can think of for the effecting of it; and countenance this our Advice with
the pretenses of Facility, Equity, and Security; showing withal, that sudden
undertakings, are full of hazard, and difficulty. When we have to do with those
impatient kind of Princes, we ought to be ready, and have always our Wits about
us for these sudden occasions, and then if they be not unsufferably rash and
wilful, no doubt but they will follow that course which we shall demonstrate
to be most Safe and Easy: Yet if their madness be such, that they will not
hear mild and gentle Counsels, his Adviser may yet excuse this his wary
Prudence with a Care and Affection to the Prince; desiring rather, that things
should be done Slowly with security, then Rashly with the ruin of his Master.

Now if so be, that in that Headlong course that the Prince has Wilfully
chosen, Difficulties or Straits do occur, he will much more reflect upon the
Prudence of him that would have dissuaded him in time, and perhaps for the
future, be willing to hearken to him, propounding Milder ways. Besides, this
gaining of time does frequently afford Subject of Moderating the Prince's
passion, and of Bridling his desires, or else of letting him see, that what he
is about is either wholly impossible, or else cannot be effected without great
absurdity.

For it after happens, that the ways which Princes propose unto themselves, are
accompanied with such circumstances of difficulty, as are not to be overcome;
and to these kind of Straits, as I would not have you exhort him, so I would
not have you too much dissuade him from them, (rather suffer him with a
respective silence to take his own course, least you dissuading out of these
difficult ways, he seek out some more easy one of compassing his will;) which
otherwise having toiled himself out of breath amongst the Obstacles that he met
with, he would voluntarily give the business over. But sometimes it falls out
that Princes commit the execution of some Wickedness or Injustice to an honest
man: In which case truly (though all good men ought to suffer any violence or
misfortune rather than consent to be made the Minister of villainy) I fear the
number of these is very few that are so Generously resolved, as by a passive
disobedience to expose themselves to the sacrifice for another; especially if
the occasion offered, and the nature of the Prince admits of no denial, or
excuse, nor affords any way of casting that displeasing employment upon some
third person.

Which later course Burrhus took, Nero resolving the second time upon his
Mother's Murder, full of so much the more care and eargerness, by how much the
danger of her contrived Shipwreck in the Tyber had produced no other effect,
than that the Woman always before malicious and greedy of revenge, was after so
great an injury become more enraged than ever. Burrhus and Seneca, being called
to Counsel, stood long ambiguous and doubtful what to say, as Tacitus reports
Annal. 14. saying: They were both of them a long time silent, fearing lest they
dissuade in vain; At last Seneca, hitherto the forwarder man, cast his eye upon
Burrhus, as if he would have asked, whether the execution of that Murder
should not be left to the Soldiers; Burrhus prevented him with an answer, and
says that the Pretorian Bands were all devoted to Caesar's house, and so
mindful of Germanicus, that they would act nothing of cruelty against his
Progeny; and therefore that Anicetus should perform his promise. So he freed
both himself and his soldiers, from the execution of that ugly act.

I confess, he is not beholding unto you, whom, to save your self innocent, you
shall entangle in such an employment: But should such an occasion happen, I
thing it fitter that some such man as Anicetus was, should undergo the infamy
of such an act, than any virtuous or honest man.

Yet the safest way of all is in time to foresee, and in their birth to
prevent, and occur to the unjust desires, and the unlawful designs of the
Prince; and before they either take Root, or appear above Ground, to suppress
and pull them up. There are many, who with Seasonable and Gentle Admonitions,
and Silken words, as Parisates calls them, have done much good, and had
wonderful success in these cases; yet it is necessary, that whosoever would use
such Remedies as these be of Great Authority with the Prince, who, must hear as
much out of Reverence as Love: And nevertheless, when all is done, though it
may succeed well in this or that case, it will hardly do so in all. I am much
pleased with the way of those men, who are of a Conceited and Pleasant humor,
and for that Faculty, acceptable with the Prince; who as it were, intending
something else, with a fit Similitude, or a well chosen Story, will represent
unto the Prince the Danger, and Foulness of those Counsels, wherewith he seems
to be carried Headlong away.

But to do this, there is a great Nimbleness of wit, and Pleasantness of
discourse required; besides, they must take heed the Prince smell not out, that
himself is the argument of the Jest. As Tiberius, who in the Tragedy of Atreus,
composed by Scaurus believed he was reproached of his Brother's murder; and
Domitian, in that which Helvidius had writ of Paris and Cenon, thought himself
upbraided with his divorces: Wherefore it is necessary, that these kind of
stories be skilfully interwoven amongst other things, not Squaring or Applyable
to the Prince; and it is very pertinent to this purpose, That they take care
not to Inculcate too plainly, that matter which makes most to the purpose;
though, least it should quite escape the Prince's observation, it may be, as it
were, by a casual repetition iterated. The conceit and continuance of the
story, by how much the greater, and more cheerful it is, by so much the more it
will imprint those things that are said; and because they seem to come by
Chance, not of Purpose, or Design, they will not distaste the ticklish ear of
the Prince.

For this kind of Moderation, whereby you may neither contribute to the
Prince's vices, nor in vain resist them; there are many critical times, and
means, which those that attend upon the persons, and are employed in the
affairs of Princes, cannot but meet with. If so be that the Case be such, that
you must needs contradict the Disposition and Inclination of the Prince, you
must seek out some other Passion or Hamor in him, whereunto he is equally
inclined, and so beget a Strife and Contention in the Prince's mind; but we
must carefully pretend still, that what we say, comes from the Duty and
Reverence that we bear him. By this means did Mutianus keep Domitian in order,
and hinder him from joining with Cerealis, as (out of what hopes, I know not)
he was about to do, says Tacitus, Hist. 4.

CHAP. X.
The several Natures, and Tempers of Princes, How to be Handled; with the Art
of Courtiers in Introducing their Companions.

YEt to do these things successfully, it does much conduce, that we know the
Inclinations of our Princes, which depend upon the Natural Temperature of their
Bodies. The difference and variety of which is common to them with other men;
except, that as they are more Powerful then others so they are less Masters of
their Affections and Inclinations; which are for the most part, more violent
and more unreasonable in them, than in meaner persons.

He, in whom Choler rules, is Hasty, Proud, and prone to Anger; a lover of
Ceremony, and Respect; a sore enemy to those that are but in the least sort
Refractary; impatient in Execution, and rash in Resolution; a contemner of all
men's opinions, that differ from his own; very apt to commit Injuries, yet soon
Friends with those he has wronged, if they renew not the memory of Passed
Enmities; but a hater of those that rip up old Offenses, and to the end, he may
prevent such as he is afraid of, watches all occasions of doing them a greater
mischief.

Whoever has to do with such a Prince, must always have his Eyes and Ears
open, that he may readily understand and obey the first Beck, without making
any reply or delay, least by Contradiction the Prince come to suspect him of
Arrogance, as one that would seem to think himself wiser than he; let him not
stick to submit himself to the lowest kind of Employments, if need be, though
they suit not with his condition. He must be Patient of Injuries, and no ways
mindful of them; but after a wrong, so much the more officious: He must not
brag of his merits, least he should seem to reproach the Prince with them; but
rather heap Services upon Services, least the memory of those that are past
should wear out, and to the end, the pleasure and gratefulness of fresh ones,
may Revive the Remembrance of the Old. When the Prince is angry, let him not
come near him, for all things displease him then; neither are those that are
dearest unto him, grateful in any thing they can devise, to say or do.
Familiarity with such Humors as these, turns into Contempt; which for that
reason, although the Prince invite us to it, is to be avoided; Let all things
rather tend to Modesty and Respect. For these Lions, though sometimes they be
Meek and Gentle, are at other times Enraged against those they Love best, and
who are in most Authority with them.

They that are of a Sanguine Constitution, are for the most part of a Pleasant
Humor, Lovers of Mirth, and Recreation; flying Sadness, the seriousness of
Business, and trouble of Debates, Lovers of Peace, leaving the administration
of their affairs to others, in whom they suffer nothing more unwillingly, than
Complaints. They are Courteous, Gentle, and Free, if not from all, at least,
from any Grievous Injuries; more mindful of benefits Received from others, than
done by Themselves; Complacent, willing to help, and for the most part Liberal.

He that lives with such as these, must omit no circumstances of Veneration and
Respect, but very seldom must they treat of Business, or serious Affairs. Those
that are employed in the Greatest, and most Important Offices, and concernments
of the Kingdom, ought not to come near these Princes, before they be either
Called, or certain that the Prince is not engaged in any Recreation; least
otherwise, they should interrupt him in his greatest Delights, and make him
Blush to be surprised by those, who, he may apprehend, are Secretly Angry, to
see him no better Entertained. For so when Philip of Macedon, was once at play,
it was told him, That Antipater was at the door, who presently troubled, and
conscious of his Transgression, hid his dice under his Pillow, Blushing that
Antipater should catch him at that Sport. Therefore with such a Prince, as
those that manage the Greatest Affairs of the Kingdom, in serious and weighty
Trusts do exceed others; so also are they out-gone by others, in a familiar and
free access to the Prince's person; who naturally avoids these kind of Serious
Men, as much as may be. Those men that are of a Jovial and well tempered
Disposition, and capable as well of Pleasure, as of Business, are chiefly
acceptable to these kind of Princes. Provided, That whilst they are out of the
Prince's Sight, they do not with too much Facility and Complacence, lose their
authority with others; but they must preserve the Honor of their Rank entire,
for without that (as the Proverb says) Familiarity breeds contempt, and
Contempt gives encouragement to Quarrels, upon the first appearance of an
Injury: Which the Prince being an enemy to Trouble and Strife, to free himself
of, will endeavor to remove him that shall appear most Faulty.

A Melancholy Prince is Slow in his Counsels, Anxious, Thoughtful, Diffident,
Jealous, Witty, and for the most part Peevish; given to Silence, and when he
speaks, Involving himself in Ambiguous Words, a Dissembler, apt rather to Sound
other men's Opinions, than Deliver his own; an enemy of Jests, and Freedom; a
lover of Solitude, difficult of Access, a friend to Few, and to those but
Coldly; prone to Hatred, out of Diffidence, an inseparable Companion unto him;
Covetous and Fearful, even to Absurdity; one that Hates equally those that he
has Offended, with those that have Offended him; implacably greedy of revenge,
and whom, though reconciled unto you, you ought to be jealous of.

With these kind of dispositions, we cannot deal with too much Wariness and
Circumspection; Principally we must take care of our Tongues, and call, as it
were, a Counsel upon every thing we say; to the end we may speak nothing
Strange or Offensive, nor indeed, scarce at all, unless we be called upon: In
our Respect, we must rather Exceed, than fall Short, and altogether Abstain
from Contradiction, without Pressing him, when he Demurs in his Counsels, least
his Melancholy once kindled in Choler, never quench till it convert to Hatred.
In our Demands, we must not be Importunate, when we see him deny us Readily;
for it is not convenient to accustom the Prince, to give us Repulses,
especially such a Prince, who being by his nature prone to ill Suspicions, will
think that man his Enemy, that he has given a Refusal unto; neither will you
Easily afterward, by any skill, take this Apprehension out of him; for with
such, the Memory of an Injury endures Long; and measuring Others by Themselves,
they believe all men as Malicious, and as Obstinate in their Hatred, as they.
In short, These kind of men are the Worst, and most difficult of all Others;
and whose Temper, by reason of the variety of Cloudy Thoughts, that Hover in
their Dark Imag^nations, is most Unequal; which makes their Conversation
exceeding troublesome.

The Phlegmatic Prince participates of the Heaviness and Slowness of the
Melancholy; but as in Understanding, so in Peevishness and Distrust, is
Inferior to him; for his heart is, as it were, Congealed with Cold; and hence
it comes to pass, that he is Diffident of none so much, as of Himself; Fearing
to undertake great matters, because he Despairs of the Success, and knows not
how to go about it. He is Doubtful in his Counsels, Fearful in Execution, not
of a Quick Capacity; and as his Hate is not Great, so his Love is not Vehement.

To supply the Heaviness of these Princes, an Active and Ready Minister is
necessary. When the Prince has once found him capable to Effect those things,
that himself thought Desperate, discovering the weakness of his own wit; he
Loves, Admires, and Cherishes this Man, as necessary unto him. And that kind of
Favor, which leans upon the opinion of such a Necessity, is of all others ^^st
Durable. Which our Courtier once observing, let him make it his business to
bring to a Prosperous Issue, those Businesses that seemed most Difficult, and
from which, the Prince expected little or no success; as it was the Constant
Practice of that great Minister of France, Cardinal Richelieu, who always kept
the King Entangled in such Dangerous Undertakings, That if he would, he knew
not How to be without him.

Let our Courtier also, if it can be so contrived, compass these things, and
Execute the most material part of his Business himself alone, taking heed,
however he do, that he take not to his assistance, a Helper or Companion, more
Habile and Dexterous, than Himself: Withal, let him beware he be not too long
absent from Court, least he chance to lose the Prince, who if he shall once
find one more Able or Useful than him, he will be either less valued, or at
least be held less necessary; and so being laid aside once or twice, in
employments that shall succeed in Other Hands, will at last fall into Contempt.

Wherefore it is an Old art of Courtiers, not to take unto themselves any
Companions, but such as in Virtue and Prudence they shall much excel, to the
end, that in comparison of these, their own Luster may so much the more Appear,
and that the Prince being surrounded with such as these, may not easily know
where to find one, whom he may either Prefer or Oppose unto the Introducer of
these. Moreover, these Grosser Souls, as often as he has need of them, to whom
they do now their Present, and may owe their Future advancement, are easy and
obn^xious to be Debauched by him, and ready for Corruption, which he cannot
easily expect from one that is his Equal in Condition, or in Parts, and who
stands upon his own legs. These are the several kinds of Humane Inclinations,
whereunto Princes are no less Subject than other Men, inclining now to This,
and then to That side, according to the prevalence of This or That, Temperature
in Them.

CHAP. II.
That Age, Business, Custom, and Sickness, alter the Temper of the Bodies and
Constitution of the Minds of Princes.

NOtwithstanding that for the most part things are thus, yet these Rules are
not Infallible and without Exception; for Age, Custom, and Business, alter the
Temper of the Bodies; yea, and the Inclinations and Actions of Princes. In the
time of War, the Prince cherishes Military Men, but Peace being returned into
his Kingdom, the Authority and Interest of these Men does soon wax Old; and
then, if the Prince inclines to Pleasure, or any other Affection, he will be
apt to save those that can Serve, or Further him in it.

See what Tacitus Writes of Tiberius, Annal. 6. He changed his Manners
strangely with the Times, whilst he was a Private Man, and under Augustus his
Government, both his Life and Manners were of good repute; as long as
Germanicus and Drusus lived, he was Close and Crafty in counterfeiting Virtue,
as long as his Mother was alive, he kept a mean betwixt Virtue and Vice: For
Cruelty he was Infamous; but for his Lusts, as long as he either Loved or
Feared Sejanus, Secret. But in the end, he burst out into all Wickedness and
Dishonesty, and casting away both Fear and Shame, he suffered himself to be
carried wholly by his vicious Inclinations.

Of Caligula, this judgment of Passtenus is very notable; There was never a
better Servant, nor a worse Master. It is almost incredible, what variety of
Dispositions were found in Marius and Sylla; so that Plutarch doubts, whether
Fortune wrought this Change in their Natures, or only brought to light what
before of wickedness lay concealed in them. In which case, if I should speak my
opinion, I would declare, I thought they did not change their Natures; but
only pull off those Masks, that fear, and a narrow Fortune had Muffled them
withal. Just as Leontius said of Zeno, That a Serpent frozen with Cold, hurts
not; but Warmed by the fire, thrusts forth his sting.

Tryphon, as Josephus witnesses, whilst he led a Private Life, to win upon the
People, did Personate a Good Man; but being made a King, he threw off his
Disguises, and quickly let them see, that all that Virtue which appeared in
him, was Forced and Counterfeit: And that of Agamemnon is not much unlike, if
what Euripides Writes of him be true; he was Modest, Affable, and Easy of
Access, before he was chosen Generalissimo of the Greeks. But after that
Election, he became an Enemy to his Friends, and Inaccessible to All, in
keeping himself shut up, whereby he became so distastful, that the Precept the
Poet gives upon this occasion, is worth Recording.

Those Men are wise, that great advancement gain, And still their ancient
modesty retain.

An excellent Sentence, but observed by few. Pollio truly seemed to follow it,
if we may believe Seneca. Afterward (says he) being promoted to the Highest
Degrees of Honor he never was corrupted by any occasion, or deviated a whit
from his former Modesty, Temperance, and civility: he was never pust up with
Prosperity, nor with the variety of Business was he so disordered, as that any
one could surprise him in a humor derogating from the Reputation he had gained
before.

For truly, the Defects and Blemishes of Princes and Courtiers, proceed, for
the most part, out of Pride, the inseparable Handmaid of Greatness. This is
that makes them Despise other Men's Counsels, being vainly persuaded, that they
do excel other Men, as much in Prudence, as they do in Power. And some are so
carried away with this Stream, that they think it below them to keep within the
limits of Law or Reason; believing they cannot be Princes, to whom all things
are not lawful, they have a mind unto, according to that of the Poet.

Virtue, Truth, Faith, such private things as these,
Are not for Kings, they must do what they please.
But if these kind of opinions did only corrupt the weakest, and worst of
Princes, I should wonder the less; but I see the minds of the Best Men to be
Blinded also with the withcraft of Power and Rule. No Man ever yet Exceeded the
Seven Sages of Greece, in giving Precepts of Modesty; nor ever were there worse
Tyrants, than such of them as came to Government. Appianus being to speak of
Aristo, reckoned up not a few that bore the name of Philosophers, that had
played the Tyrants at Athens; naming also some of the very Pythagoreans, who
being called to Government in Italy, did Exceedingly abuse their Power; which
makes me doubt much, whether most of those Philosophers, who so Proudly Contemn
Honors and Dignity, do it in good Earnest, or not rather for a Cloak and Cover
to their Small Deserts, their poverty and idleness. Surely, if we will believe
Aristophanes, they did not live so Frugally and Nearly, so much out of Virtue,
as Necessity; and would not refuse to feast plentifully, when ever they were
invited.

CHAP. XII.
How much Impostors are Able to Do by Flattering Princes; and How a Prince is
to Beware of Them.

THere are oftentimes Impostors, who with Flatteries, and hidden Sly
Suggestions, Creep into the Prince's Bosom, and Corrupt their Nature. To these
kind of Men, does Tacitus impute the Pride and Cruelty of Vitellius. Vespasian,
who was of a Gentle Nature, learnt from these people to Oppress his Subjects
with heavy Tributes, as the same Tacitus affirms: In short, it is certain, that
many who have used the Service of these kind of Men, have sadly degenerated.
These Impostors seek Favor unto themselves, by showing the Prince ways to
Greatness, Power, and Profit; who by so much the more willingly does hearken to
Them, by how much the less he understands himself. He poor Man, not reflecting,
nor observing that these Men praise and sooth him; to the end, they may at last
Betray him to Contempt, and Expose him to the Hatred of his People. And truly,
to humor and comply with the Cruelty, Covetousness, and Lust of a Prince, is of
all others, the securest way to betray him, for he cannot condemn the Traitor,
without discovering his own Guilt and Vices.

The Franconians, by the help of Aegidius, at that time governing in Gaul for
the Romans, had Expelled Clodius Comatus out of his Kingdom, whom one of his
Friends desiring to see Restored, goes over to Aegidius, and Fostered, upon all
occasions, as much as in him lay, the Avarice and Cruelty of the Man, which was
but too notorious before; whence the Injuries of this Roman growing
Insufferable, the Franconians begin to wish for their King again, and at last
Recall him to his Kingdom. Thus this honest Franconian made good use of his
Flattery, and by feeding him in his own Vices, betrayed his Masters enemies.
Sejanus, who gaped after the Roman Empire, (see what arts he used,) after he
saw that Tiberius, who by his instinct had Imprisoned Agrippina, and her
Children, grew weary of the City; spurred that inclination on, hoping, that when
the Prince was once retired, the Trust and Government of the Empire should be
cast upon him, as indeed it came to pass; so that for a time, Tiberius was
only Lord of a little Island, and Sejanus Emperor. Perrennius also thirsting
after the Empire, first circumvented and made away all those that stood in his
Light, under pretense of a Conspiracy, that Lucilla had contrived against
Commodus; and then Intices the Emperor to Pleasures, whereby he himself might
come to the managing of all things, and at last attain unto the Empire.

The same way took Bardas, Uncle to Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, who
having taken away Theoctistus, his Associate, and Tutor to the young Prince,
contrived also his Mother's Banishment; persuading Michael to take the
Government into his own hands; whose young years incapable of Rule, he soon
Diverted to Delights, and Pleasure; so as he gave himself wholly to these
Entertainments, and intended nothing else: Bardas, in the mean time, fishes
eagerly after the love of the People, and to that end, converses with Good and
Learned Men, restored Learning in the City, and made many good Laws; by which
means he would doubtless have Stepped at last into the Imperial Throne, if
another had not prevented him. I do not bring these examples, that I may teach
how Princes are to be Circumvented, but that I would have Princes themselves
learn hence, what Prudence and Caution is necessary for them to Discern, and
Distinguish the Counsels of their Ministers; and chiefly, that they may beware
of those who are apt to sooth them in, and applaud their Lusts and Vices; and
learn to think well of such, as will sometimes Modestly adventure to express
their dislikes of their Excesses.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Familiars and Servants of the Prince, and the ways to win them.

HAving considered all things, that our Courtier was to observe in the Prince
himself, let us come to his Servants, who, by reason of the Offices they bear,
are continually about his Person, and may be useful to those that pretend at
Court, either by procuring them Extraordinary Accesses, or by making Seasonable
mention of them, or by instructing them of the Ways, Times, and Occasions of
doing their Business. There are many Princes, who being Private, put on a quite
other face, than that they bear in Public; and who more willingly do Trust and
Disclose their thoughts, to such of their Servants, as they think faithful to
them, esteeming the Lowness of their condition incapable of Treachery, or
Wicked Practices: Who does not know, that Claudius was governed by his
Freedmen, one of which, called Pallas, he had so enriched, That upon a time
complaining of Poverty to some body, he was advised to get Pallas adopt him for
his Heir. By this Man's persuasion, Claudius Married Agrippina, after by the
help of Narcissus (a Freedman also) he had destroyed Messalina.

Who can be ignorant, that during the continuance of the Eastern Empire, the
Eunuchs many times Governed all? if that had not been so, it had been
impossible for Arbetio, the Chief Ruler of the Empire, to have escaped with
life, when Verissimus accused him. Borilus and Germanus, two slaves, by the
absolute Authority they had with Botoniates, one of the Emperors, made him an
enemy to Isacius, and Alexius Comnenis.

Yet let us suppose, That the Prince does not impart his Counsels to these Men,
they are more easily Pryed into by these, than any others: for it cannot be,
that Princes always wear their Masks in private, oftentimes the Throng, and a
Public life, makes him suppress and hide those Affections, which when he is at
liberty, and in private, do break out. Wherefore, I conclude it is very
necessary in Courts, To think all kind of Men, even the meanest, useful unto
you. And we must believe for certain, That together with their Authority and
Fortune, their Prudence and Discretion, will grow up; which Arrian demonstrates
to Epictetus in Epaphroditus, and his two slaves; The one of which coming to
wait upon the Emperor at his Stool, and the other to have the charge of his
Shoes; Epaphroditus himself, who had sold them not long before as unuseful,
sought now their Favor, and praised their Prudence.

Fortune has never scarce been so favorable to any one in Court, as not to
afford him as many Enemies as Friends; neither has it ever yet cast any Man so
low there, as that he was neither able to Hurt, nor Help another: Whence it
was, that in the time of Tiberius, as Tacitus says, It was a great honor to be
known to Sejanus his Doorkeepers. It will therefore be a Wise Man's part, by
all Becoming ways, to endear the Servants of the Prince, whatever their
Condition be.

CHAP. XIV.
Four Kinds of Noble Courtiers: How to be Handled, and made use of; how Warily
we ought to Deal with Inconstant Princes.

FRom the Prince's Servarts, we come to the Nobles of the Court, which are of
sundry kinds: There are some Illustrious for their Birth, but Destitute of the
Prince's Favor; others in Favor with the Prince, but not Laden with Honors; a
third Sort, that have Honors and Offices, far exceeding their Interest and
Favor; and lastly; Those who flourish both in Favor, and great Employments.
The Friendship of the first of these, will perhaps avail our Courtier very
little, who are nevertheless to be Honored and Respected, according to their
Quality; least, though they cannot hurt you themselves, by their Friends and
Followers, they should do it: For in such Trains of Dependencies and Followers,
great Families are often very powerful, either by reason of Old Benefits, or
reverence to their greatness; or lastly, (since Princes minds are mutable) out
of respect to the Fortune and Favor these Great Men may yet chance to come
into; with this, or the succeeding Prince.

Archelaus, King of Cappadocia, to his great disadvantage, did neglect to Honor
and Court Tiberius, when he came to Rhodes; for Tiberius afterward meditating
Revenge, but pretending another Cause, called him to Rome, where he Perished
miserably: Which Respect nevertheless the Historian says, He omitted not out of
Pride, but for that he was warned by some of Augustus his Favorites, That
whilst Caius Caesar flourished and was sent into the East, the Friendship of
Tiberius seemed unsafe. We must look therefore upon these Great Men of Fortune,
though not able to deserve well of us, yet powerful enough to Hurt us: And
though they be unacceptable and suspected by the Prince, we must yet Reverence
them, to avoid the Blame of others, and their Emnity.

If it chance, that the Prince will oppose you to one of these Great Ones, as
it is usual with Princes to do; as you must not Refuse the Task, so you must
with great Art, Dexterity, and Choice of Occasions, undertake it; taking care
that you may both Satisfy the Prince, and justify your endeavors to other
men: It is an enterprize-full of Danger, but if at the Prince's instance, it be
taken in hand, it is the way to rise.

Yet after you are once engaged in one of these Brigues, there are the choice
of two ways to be taken, according to the nature of the Prince you act for, the
Persons you have to do with and the Times you are in: Some men act all these
things in their own name so boldly, and with so High a hand, That all kind of
men, except those that are Great indeed, strike easily Sail unto them for fear
of offending the Prince; who approves (as they believe) all these men Say or
Do. There are others yet, that take another course more safe and sweet, by
continually Waiting upon the Prince, their Interest, in whom they will make no
show of, but upon the Best Opportunities; neither will they take any occasion
for these Contentions, but such as with Great Choice they have Selected, as
both likely to Succeed; and having took effect, to redound much to the
Advantage of the Prince and Public.

For you must take great heed you undertake nothing you cannot go through with;
for besides that, the Common People judge of all things by the Event, believing
still, that Justice and Prudence, are on the side that Fortune is; by Ill
successes, you will soon diminish the Esteem and Favor, you have with the
Prince. For he to take away the Disgrace received, and by reason, That he fears
either to be Despised of his Subjects or Contemned by his Enemies, whom he has
opposed in vain, will be compelled to remove his Favor from, and Abandon you.

Beware, that when I speak of your contention with these Great Persons, that
you understand not, that I wish you to intermeddle, when you see it cannot be
done with Tumult, or that you should provoke them with Contumelies and
Reproaches, for that becomes only a Base Soul, whose judgment is Corrupted by
Fortune: The end of which kind of men is seldom happy; as is to be observed in
Piso, whom Tiberius sent into Syria, to Cross the Hopes and Designs of
Germanicus; against whom he carried himself so Insolently, that when Prince
Germanicus was dead, Caesar was compelled to Sacrifice and abandon Piso to the
public Hate.

When I advise you to oppose these Great Men, it is in Cases only, wherein
they are to do something that is unjust, or against the Public good, or
Religion, or that is prejudicial to the Government of the Army, or the
Treasures of the Kingdom: In which occasions, you must so comport your self
with Prudence and Modesty, that all others that are Concerned, and all Honest
men may perceive, that what you do, proceeds not out of any private Enmity, but
only from your zeal to the Public good. If you demand an example to imitate,
behold Cardinal Ximenes, chosen by Isabella, Queen of Castile, on purpose to
Tug with those Grandees, that were not so subject to the King's pleasure, as
they are now: Of a Franciscan Friar, he was first made the Queen's Confessor,
afterward by the advice of Cardinal Mendoza, Archbishop of Toledo and
Inquisitor General of Spain; which Offices he bore with great Authority, being
there during the whole Reign of Isabella, and Ferdinand, and was even to the
time of Charles the Fifth, the sole Arbiter and Moderator of all Affairs; ever
contending with the Great Ones, but so discreetly, That he always held both the
Prince and People fast unto him.

It is reported that he was Poisoned, and he himself suspected it, but the fact
could never be proved. Wherefore it is better to attribute so Late a Death as
his (for he was very old) to Age and Nature; and not without reason, since he
preserved his Fortune and Authority (both which he owed principally to his own
industry) Entire unto his End. Chico Simoneta had not so good success, who
whilst Francis Sfortia ruled in Milan, was called to the helm of Business, and
afterward chosen by young Galeaeius's Mother, by reason of his known fidelity
and experience in Public Affairs, to contend with his Master's Brethren. He to
preserve the Dukedom for Galeacious, banished Galeacius's Brothers, and Robert
de St. Severin out of Milan, with how much envy you may imagine: Yet see how
wickedly he was afterward deserted, for the Widow, Galeacius his Mother,
reconciling her self with her Adversaries, sacrificed Simoneta to their new
friendship; by whom being cast into Prison, and there Flayed alive, he died
miserably. Learn hence, how Warily we must trust Princes, of whose Steadiness
we are not assured; for often upon a light occasion, they are wont to
Prostitute their Servants to the will of their Enemies.

CHAP. XV.
The Three other kinds of Noble Courtiers; How they are to be Dealt with.

THere are a second kind of Noble Courtiers (as I said before) who are in
Favor with the Prince, and yet not very eminent in any Dignity or Employment.
These though they can Contribute nothing else unto us, may make our Way unto
the King, Seasonable and Easy, besides they may be useful in Calling to mind
our Deserts, or if occasion require, in Excusing our Errors; protecting us also
from the Calumny and Detractions of our Enemies; by which means, if they be
really our Friends, they may serve us Highly; as on the contrary side, if they
be our Foes; they may Prejudice us exceedingly: Wherefore we must seek the
Friendship of these Men, by all means, that are not Unworthy our condition; and
we must consider, that they seldom stay any long time about a Prince, unexalted
to Honor: Nay, suppose that for some reason or other, they be not Advanced,
yet by their Help and Commendations, they do Advance their Friends, and lift
them up above others, though either Equal or Superior to them in Desert.

The third sort of Nobles, are those who are in great Offices of Authority, and
have a great share in public Business, and yet have little interest in the
Prince's Favor. And these kind of men are chiefly found about such Princes,
who live quietly, attending to their Pleasures, mindless of Public Business,
which they commit wholly to one or two of their Tried Servants, abhorring the
Trouble that is attending it themselves. In such a Court as this, we must
rather seek the Favor of these Ministers, than of the Prince himself; who
since he trusts them with the Administration of his Affairs, leaves also the
choice of his Officers to these men, being himself unfit to choose Men for
Duties, which he knows nothing what belongs unto.

There are other Princes more Jealous of their Majesty, and Sparing in their
Power; who though they entrust one or two with their Affairs, do seldom or
never admit those men to their Presence or Conversation, but when they are to
treat of Weighty Business; and do not leave the Disposal of places to them, for
fear that by the multitude of Creatures and Dependants, their Power should
Swell to that height, that it cannot be Abated, if they Transgress. Wary
Princes are wont to keep their Ministers in awe, and make them believe, That
they can in a Moment cast them from all their Authority, and divest them of all
that Power, that with the Services and Labors of many years, they have been
Acquiring toward Such persons as these; whose power is thus circumscribed, you
will have a Hard Task, how to Demean your self. Their Friendship can Avail you
little, nay perhaps if the Prince observe it, it will do you Hurt. Again, if
they Stand in your Light, you will hardly come to the Management of Affairs,
and yet you must of necessity run the hazard of Clashing oftentimes with them.
Wherefore, a most circumspect Gentleness of Nature will here be needful, for
you must render them all the Duties of Respect, and as occasion presents it
self (yet warily) express the Inward Devotion of your mind unto them. But in
the mean while, without openly Seeking to, or Relying upon the Patronage of any
other, you must your self, work out your way unto the Prince's person, and his
Favor.

There remains now unspoke of only the last kind of Noblemen, who are, in
short, The Favorites, as being both Highly in the Prince's Favor, and Great in
the Administration of Affairs: Which kind of Men, are to be honored with a
Respect almost Equal to the Prince himself. Their Wills and Inclinations are to
be Pryed into, as being more necessary to be Known and Executed, than the
Prince's own. Here you see what you may expect, or hope for, from the Authority
and Patronage of the Peers, and Grandees of the Court; and how you may use each
of them in his several Degree and Kind.

Truly we must carefully take heed, that we ask nothing of either the Prince,
or any of all these that is Impossible, or cannot be Effected without great
Absurdity; For nothing is more troublesome to Humane Nature, than not to be
Able to fulfill the Requests of those we love; and surely, the Friendliest and
Gentlest Dispositions that are, will be offended with an Uncivil and
Unreasonable Suit. Know moreover, that he from whom you have received such a
Repulse, is not pleased with Seeing you again, for fear lest with the Impudence
of a like Request, you should make him Ashamed; and also, lest he should seem
to want Authority, or Means to Perform what you desire. But you must note by
the way, that Access unto the Great Ones, is not suddenly obtained, we must by
degrees also gain That; and to this end, All that have any Interest in Them,
whether they be Strangers or Domestics, and the Dependants of these (according
to their usefulness) are to be won unto you.

CHAP. XVI.
The Meaner sort of Courtiers, How they are to be Handled; as also such as are
Enemies to us, for the sake of others, to whom we Relate.

THere are yet in Courts below these Great Ones, others of a Lower stage; some
of which are our Betters, others our Equals, and some perhaps our Inferiors;
all which, since we are to make use of, we will divide into Two Kinds: The
first, of those that may help and Advantage us; the Second, of those that are
likely, or able to Hurt us. The Interest and Power of both of them, is
diligently to be weighed, to the end, we may gather what Help or Impediment we
are to expect from them. We must consider also, their Friendships and
Alliances, to the end, that if necessity press us to seek their Votes for the
promotion of our Designs, if they Themselves are through Envy or any such
respect, backward or Averse unto us, we may work upon them by their Friends and
Dependants: But we must be sure to take heed, that we do not then begin to seek
their Friendship, when we have apparent need of them, or their Assistance; we
ought to have it prepared long before, and assured unto us by the Pledges of a
long professed Kindness, and Good will. Let this suffice for the first Sort,
(to wit, of those that may help us) for every man's Industry will prompt him,
How to insinuate with such, as he finds may be useful unto him.

Of the Second Sort (to wit) those that may Hurt us, there are Three Kinds;
either those that are our Enemies, or those that Envy us, or lastly, those that
are our Competitors. Those I call Enemies that hate us for our Own, or our
Friends Sake; but this latter kind of Hatred, is not for the most part so
inveterate and sharp as the first; and it may be Mitigated much by our
Civilities and Professing, That we can Love our Friends, notwithstanding our
Relations to their Enemies: Yet the Friendships of the Court are for the most
part Factious and cruel; compelling us to break off all Friendship and
Familiarities that may bring us into suspicion: For which reason, many
Publicly pretending a friendship to one, have notwithstanding complied
Underhand, and kept fair quarter with the Adverse Party; not out of design to
betray their Friend, but to the end, if he should chance to fall, they may find
a Refuge and Support. And truly, this care of our preservation may be sometimes
Blameless, but all kind of Treachery is unworthy an Honest Man.

This kind of Prudence has not only been practiced in the Brigues of the
Court, but in Kingdoms also, and that very Fortunately. Syenneses, President of
Tharsus, when the War broke out between Cyrus and Artaxerxes, Fearing to Resist
Cyrus, took his Part in Person, and sent his Son to Artaxerxes, to the end,
that if Cyrus were vanquished, he might be a Refuge to his Father. Bardus Durus
escaping out of the hands of the Saracens, where he was Prisoner; seeing Phocas
created Emperor against Basilius, applied himself to gain the Friendship of
Phocas, hitherto his Enemy, and followed him; but caused his Son, with a
contrived Flight, to take part with Basilius, to the end, that if Phocas were
vanquished, he might Intercede for his Father, as it afterward fell out. Solon
made a Law, That in case of a civil discord in the Commonwealth, none should
be permitted to stand neuter; not intending, I believe, that Friends taking
several sides, should break off their private Friendships, but rather hoping
that Friends being severally engaged, could not but labor for the Public
Peace, by so much the more Eagerly, and with more Success.

After this manner, in Court, a Man, tho of a different Faction, may yet
Discreetly, and without prejudice to Integrity, retain his Friendship with a
Man of another Party; to the end, That he may both have a Retreat in the change
of Fortune, and that if their Animosities should begin to Assuage, he may be a
fit Instrument of Reconciliation between the Factions: Which is the safest and
most commendable way amongst the Strifes and Discords of Great Men; and the
means of gaining at last the Favor of both the Contending Parties.

CHAP. XVII.
How we are to Treat with those Enemies that Hate us for our Own Sakes; Also
Concerning Threats and Injuries.

THose who Hate us for our Own sakes, do so either, because we have Offended
Them, or else (as it is frequent from Great Men toward their Inferiors)
because They have Injured Us; and the Italian Proverb says, He that Offends,
never Forgives. It is a custom amongst Minds, Puffed up with a prosperous
Fortune, to Hate Those themselves have Wronged. The Injuries that, These Kind
of Men do us, are best Remedied in our seeming not to Understand them: but if
it chance, that the greatness of the Wrong, do wrest out of us some Testimony
of our sense of the Injury Received, we must quickly after our grief is over,
Seem to have Lost the Memory of All; otherwise if they see us still Impatiently
suffer it, fearing our Revenge, they will seek to Prevent us with a greater
Mischief.

Chiefly we must beware of Threats, if we be not Ready, and sure to Execute
them; for Threats do both Warn our adversary to Beware, and Provoke his Hatred
to Double our Injuries; affording us nothing but Shame, in seeming to Breath
Revenge; but to be Destitute of Power. I know this kind of Moderation will not
be approved by all kind of men, especially such as are Greedy after Vengeance;
who think no Injury is to be passed over without Resentment, not only by reason
of the Sweetness that is found in Revenge; but also, because they say by
suffering one Injury, you invite another; wherefore we must Persecute those
that offend us with an Immortal Hate: But these men whilst they desire to
Render themselves Formidable, do effect nothing else but make all men fly
their Company. For since we Mortals are Creatures prone to Falls, and Slips,
and are carried away sometimes with Affection, and at other times with Passion;
and in consideration, every one for Fear of Offending, will fly from these
kind of Malignant, Rash, and Revengeful persons; and as Wild beasts leave them
to their own Solitude. Since, if any one Offends one of them, he must expect
all that Rage and Malice can afford at his hands. Lastly if any one Provoke one
of the Malicious Hot-spurs, he expecting a Severe Resentment, and fearing a
Home Revenge, will strive to be Aforehand-with him.

For this Reason therefore, for the avoiding all these Evils, I think the
contrary way is to be chosen, and Gentleness to be Preferred which truly, in
the Greatest Injuries is not hard to be Personated, when we consider the
Reasons and Consequences of a Passionate Resentment, and the Condition of the
persons from whom we receive them. In Lighter Injuries, that we see arise
rather out of Passion, than Malice or Design, we ought to be so little offended
with them, that it may not be perceived we are Sensible of them. If the Injury
is Great and Foul, we must not show our selves wholly careless of our Esteem
and Reputation; yet without seeming too Implacable toward them that provoked
us, as they may have Reason to think there is no Hope of a Reconcilement, or
place for Pardon upon any Reasonable Satisfaction left them. And therefore it
will be pertinent in this case to Complain unto his Friends that has injured
us, of our Wrongs, and to make them judge of our Difference.

Injuries that are offered in a Petulant Insulting Humor, I think ought to be
presently vindicated, not so much out of a Desire of Revenge, as for the
Chastisement of him that did them; and to Teach him how to Demean Himself more
Modestly hereafter, as well toward Others, as Our Selves. But these Injuries
also are not to be Prosecuted with an Inveterate Hatred, nay, we ought to
declare, that the Necessity of Complaint, and seeking Revenge is Put upon us,
and that we are ready to be friends after a Satisfaction given us, that is any
way Compatible with the Injury we received. And if so be they give any Secret
Testimonies of Regret, or seek in the least manner unto us, we must Return into
Favor with them, and by way of Amends, let this suffice instead of a
Submission, That they profess, They cannot want your Friendship.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Injuries of the More and Less Powerful, How to be Avoided, and Managed;
the the several Artifices of Reconciliation.

BEcause these kinds of Injuries are done, for the most part, by Those that are
much More Powerful than Our selves, and who have some way or other, great
advantage of us: The First way to avoid them, is to Treat These kind of men
Respectfully, and to Avoid all Freedoms as much as may be with Them: Or if they
be very Cross and Unruly, to Fly their Conversation altogether. This saying of
Martial is in this case very notable.

Would thou avoid what may Displease?
Or seek'st thou for Content and Ease?
With no man be thou over Free;
As joys, so Griefs will Fewer be.
The Second Way will be, as I said more than once before, to seem. Insensible
of the Wrong; for it is neither Safe nor Prudent for us, to strive too much
with One that is too Powerful for us; and the Inequality, of our Forces, will
be a just pretense to excuse our Dissimulation. I know there are some that are
persuaded, That if we can but Eright our Adversaries, they would soon seek unto
us, and desire to be Reconciled; and I do not deny that there are some Sly
Dispositions that will Descend to do so; but believe me, it is always a
Dangerous. Unsound, and Faint Reconciliation: And these will seldom or never
omit (if an occasion of Injury Present it self) to give way to their
Disposition; which is by so much the more Revengeful, by how much their
Dissembling was the Tamer; besides, a Private Enemy is harder to be taken heed
of, than one that is Publicly so. It is better to have such as these, our
Professed Enemies, than out of Fear, our Reconciled friends; yet I mean Those
who are not Greater than our selves, nor whose Friendship being lost, can Hurt
us notably.

For if we have to do with one that is much Superior to us, and whose Enmities
will stand in our Light, it is better to have a Feigned Friendship, than open
Enmity with him; though he Offer us the Wrong, yet we must endeavor by the
Mediation of Friends to appease him, as if We had done the Injury. To discern
who is most able and likely to Prejudice us, we must consider not only their
Power, but also the nature of their Malice toward us; for some have a Desire
of Revenge, like a handmaid, always waiting upon their Hate; others a Fear,
lest that having got what we Aspire unto, we should be more able to hurt them.
Though the sting of this Revenge is very sharp, yet the Fear I mentioned, is
the most violent and frequent cause of our Court Oppressions, and far the most
unavoidable. The first may be mitigated with the satisfaction of a Continued
Duty and Respect; but you shall hardly ever persuade Fear, to put on the
Confidence of Friendship, and Good will again; yet we must seek by all means
possible to effect it: and Occasion will better instruct us How to do it, than
any Rule can.

Agesilaus desiring to become friends with those that he had Offended, did put
them into Great Offices and Employments, which whilst they Ill Administered,
bringing Envy (as is usual) upon them; being Accused, they were Compelled to
have recourse unto the Prince; who delivering them from the Danger and Infamy,
won them by the benefit, to be afterward Sincerely and Heartily his Friends.
It is an ordinary thing in Courts to Supplant one Secretly, to the end that
being supported by your Favor, he may become your Creature. It is no less
frequent as Eutrapelus Craftily practiced in Horace, to lend those men money to
feed their Lusts and Vanities, whom we desire to Ruin. So it proves, that for
the most part, they who applaud us in our Pleasures, our humors, and Expenses,
and exhort us to undertake things that are Unreasonable, and above our
strength, do seek our Destruction.

But let us now return unto the ways of Renewing our Friendships with our
Enemies. Amongst all which, it is none of the worst to Help both with your
Counsel and Assistance, the Desires and Endeavors of your Enemy, in such
things as you see by Succeeding will nothing Hinder, nor Prejudice you; to the
end, he may seem to owe you his Love, for your Benefits. In this manner
Cardinal Ascanius Sforza observing, That in vain he opposed himself to the
practices of Julian the Cardinal, who labored to advance John, the Nephew of
Alexander the Sixth, to that Dignity; did so eagerly move in the business for
John, that it succeeding, he got the start of Julian in his Friendship. If the
stubbornness of our Enemy be such, as that all our Endeavors for a
Reconciliation are fruitless; we must at last look out, if there be any body
else that he hates or fears more than he does us, and let us fain this man (if
the circumstances will bear it) to be a Competitor to us, and him; to the end,
That his Hate toward the other prevailing, may induce him either to Favor, or
less Oppose us in our Designs.

An Artifice not much unlike to this, was that which Gerlachus Achbishop and
Elector of M^ntz used, when he intended to create Adolphus of Nassau, his
Kinsman, Emperor: He knew that those Princes that stood for the Empire, (for
which a Governor was now a choosing) were Divided amongst themselves; which
Discords and Factions, he to make use of, dealt thus with the Electors
severally apart. He tells Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, That the Votes of the
Electors, for the most part, would favor Albert, Duke of Austria, Wenceslaus
his Enemy: But if he were certain of Wenceslaus his concurrence, he was ready
to hinder it. Having thus won Wenceslaus, he sets upon the Duke of Saxony, and
tells him, that his Enemy Brunswick was like to carry it; and then assures the
Palatine, That Wenceslaus (at that time Hated by him) unless prevented, was
like to Defeat them all. So promising to oppose every man's Enemies, he
Circumvented them all; making by that means, his Kinsman Emperor, who if he
had been first Propounded, had without doubt been rejected by the Common
Consent of all.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Envy, How it is to be Overcome.

NOw I must say something of Envy, which is so great an evil, that we have need
of a Strange Felicity, and Fortitude to overcome it; which is not to be
Satiated with any thing, but the Participation of that which it Envies in
another; for every one eager after its own advantage, desires to toil in
nothing but that, whence if not the Whole, at least a Great share of the Honor,
and Emolument will redound unto Himself. Yet although, I confess, it be very
hard, yet this Envy is nevertheless with Industry and Prudence, to be Mastered;
and that not only by this means alone, of sharing with them, That very Thing
we seek for: For sometimes it will suffice to persuade them that Envy us, That
the thing they desire, if it chance to light upon us, will turn much to their
Honor and Profit. To which end we must Court them with Friendship and
Familiarity; and though their Envy to us be very Palpable, yet must we express
on our parts great Inclinations and Affections toward them; professing, that
we wish nothing more, than that their desires should succeed, and that we
desire this very thing that we now pursue, for no other end so much, as that we
may become capable to serve our friends, and principally themselves. In short
we must act our part so, as from the Augmentation of our Fortune, they may
conceive hope of Advancement to their own.

By those that desire to be Free from Envy, all Pride, Over-sumptuous manner of
Living, unseasonable Feasts, and Boasting, is Sedulously to be avoided;
especially, by those who have risen from a mean Condition; unless the Pleasure
of the Prince, or the Dignity of their Office, require it otherwise; for then a
Becoming Magnificence will not be unfit, provided, That in these Expenses, he
lets the world see, he does rather comply with the Pleasure of the Prince, Then
follow his own Inclination. With this kind of Modesty and Prudence, the
beginnings of Cardinal Ximenes were very Fortunate, and Notable; for he was
born of so Mean a Parentage, that it was doubtful whether he were a Gentleman,
or no; although his Prosperous Fortune found those afterward, that would
undertake to prove his Nobility. This Ximenes whilst the world went hard with
him, became in his youth a Friar, whence soon after for his Singular
Endowments, he was by the commendation of Cardinal Mendoza, made Confessor to
Isabella, Queen of Castile, and not long after Archbishop of Toledo, (as I said
once before) which Archbishopric upon Mendoza's death, Queen Isabella having
obtained of the Pope for Ximenes; he finding himself too Weak for the Envy it
would draw upon him, refused to accept it; and was so Stiff in his Refusal,
that he scarce suffered himself to be won to the acceptance of it, by all the
Nobles of the Court, who one by one, at the Queen's direction, pressed him to
Embrace it: And having Accepted of it, he was fain to be so entreated over
again, before he could be persuaded to live in a Condition and Splendor equal
to his Dignity; nay, after that, he was Personally so Observant of his former
manner of life, in this great Fortune, that no way else, but by the Pope's
Express Command, could he be induced to change it.

This Modesty succeeded so well with him, that hereby he Appeased and Avoided
that Great Envy, which must otherwise of Necessity have Oppressed him, being
the Possessor of a Dignity Gaped after, by all the Grandees of Spain, and of
Revenue scarce inferior to those of the Crown.

But yet as this manner of Proceeding is in the Best of our Fortunes, an
Antidote against Envy, so it little avails those who have once already carried
themselves Insolently and Proudly; for the Moderation of these men is still
looked upon as Counterfeit: Of which thing, the Constantinopolitan History
affords us an example in a Metropolitan, called Constantine; who being banished
from the Courts, both of Isacius Angelus, and Alexius, the Emperors, returned
afterward with the Empress Euphrosine; pretending a great aversion from
Business, and a Courtiers life, to the end, he might be the more Credited, and
sought unto the more eagerly, he took orders upon him: In short, he carried his
business so craftily, That the Emperor himself causing him to be Absolved from
the Oath of Priesthood, called him to Court, and trusted him with the
management of his Greatest Affairs: Who presently, not content with his own
Advancement, introduced his two Brothers to wait upon the Emperor; and as it
were, to stand Sentinels for him, if at any time his business called him away:
But because his former Prosperity had discovered the Insolence of his Nature,
every body Feared him still, although he now made show of Great Temper and
Moderation, which was the cause that he was again Supplanted and removed from
Court, without ever being Restored more.

CHAP. XX.
Of Emulation, the Sister of Envy, and the Remedies of it.

THe same Remedies that are good against Envy, prevail also against Emulation,
which has Less Malignity in it truly, than Envy has; but more of Ambition,
and the Treachery of Self-concernments. But these Competitors of ours, are to
be Stroked with a a certain Specious Respect, and Ceremonious Veneration, which
will Powerfully divert these kind of humors; especially, if we Feed their Hopes
with Higher Things than those We aim at, and seem to Contribute our Votes and
Assistance to them; on the other side, Vilifying that which we seek for, as
Below them to stoop unto, and fitter for Our selves; whose Merits as they are
Less, so our Pretenses ought not to be so High. If we fear that they will smell
our Drift, we are to hold them in Suspense, and seem to Discourse the Case with
Arguments on both sides; yet giving the Greatest Weight to those which we
intend should Divert their Ambitions. But the surest and best course of all, is
to Conceal, if it be possible, what we Aim after, till it be out of the power
of our Enemies, or Competitors to hinder us.

A Too Great Eagerness in our Pretenses, is sometimes odious, even to those
that would if it were more modest, Contribute their Assistance to us; pulling
with it besides, other Greater inconveniences upon us, as if we succeed, More
Envy, and if we fail, a Greater Disgrace: It is much more safe, as I said even
now, to Hide our Designs, and as Rowers do, turn our Backs upon the place we
are going unto. Those that look, after the greatest Commands, have taken This
way; nothing has been more usual unto them, than after the example of
Agamemnon in Euripides, to express a greater desire of Rest and Retirement,
than of Honor or Employment. And many have found this a singular Remedy, to
divert the Wiles of those that would Oppose them, and to escape the Disgrace
which attends those Fierce Pretenders; nay they have had hereby the Glory, to
have often thought, That this Honor or Employment was cast upon them, merely
for their Merits, and not obtained by Begging or Bying of Voices, as it too
often falls out.

Last of all, in our Pretenses we must take heed, that we Clash with no Rival,
that is greater or more powerful in Friends and Dependants, than our selves. In
this case we must imitate Marcus Lepidus, a man in Tacitus his opinion, of
Great Wisdom; who being Drawn, as it were, into the Senate by Tiberius, to
stand with Junius Blaesus, Sejanus his Uncle, whether of them should be chosen
Proconsul of Africa, pretended presently against himself, Want of Health, the
Tender years of most of his Children, and the Marriage of a Daughter, that he
was to take care of; fearing doubtlesly to make Sejanus his Enemy, if he
carried away the Province from Blaesus. Neither must we obstinately contend
with him, whom some great man is about to Advance, although the Law favor us
against him; for without doubt, Favor weighs down the Law, as Tacitus
instances in Germanicus and Drusus, creating Haterius Agrippa Praetor,
notwithstanding the Express contradiction of a Law; But let the Historian speak
himself. There arose a dispute of substituting a Praetor in the place of
Vipsanius Gallus lately dead; Germanicus and Drusus favored Hateriut Agrippa
Germanicus his Kinsman; others on the contrary side did contend, That the
number of Children should carry it, according to the Law. Tiberius was glad to
see his Sons, and the Laws of the Senate, clash together; without doubt the Law
was overcome, but yet not easily, nor by many voices: By which means, when they
were in their greatest vigor, they were wont to be overborn.

CHAP. XXI.
How to avoid a Treatning Ruin, and When it is upon us, how to make the best
use of it: Example of the fall of Great men.

HIthetto we have observed the Principal Precepts that are to be observed by
our Courtier; if any want, every Rational man's (for such only we intend to
instruct) Prudence and Dexterity will supply it. Now because these kind of
Rules are no less necessary, for the Preserving our Greatness and Fortune in
the Court, than for the Gaining of it; it will not be impertinent to have by us
the examples of some of those that have Fallen from their Power and Greatness,
to the end, we may grow Wise by other men's Mischances; and learn, if not to
Avoid a Ruin, at least to Arm and Prepare our selves for it; for this Latter
is almost as necessary as the First, since the endeavors of those that seek to
escape their Approaching Misfortunes, are for the most part Vain; whilst he
that Prepares himself for it Long before, makes that Fall (which few or none of
them can Avoid that Fortune has lifted up on high) to be much More Gentle and
Easy, than otherwise it would.

These Falls happen unto us, either through our own Faults, through the Arts
and Contrivance of our Enemies, or through the Perverseness of the Prince's
Nature, or perhaps his Death. Since the lives of all men are obnoxious to
Faults, and full of Errors, and Failings, it is so especially with those that
are on High, who by reason of their Greatness, are out of the Lists of
Reprehension; all that are about them, being compelled to approve of Whatever
they Do, be it well or ill. Amongst all which Faults, the foulest they are
incident unto, is, A Treacherous Turning against their Prince, who is the
Author of their Dignity and Power: A crime marked out with the Blackest note of
an Ungrateful and Faithless Soul; and a most just subject of the Prince's Hate
and Indignation. All men that are in Authority ought to fly the very Shadow of
this Crime, and to the end of taking all ground of Suspicion from the Prince,
to decline those Honors and Places, that are opportune for such Attempts.

Paterculus esteems Sejanus to have been one of the wisest Courtiers that ever
was and truly it is likely, That He that flourished so long in the Favor of a
Prince, so Subtle and Diffident, as Tiberius was, did Comport himself with
great Modesty and Wariness. He was (says our Author) in appearance given to
ease; assuming nothing to himself, and by that means obtaining all things;
Crouching still willingly beneath the opinion of other men, and striving to
come behind them in repute; His countenance and his life, was Calm and Quiet,
although his Mind was Restless, and ever awake; yet Ambition at last
transported this Provident and Wary man so far, as to aspire to the Empire. To
which end, Drusus being dead, he married Livia his Widow, that so being linked
into the House of the Caesar's, he might more easily compass his Desire: And
although he perceived out of Tiberius his Tergiversations, when he demanded his
consent in the case, that it had drawn a Suspicion upon him; yet did he not
change his mind; but what he had failed of this way, he sought to compass
another.

He knew that Tiberius was grown weary of the City, whereupon he presently
Spurs him on, and persuades him to Retire to Caprea; read Tacitus, Annal. 4.
who says That lest he should either infringe his Power or weaken his Authority,
by debarring the Multitude from the Court, or minister matter of Slander, and
suspicion by Entertaining them, he took this Course: He persuaded Tiberius to
go live in some Pleasant place, far from Rome; foreseeing many conveniences in
it. First There could be no access to the Prince but through him; then, That
the Disposal of all Letters would be in his hands, since the Soldiers, by whom
they were to be Conveyed, would be at his Devotion; and lastly, That Caesar now
growing old and waxing Effeminate with the privacy of the place would easily
transfer the burden of Affairs, and Government upon him, and truly, his hopes
deceived him not, for in a short time, under Pretense of easing Tiberius his
age, he drew all the power of the Empire into his own hands.

Yet at last, the event showed, That this way of Sejanus, was both Perilous and
Tedious; to mention which more accurately seems worth my labor here, to the
end, That both Courtiers may be more Wary in governing their Fortune, and
Princes more Cautious in exal^ing their Minions. Tiberius did either love or
suffer patiently Sejanus, as long as he found his help useful to the Oppression
of Agrippina, and her Children, Nero, and Drusus; to which kind of Employments,
Sejanus showed himself very Ready, knowing, That thereby he should not only
win the Favor of the Prince, but also establish his own Power and Hopes; there
being none left of Caesar's House now, but two youths, whose tender Age, if
they should come to the Government, must needs leave the Authority, and
ordering of Affairs, to him; until he saw his opportunity of Usurping the
Empire it self.

But mark how Rash and Blind Ambition makes us; He did not see, that the nearer
he came to the Top, the more he became Suspected of this jealous Prince; who
now sought all means of Lessening, rather than Advancing him; that strove as
much on the other side to Climb still on; For though he wanted nothing, but the
Name of Emperor (which some did not stick to give him) and the Tribunes power
(which the Emperors never entrusted to any) yet was he not Content, but daily
Endeavored to Augment his Authority. By which course, as he rendered himself
Venerable to all others, so he made himself Formidable to Tiberius; For when he
saw that Sejanus had not only Won the Praetorian Guards, but also very many of
the Senators, and principal Families of Rome, by either Benefits or Hopes, or
Fears, unto himself; and likewise, That his Secrecies were by his own Servants
told unto Sejanus, and not Sejanus his to him again; he determined his
Destruction, as one that was become his Rival: But before he went about it, he
thought fit to Sound the Inclinations of those about him, to the end, That he
might know how to Choose out some that would like of his Design.

Lest that Sejanus should smell out any change in Caesar's affection toward
him, he makes him Consul, and calls him both Present and Absent in his Letters
to the Senate, and the People, his Friend, and Companion of his Labors. Lastly,
he feigns himself Sick, to discover thereby, the affections both of Sejanus,
and several others. Sometimes he Writes to the Senate of his Recovering
condition, and that he would shortly come to Town; sometimes Praising,
sometimes Blaming Sejanus; sometimes Receiving those that came Recommended by
him, and at other times Refusing others; that thus he might keep him suspended
between Hope and Fear, who, whether trusting to his Favor with the Prince, or
for Fear of losing of his Hopes, Resolved to attempt nothing by Force; hoping,
that the Disgusts of the Prince, if there were any, would wear out with time.
In this interim, Others who had hitherto Fawned upon Sejanus his Fortune, not
upon Himself, seeing Tiberius stagger, began to carry themselves more Warily,
and the Devotion of many toward Sejanus, grew Cold.

Tiberius having discovered long ago the Pride and Insolency of Sejanus, and
fearing withal, lest provoked by Contempt, he should Run some Desperate Course,
Caused it to be given out, That he intended to Confer the Tribunical Power upon
Sejanus; and presently after, Commands him to be laid in Prison, writing
Letters, to that end, to the Senate, which were carried by Macro, Captain of
the Guards: Who coming to Rome, first communicated the Prince's pleasure to
Memmius-Regulus, then Consul (for the other Consul was more addicted to
Sejanus) and then to Graecinus Laco, Captain of the Watch, it being not yet
break of day. Thence going to the Senatehouse, he met Sejanus, who startled to
see him, demanded if he had brought him any Letters from Tiberius, he whispered
in his ear, That he should anon be saluted Tribune; whereupon, he entering the
Senate House, not without an inward joy, Macro commanded the Pretorian Guards
to go home, showing them to that end, a Warrant from the Emperor, in which
also, he promised them a Largess. The Pretorian Soldiers being departed, and
Laco's Company placed there in their Room, Macro enters the Senate, and
delivers his Letters; Immediately going forth, without expecting the Reading of
them, to bid Laco stand well upon his Guard, lest Sejanus raising a Tumult in
the Senate, should break away; and went thence himself to the Pretorian Gua^ds,
to hinder them, lest they should attempt any thing.

The Letters that were then a Reading, were spun out into a Great length, to
the end, That Macro might have Time enough to order his business; and truly
they were interwoven with a wonderful Contrivance, In the beginning there was
no mention of Business, nor any thing concerning Sejanus; a little after he was
touched upon, as they say, with a Gentle hand; then some other things
interlaced, there followed a More Open, but that also a slight Accusation
against him: At last, after sundry Excursions about the Affairs of the
Commonwealth, two of Sejanus his Favorites were named, and the Senate
commanded to Proceed against them; and withal, that Sejanus himself should be
Secured. All mention of his Death being purposely left out, to the end, That
Hope might be left to the Accused, of Clearing himself of those Crimes, and
those but Light ones, that were there objected against him.

The Letters being read, many that had Waited upon him into the Senate, seeing
things of another nature in hand, than making Sejanus Tribune, rose up and
compassed him in, lest he should Escape; which it is believed, that he would at
least have Attempted to do, if in the beginning, the Emperor's Letters had
thundered any thing sharply Against him. But he then despising those Slight
Touches, sat still in his place; and being called upon, either two or three
times, by the Consul Memmius to rise up, with much ado he Obeyed at last, as
being accustomed to Give, and not to Receive Commands. When he was risen, Laco
followed him Close at the heels and after him came Regulus, accompanied with
other Senators, who led him from the Senate to the Prison; and thence, soon
after, to Execution at the Scalae Gemoniae, where he was put to Death.

Behold here the ruin of a great Courtier, and a Favorite, who for Craft and
Power had scarce ever his equal* The Contrivance of whose Fall, though it may
seem due to Tiberius his Prudence, ye^ it is rather to be attributed to his own
Greatness and Prosperity, which ruined it self with its own Weight, so
evidently, That all those Sleights and Stratagems of Tiberius, were not very
needful; as may be gathered out of the example of Perennius, who aspiring to
the same Height that Sejanus did, and by the same Arts, was Subverted by
Commodus, a Prince of a judgment far inferior to Tiberius. It may well be, that
many will not be moved with these Examples, because they will seem to be Wiser
than others, and to know something more than these did, whose Misfortunes are
here recounted. I will not move them to Passion, with telling them what I
think; although truly, I will not deny, but in those latter Ages, there have
been some, whose Projects succeeded less unhappily, as Boylas, whose story we
read in the History of Constantinople; who being Caught in a Conspiracy against
Constantinus Monomachus, then Emperor, did not undergo so heavy a Punishment as
for such Crimes is wont to be inflicted, the reason being, because he had the
Luck to Transgress against a Mild and Gentle Prince.

It will not be amiss to recite the Story briefly here, to the end, you may see
how the Secretest Counsels, and Undiscoverable by the eyes of Man, are
oftentimes Discovered by the Divine Providence, after an unlookt for Manner;
not being able to escape Punishment, by whatsoever Caution they are managed. No
Mortal Man would have believed, that this Boylas should have any Inclination
to, or could have any Ground for, so great a Villainy. The greatness of the
Favors, which were Heaped upon him, had possessed the good Prince with a great
Hope and O^inion of his Singular Fidelity, who seemed also by nature unapt for
Great Undertakings: He was not only of very Mean Birth; but also Stammered so
much, as he could hardly be understood; which Stuttering, since he saw it
pleasing to the Emperor, he did afterward Affect on purpose: With this
Assentation and Flattery, he so Insinuated himself into the Prince's
Familiarity, That the Bedchamber, and Cabinet of Constantine, were always
opened unto him: At last, being Enriched by the Prince, he was chosen into the
number of the Senators, and begins to cast his thoughts Higher; wherein he went
so far, that he determined by the Murder of the Prince, to make his Own Way to
the Scepter. This design he first opened to those he knew surely hated the
Emperor, promising Mountains to such as Approved it, and Offered him their
Assistance; and Praising Greatly those that Disliked it, and Refused it, out of
their Affection and Loyalty toward the Prince; as whose Spy, he would seem to
propound Such things, to discover the Inclinations of his Subjects.

By which means he was undescryed by all, but such, whose Fellowship in the
Treason, make him secure of them; and had, at last, Effected that Abominable
Act, if at the very time, when he had the Weapon in his Hand, which he had
prepared for the Emperor's Throat; one of the Conspirators, touched with a
sudden Remorse of Conscience, had not seasonably Disclosed, and discreetly
Prevented it. The Emperor t^ok the Injury so patiently, That having Condemned
some of the Conspirators to die, he was satisfied in inflicting Banishment
only on the Author of the Treason.

It were too long to recount all those here, who having undertaken such
Treasons, were caught in them, or else, though Innocent, were falsely believed
to be Guilty of some such design, and made Shipwreck in Court. But contenting
our selves with what we have already said, this only is to be added, That all
Pride, whether through Ambition, Bragging, Reproaches, Detraction, Ostentation,
or other Pompous manner of living, it displease the Prince, is the high Rode to
Ruin.

CHAP. XXII.
Boasting, Presumption, Arrogance, too much Familiarity, Pride, and Perfidy,
noted with Examples.

THis Boasting and Recounting of services past, destroyed Philotas and Clytas
in the Court of the Great Alexander; and Craterus himself had like to have been
overborn with those Winds: Certainly, he had been much more acceptable to the
Prince, if he had contained himself within the bounds of a Generous Modesty; So
Cajus Silius with Tiberius; Antonius Primus with Vespasian; and Sillas with
King Agrippa, by Boasting of their Services, deprived themselves of all the
Fruit of them; as Tacitus witnesses of the two first, Annal. 4. and Hist. 4.
and Josephus of the last. Princes do believe their Fortunes and Favors lost,
and cast away upon these Braggadocio's, for they will have their Subjects seem
to owe all they have to Them, and their Bounty; not to their own Virtue, and
Merits.

The liberty of Reprehending the actions of Princes, or Inveighing against
others in their Presence, is to be carefully avoided, as bordering upon
Arrogance, and Presumption, Eumenes complaining before Alexander, something
Petulantly, That Hephaestion should Assign the Soldiers Quarters to Musicians,
Comedians, and such kind of people, incurred the displeasure of the King.

To treat with the Prince over famil arly, or to seem to make ones self the
Sole Arbiter of his Principal Cares, savours of Pride, although it may proceed
only out of Vanity and Covetousness; as it appears in the example of
Zotirus, once the Favorite of Heliogabalus; and also of Turinus, who scarce
worse than Zotirus, yet more unhappy, was commanded to be stifled to death with
smoke, by Alexander the son of Mammea; the Executioner crying out, Let him
Perish with smoke, who Sold smoke. He was wont to brag, That the Prince was
governed by his Advices; and so by Intruding upon the Princes Retirements, and
with Impertinent Senceless Whispers in Public, pretending to Favor, was
sought unto by very many and gathered together great Riches, through the
Tribes, and Presents of Those, to whom all his Interest in the Prince, could
not avail a straw.

The Arrogance of Plancianus is also worthy of Memory, which being accompanied
with great Vanity, broke out at last into open Perfidy: His Arrogance was such,
That he did not stick to contend with Bassianus, the Emperors Son; who was
Author both of his Dignity, and Fortune; and he was withal so Vain, that as he
passed through the City, he would not only Interdict all Access unto him, but
also would not suffer them to Behold him; his Ushers going before still to
Clear the streets, of all that they could see. Becoming a Traitor at last
against his Prince, and convicted of his Treason, he was Beheaded. In France,
during the time of Philip le Bell, Enguarrandus Marigny, daring to contest
personally with Charles de Valoy, what Misery he did pull upon himself, and his
friends, may be observed in the French Histories.

Above all things, we must take heed, That we give not our selves in Court, to
sowing of Strife between Princes, and Great men; for they becoming friends, do
for the most part Sacrifice such unto their Friendship; of which, though the
stories of all Nations are full, yet the Bavarian History furnishes us with one
Example very memorable, of Otho Crondoserus, who flourishing with Rodulphus the
Palatine in singular savor, was the Author of Great Enmities between the
Frince and his Mother, for a time; but the Mother afterward reconcling her
self unto her son Crondoferus had his Eyes and Tongue pulled out.

CHAP. XXIII.
How we must, not only Take Care to Preserve the Prince's Favor, but also That
of Those in Power about him.

IT is not enough that the Princes themselves be not Averse unto us, but we
must also keep our selves Aright with those that are in Favor with them.
Germanicus at his death, gave that advice to Agrippina his Wife, of which
Tacitus, Annal. 2 speaks thus. Then turning to his Wife, he entreated her by
his Memory, and for their Children sake, which were common to them both, That
she would pull down her stomach, and submit her Great heart to the rage of
Fortune; lest returning to the City, she should with Emulation of her
Greatness, stir up against her, persons more powerful than her self;
Agrippina's neglect of this Document, Ruined her and her children, I told you
before, how much Eumenes his favor was diminished with Alexander; after that,
railing against Hephaestion, he carried himself irreverently toward the
Prince; and discovered his Spleen and Envy to him that he accused.

Wherefore, when we see any one in the Prince's favor, we must carefully weigh
his Authority, and compare it, as it were, in a Balance against our own; that
we may know certainly which weighs down the other: And in the trial of this, we
are not so much to observe Outward Appearances, as the circumstances of Inward
Causes. Craterus and Hephaestion, for a time did flourish both of them, in
Great and Equal Favor with Alexander; until Alexander himself determined the
business, in calling one of them, The Kings friend, and the other, Alexander's
friends.

Out of which decision Craterus might have made this judgment, That since
Princes, for the most part, are more in love with their Own Wills, than their
Authority; they also are held More Dear unto them, who rather adore and worship
Alexander, that is their Person, than their Fortune and Kingly Dignity: And
though that afterward upon a strife that arose between Him and Hephaestion,
when all the Court was divided into Factions, Alexander seemed to incline to
neither side; but chiding them both heavily threaned punishment, if ever they
should Harp upon that string again; yet his manner of dealing with them, showed
rather his Singular Prudence, to be imitated by all Princes, than his Equal
Affection to them both. He apprehended, that this Discord might produce Great
Tuinults, and Mischief; For he knew both Craterus his great interest in the
Macedonians, and how much Hephaestion was Envied for his favor to him.
Therefore to diminish Hephaestion's Envy, he reprehended him publicly; and to
avoid giving offense to the Macedonians, he Reproved Craterus in private.

Amongst those that in this trial and examen of the Prince's favor, between
themselves and others, were out of negligence and in discretion, most grossly
Mistaken: Antonius Primus ought to have the first place, who daring to contend
with Mutianus, learnt at last, That he had better have contested with Vespasian
himself. And in this manner, you will find it is a thing witnessed by the
examples of all Courts, To vindicate more sharply an injury against the
Favorites, than against the Prince himself. Dio tells us the reason of it,
when he had recounted how the same thing happened to Sejanus, thus, As those
whom virtue and consciousness of their own Deserts, has lifted up to
Dignities, do not much stick upon the vain Ceremonies, and outward
Circumstances of Honor: So on the contrary side, those who seek to climb by
Ambition, Pride, and Vice, thereby to hide their unworthiness, and meanness, do
presently take ill, and understand as a contempt, the least neglect of
Ceremony, and respect toward them. Insomuch, that it is harder to preserve the
friendship of these men, than of the Prince himself, for he thinks it a
Glorious and Princely Act to forgive Injuries: When these, lest they should
seem to Remit that which they cannot Revenge, even to ostentation, do use their
Borrowed Power, in persecuting those that have offended them.

CHAP. XXIV.
Pride even in the Meanest Persons at Court, noted with Examples; as also
Treachery in Betraying the Prince's Secrets.

NEither truly has it been Destruction to Great Ones only, to have carried
themselves Insolently and Amiss, but also to Men of the Lower Stage. John King
of Arragon, loved Alvarez de Luna so much, that he Trusted him with all his
Affairs, and even his Kingly Power it self, notwithstanding the Repining of all
his Nobles. But when he by reason of his prosperous Fortune, fell into that
Pride and Presumption. That he caused a Nobleman, who in the King's name
admonished him of his Duty, to be Precipitated and Murdered; he was by the
King's command beheaded. It is also an ordinary cause of shipwreck in Court,
when any one has rendered, either himself, or the Prince, Hateful to the Peers,
or People; For, either the Prince is fain of his own accord, to cast such a one
off, to Rid himself of Envy, or else others never leave, till they have
Overthrown him. During the Reign of Commodus, Cleander once armed the Pretorian
Guards against the Roman People; which was a ground of so great tumults in
Rome, that unless the Emperor had Sacrifiecd Cleander to the Peoples Fury, he
himself could not have been Secure.

The same Commodus, had Rendered himself Odious to all Men, by his Affection to
one Anterus; from which envy, that they might Free their Master, some of
Commodus his Servants being very desirous, slew this Anterus as he was coming
from Court. Eutropius, who had been long dear to Arcadius the Emperor, since he
was believed to be the Author of the Sedition raised by Tribigildus, was given
up, as a Price of the Peace, by the Prince, to the Enemies.

Amongst the Evils that subvert Courtiers, there are two remaining yet, as very
dangerous, so very frequent; A betraying of the Prince's Secrets, and
Conspiracy with his Enemies. Crimes, for the most part, arising out of Perfidy,
but many times also out of Levity, and Indiscretion only. And forasmuch as
concerns the Secrets of Princes, I think they do very well, who Pry not into
them; and who, if their Office exact it not at their hands avoid the bare
knowledge of them: For if you be the Only person, to whom they are imparted,
and Fame (which often makes witty Conjectures) chance to scatter any thing like
unto them, you cannot avoid the suspicion, that the Secret came out by you: And
although the Prince perhaps has imparted it to some one else, yet it may fall
out so, that he has forgot; or else, that he is more Confident of the other
man's silence, and so the foil remain upon you still.

Not without cause, did Philippides the Comic Poet, when he was asked by King
Lysimachus (to whom he was very dear) of what things he did chiefly desire to
be made partaker by his Prince, answer, That he would refuse nothing that came
from the Prince, his Secrets only excepted; from which he desired to be
Excused. Let us learn from the example of this man, as much as we can, and
esteem it safer to be Ignorant of Secrets, so difficult and dangerous to be
kept, than to Know them. Hiero, Tyrant of Syracusa, was wont to say, That those
who discover Princes secrets, do wrong both to Themselves, and to Those they
Impart them unto by exposing them also together with themselves, to the hatred
of the Prince.

CHAP. XXV.
The Causes, Kinds, and Examples of Conspiracies with the Prince's Enemies.

YEt their Condition is, of all other, most Hazardous and Ticklish, who led
either by Avarice, Ambition, or Desire of Providing for their own Security, do
Conspire with the Prince's Enemies; whether they be either Strangers or
Domestics. Cardinal Balaeus, a Taylor's son, being by Lewis the Eleventh, made
his Treasurer, and afterward a Bishop, at last also by the King's intercession,
and the Pope's willingness, to oblige one that had been so sharp an Adversary
unto him was promoted to the Dignity of Cardinal: But afterward being
Convicted of a Conspiracy with the King's Enemies, he was sent to the Tower of
Loches, where he dwelt twelve years until Sixtus Quintus by great Entreaties,
and much Ado, procured his Release. For the like crime, the Cardinal of Prata
underwent the like punishment, in the Reign of Francis the Fifth; and had
never, perhaps, got his Liberty, had he not deceived his Physicians with an
opinion of the Strangury, by drinking his Urine: When the King fearing the
anger of the Pope, if consumed with that disease, a Cardinal should die in
Prison, Dismissed him. Petrus de Vineis, a chief Counselor of the Emperor,
Frederick the Second, being Suspected of Intelligence with Pope Alexander
third, the Emperor's Enemy, lost his Eyes.

Not only designs of Usurping the Empire of the East, but also Private
Intercourse betwixt him and Alaricus, King of the Goths, are believed to have
caused Stilico's death: Which that shameful Peace he made with the same
Alaricus, against the will of the Senate, seems to confirm; Lampadius (who
always disclaimed it) calling it not a Peace, but a Contract of slavery;
whereby the Emperor was obliged to pay Tribute to Barbarians.

CHAP. XXVI.
That our Courtier must not be the Author of Hazardous Counsels; the Variety of
Errors, whereby the Prince's Favor is lost.

THe Courtier that we are all this while a forming, must chiefly beware, That
he never be the Author of Hazardous Counsels; for the Ill Success of these, is
always wont to be imputed to the Unfortunate Adviser, and the Good unto the
Fortune of the Prince: not only by the Vulgar, who judge all things by the
Event, but also by the Prince himself; who is Always Glad to have some one,
upon Whom to Derive the Envy of an Unlucky Undertaking, and scarce ever
willingly that any one should share with Him in the Glory of a Prosperous
Action. A good while before and after Stilico's death, the Argument of the
Public Complaint, was his Unseemly Peace with the Goths; until at last,
Olympius who had procured his ruin, seeking fame from contrary courses, broke
the Truce, Alaricus in vain, Pleading the injustice of the deed; But afterward
having made War for some time, still with ill Success, this very Man was, in
the opinion of the people, esteemed, The Author of all their Evils; And at
last, being accused by the Eunuchs, who were in great favor with the Emperor,
he was fain to leave the Court, and fly into Dalmatia.

When either the beginning of a War, or breaking of a Peace, is Treated of; the
part of a wise Counselor is to bring Arguments for Both Sides, and leave the
Prince at Liberty to make Choice of What Likes him best. And if he be Pressed to
deliver his Opinion, it will be the Safer Course to Incline to Peace; unless
Invincible Necessity, or an Apparent Advantage, persuade the Contrary: Which
Course was Prudently taken by Jovius, the Successor of that Olympius, we lately
mentioned.

He, though he was more Inclined to War, that so himself might be more
Necessary to the Emperor; yet after the manner of some Statesmen, seemed to
prefer a Love to Peace, having met with Alaricus at Ariminum, whither he was
sent to Conferr with him; he sends the Conditions that Alaricus propounded to
Honorius; persuading him in other Letters apart, That he should offer the
command of his Armies to Alaricus, to make him more Reasonable in Other Things.
The Emperor denying, That it was not Safe for him to commit the strength of his
Empire to a stranger, that had been hitherto his Enemy, answered, That he had
rather consent to pay him Tribute.

When Jovius had read these Letters to Alaricus, he Angry to see himself, and
his Friendship Rejected by Honorius, broke off the Treaty of Peace, and Jovius
returns to Honorius; who being much Offended with the Insolence of his Enemy,
Swore, He would never have any peace with Alaricus; and gave the same Oath to
all his Courtiers and Commanders. Thus Jovius by the same Art, removed from
himself, the envy of the Broken Truce, and Endearing himself to Alaricus, by
the Testimony of his good will, in advising Caesar to give him the Command of
his Armies, engaged Honorius in a War; whereby the Power and Authority of
Jovius was wonderfully established. There is in Story so great variety of those
Errors, by the means of which Courtiers have fallen from their Prince's Favor,
that no man's diligence can reckon them all up so; but when he has Recounted
many, he shall find still More behind. Wherefore having here culled out some of
the Principal, we leave the rest to the Industry and Discretion of every
Observing Reader.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Arts whereby Courtiers are Supplanted by others; and First under
Pretense of Specious Employments Abroad, or of Calling Them from their
Commands, to Attend upon the King's Person.

WE have seen already, How by His own Fault, a Courtier may lose the Prince's
Favor; let us now show the Means whereby his Enemies are wont to Supplant Him;
which are of three Sorts. Either they will Endeavor to Remove him from the
Court under an Honorable Pretense; or else they will Render him Suspected, and
Hateful to the Prince; or lastly, will by Open Force Compel the Prince to
Remove him.

Of the first kind of these three; as there are Diverse Ways, so the Ends are
Diverse. For some are with Shows of Honor, or with the desire of Living amongst
their Friends, willingly persuaded to Depart the Court. Which Course, during
the Reign of Manuel Comnenus, Styppiota craftily used, to Remove out of his way
Hagiotheodorita that stood in his Light: For there arising a Controversy
between Michael Paedagogus, and Joseph Balsamon, Styppiota persuaded the
Emperor, That if Hagiotheodorita were made Governor of Peloponnesus, it would
put an End to the contention of these Great Ones. Hagiotheodorita out of desire
of assisting his Kinsman, undertakes the Employment; not Dreaming that
Styppiota having got his Rival out of the way, would by this means come to the
Sole Management of Affairs, as indeed it fell out.

Some men also Tired out with the Brawls and Strifes of their Enemies in Court,
to provide for their Own Quiet, do Easily Embrace any Plausible Employment for
a Pretense of their Departure. As Agrippa did, who, Velleius testifies, went
into Asia, under the Color of a Great Employment, only to withdraw himself
from Court, where he had Private Grudges and Heart-burnings against Marcellus,
as the report goes.

Tiberius, whilst Caius Caesar lived, Retired to Rhodes, upon pretense of
following his studies, and by his Mother's means (they are Suetonius his words)
to Hide the Disgrace of it, Obtained to be sent, as it were, Ambassador from
Augustus. If there want a Pretext, whereby he whom you desire to Remove, may
voluntarily seek leave to go, and esteem it for a Benefit; the Prince must be
persuaded to give him some Charge, by reason it can be Executed by none, so
well as He: So also, if there be any man Great and Powerful in any of the
Provinces abroad, and have Emulators that seek to Eclipse him; they must labor
to call him thence to Court, as necessary to the Prince's person; that so being
Crowded up amongst the Courtiers, his Luster may be Obscured.

This art used Apelles in Polybius, when he stripped Taurion of the Government of
Peloponnesus. So Darius by the advice of Megabyzus, recalled Hyesteus out of
Ionia; not, that he had any need of his Presence, as he pretended, but to
Weaken his Authority. If these Courtiers would rest contented with Removing
others out of their way, for their Own Advancement, and Proceed no further, in
comparison of many Worse, these Arts and Practices would be something
Tolerable; but the Most of them rest not here: In the Reign of Constantius,
Sylvanus, General of the Foot (as Ammianus Marcellinus tells us) by Arbetio his
Procurement, was sent into France to chastise the Barbarians for the injuries
they offered to the Gauls; whither he being once come, and Growing into Favor
with the Nation, and also Rich; the envy of Arbetio wrought at last his Utter
Destruction with the Emperor.

Almost the same Fortune under this very Emperor had Vrsicinus, the General of
the Horse: Eusebius, the Eunuch, had together with some other Courtiers,
Conspired his Ruin; and by these men's Means, to the end he might be far enough
from Court, he was sent upon some Expedition to the Confines of Persia; where
having staid ten years, Sabinianus was sent to succeed him, neither in Judgment
nor Experience, equal to the charge: Whereupon, presently a Rumor being spread,
That the Persians were preparing for a War, he was commanded to stay there
still, though the Power was already given to another. Eusebius Contriving it so
on purpose, to the end, That whatsoever Good Success happened against the
Persians, might be Attributed to Sabinianus; and what ever Fell out Amiss,
might be Imputed to Vrsicinus, as the event witnessed; for Vrsicinus cast down
for another Man's Faults, Retired, and past the rest of his life in Private.
The Reign of this Emperor does furnish us yet with another Example; For
Ruffinus, the Uncle of Gallus, Captain of the Guard, was sent to Appease a
Mutiny of the Soldiers, out of no other Intention, but that he might Perish in
the Rage of the Tumult: As Clytus did complain, That he was sent by Alexander
against the Sogdians, to no other End.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How Calumnies are used to Make Men Suspected, or Hated by the Prince.

THus much for the First way, whereby Courtiers are by their Enemies
Supplanted, and stripped of the Prince's Favor. Now let us come to the Second,
which are, The Calumnies that are used to Render us Hated and Suspected by the
Prince: In Calumny, two things are to be Observed; the first is, Whether it be
sufficient to Deprive him of the Prince's Favor? the second is, Whether it be
Probable? Of the first, We must make our judgment out of the Present State of
Things, out of the Humor and Inclination of the Prince, and out of the Nature
of the Calumny intended. No kind of Slander does subvert more Great Men, than
that which Accuses us of Conspiracy against the Prince's Person, or his Empire,
or else of Contempt, or Disdaining to Obey, with Detraction, and Derision
toward the Prince.

These Calumnies are Rendered likely to be True, not only by the Words and
Actions of those that are Accused, and of their Servants, Friends, and Kindred,
but also by Contrived Letters, and the Disposition of the Prince; too Apt to
believe the Calumny, or too Prone to think Ill of the Person Accused;
especially, if he were ever suspected before. These things which are by Calumny
converted into a Crime, he that is Traduced, either Did, or said of his Own
Accord, or else was Ticed into them by the sleights of his Enemies, and
Competitors: The knowledge and practice of which Malice, whets the wits of
those who will Curiously Watch their Occasions, and know dexterously How to use
them.

There are some Men that will put Projects into our heads, to the end, That if
we embrace them, they may make these very things, a Subject of Calumny against
us, and accuse us to the Prince of some Wicked Intention. There was a certain
Magician, called Santabarinus, very much beloved by Basilius, Emperor of
Constantinople, but as much hated by Leo, the Emperor's Son; who this Magician
desiring to Overthrow, did so besiege him with Counterfeited Duties, and
Feigned Respects, that at last winning upon him, he grew into credit with the
young Prince: Then having got an Authority and Interest in him, he takes his
time, and warns Leo, with great Art and So^i^itude, That whenever he went a
Hunting with his Father, he should carry a Poignard under his Garments, to
Defend himself withal: He obeying this Advice, the Magician goes to his Father,
Informing him, That his Son intended to murder him, and for a Testimony, told
him, That he always carried a Dagger hidden about him, waiting for an Occasion
of Performing it. In short, the business came to that pass, the young Prince
was Searched, and the Poignard found, whereupon he was cast into Prison; and
though he were protected by the joint intercession of all the Co^rt, yet he
hardly Escaped with his Life.

Whilst Valentinian was Emperor, Aetius accused Earl Boniface, who was very
dear unto Valentinian, and Governor of Africa, unto Placidia, the Emperors
Mother, of Treachery toward the Prince, and of a Design he had of Subjecting
Africa to himself; persuading her withal, That he should be Recalled quickly.
At the same time he warns Boniface by his Letters, That he was Accused at
Court, and for that reason Recalled; wherefore he should take heed how he
Returned, if he loved his own Safety. Boniface giving credit unto him, obeyed
him so far, That (resolving to oppose those that would come to reduce him) he
called in Gontarus, King of Valladolid, and Gensericus his Son, then Reigning
in Spain, unto his aid; who, upon this occasion, possessed themselves of
Mauritania. The Deceit being afterward found out, to the end the Truth might
appear more plainly, they were permitted the Trial of a Combat, wherein Aetius
being vanquished, was Banished the Court.

Not unlike unto this was the Craft of Samona, beloved by Leo, Son to the
Emperor Basilius (by reason of his Detection of the Treason of Basilius,
Kinsman to the Empress Zoa) who Resolving to Ruin Andronicus, that was General
against the Saracens, Caused him to be Warned by a Friend, that he should take
heed of Hymerius, who came to Deprive him of his Eyes; which was in those days
a Punishment Usual toward Great Persons, whose power was Overgrown, and become
Formidable: Andronicus believing this to be true, which was Feigned by Samona,
withdraws himself from Hymerius, unto a place of strength, which he seized
upon. This fact of his, Samona did not omit to Exaggerate unto the Emperor,
insomuch, that by his Procurement, an Army was sent against him, which forced
Andronicus, driven to Despair, to Quit the limits of the Empire, and Fly unto
the Saracens. A little before, we mentioned Arhetio, and it will be worth
observing, how he added Deceit upon Deceit: When he observed the Emperor Angry
with Sylvanus, and Feared, that he should come to Rome to Clear himself of the
Objected Crimes; he gives the Emperor his Letters, wherein he called Sylvanus,
to his Presence, to an Instrument of his own, called Apodenius; who arriving in
France, suppressed the Letters as he was directed, and tells Sylvanus, That
Nothing but Destruction Hung over him; whereby Sylvanus Running into Rebellion,
as the only Means of his Preservation, made good Arbetio his Calumnies.

But we have too long been silent concerning Sejanus (to whom being Expert in
all these Tricks) this Artifice we now treat of was very Usual. That he might
render Agrippina suspected to Tiberius, He Inveigled her Friends to Puff up her
Haughty Spirit; and her own Kindred were Enticed to Feed the Swelling Hopes of
Agrippina, with Crooked and Perverse Discourses; whilst in the interim, he
causes Claudia Pulchra, Agrippina's Cousin-Germain, to be Accused by Domitius
Afer; which Injury, this Fierce and Passionate Woman, Complaining of Heavily to
Tiberius, did thereby Exceedingly Increase the Suspicions of this jealous
Emperor. Yet Sejanus not content with this, but seeking the V^ter Ruin of this
Unwary, and Sorrowful Lady, sent those unto her, who, under a Shadow of
Friendship, should warn her, That Tiberius meant to Poison her, and that she
should Beware of his Feasts; whereupon she over- Credulous, Refused to take an
Apple out of Tiberius his hand at Table, which grievously Incensed Caesar
against her, By the same Sejanus now, when Soldiers were set to watch over
Agrippina and her Children, were Men Suborned to Advise her, to Fly to the
German Army, or to run to the Image of Augustus for Sanctuary; and there to
Invoke the help of the Senate and the People.

With the same Ugly Arts, whereby he endeavored to supplant this Lady, by
making her suspected of Tiberius, he Utterly Overthrew her Friend Titius
Sabinus; which thing, as it is described by Tacitus, you may read here in his
own words, because the Circumstances are very Notable, Annal. 4.

Junius Silanus and Silius Nerva, being Consuls, the year had a foul beginning;
for Titius Sabinus, an honorable Gentleman of Rome, was cast into Prison only
for his Friendship to Germanicus, which was such, That he never omitted any
occasion of honoring or serving his Wife and Children; Of all Germanicus his
Followers, being the only Man which Visited them at their house, and
Accompanied them abroad; wherefore as he was much praised by the Good, so was
he much maliced by the Bad: Against him, Latinius Latiani, Porcius Cato,
Petilius Rufus, and Marcus Opsius, who had sometime been Consuls, bent their
Spite, through a desire of the Consulship, which they could not obtain, but by
Sejanus his means, and Sejanus his liberty could not be purchased, but by some
notable piece of Villainy. Wherefore they plotted amongst them, That Latiani,
who was somewhat akin to Sabinus, should lay the snare, and that the rest
being privately witnesses to what past, they might begin their Accusation.

Hereupon Latiani began at first to cast Speeches out at Random, and to Extol
Sabinus his Constancy, that he did not as others did, Fawn in Prosperity, and
Shrink from a house in Adversity; with other Honorable mention of Germanicus,
bewayling Agrippina's estate. And seeing Sabinus (as Men's Minds are soft and
tender in Calamity) to pour down Tears, and complaints; Latiani began more
boldly to touch Sejanus's Cruelty, Pride, and Ambition, not forbearing to
reproach Tiberius; These seeming dangerous Speeches, and such as durst not be
avouched, made a strict friendship in show between them: So far, that Sabinus
often frequented Latiani's house, and as unto his Faithful Friend uttered his
Griefs unto him. Those I mentioned before, now began to devise with Latiani,
how these Speeches might be heard by them all: For the place of Meeting, must
be, in appearance, private; and if they should stand behind the door, they did
apprehend some noise, or other accident of suspicion might discover them;
wherefore, between the Cieling and the Roof, the Three Senators (in a place no
less Unseemly, than the Treachery was detestable) hid themselves, laying their
ears close to the Holes and Chinks, to Listen what was said.

In the mean time, Latiani having found Sabinus in the Marketplace (as if he
had some New Matter to tell him) inticeth him home into his Chamber, beginning
there to rip up things past and present in a great abundance; and to load him
with new Fears. Sabinus was not behind hand with him, the nature of griefs
being such, that when once we enter into them, we can hardly make an end. This
done, they began immediately their accusation, and writ unto Caesar the whole
contrivance of their own Lewd and Shameful Act. The City was never in Greater
Perplexity, and fear than at that time, Every man estranging himself from his
nearest Kindred, and acquaintance; avoiding all Meetings and Conferences as
well with their Friends, as Strangers; yea they grew jealous of mute, and sense
less things, Prying into the Roofs and Walls of their houses. But Tiberius
Requesting in his Letters that the Solemnities of the new year might be
Celebrated on the Calends of January, falls at last upon Sabinus, Charging him
that he had corrupted some of his Freed-men to Attempt something against his
Person, and therefore boldly demands a Revenge, which without delay was
granted.

Sabinus being Condemned, was drawn and haled away with his Garments over his
head, so that he being almost Throtled was heard to cry out: Is this the
beginnings of the new year? be these the sacrifices slain in Sejanus his honor?
Which way soever he did cast his Eyes they all fled that he directed his speech
unto; the places of Assembly and the Streets were Empty, some came running back
and showed themselves again Afraid for that they were seen to be Afraid. And
what days think you now were Exempt from Executions, if amongst the sacrifices,
and the vows, when the custom was to abstain from profane speeches, Fetters and
Manacles were mentioned. It is believed Tiberius could not be ignorant of the
Envy he should incur for doing so, but that he did it on purpose, to the end
the new Magistrates might open the prisons, when they set open their Temples
and their Altars. For after that he sent Letters of thanks, for that they had
punished an Enemy to the State.

CHAP. XXIX.
Examples of other Treacheries in Suborned Witnesses, and Forged Letters.

I Cannot avoid bringing here another Example out of the same Historian.
Firmius Cato, a Senator, and one of Libo 's inward friends induced this fimple
young man, easily led to vanities, to give credit to the Chaldeans Promises,
the Magicians Ceremony, and the Interpretation of Dreams, vainly putting him in
mind that Pompey was his Great Grandfather, Scribonia who had been Augustus his
Wife, his Aunt; The Caesar's his Cousin Germains; and that his house was full of
the Statues and Monuments of his Ancestors: He enticed him to Licentiousness,
to Borrow Money, making himself a Companion of his Lusts, and Familiarities,
the better to Entangle him and Convince with many evidences. That there might
be witnesses enough, he also Debauched such of his Servants as knew any thing
of the Matter. Then he desires Access to the Prince, and by means of Flaccus
Vescularius, a Gentleman of Rome, one of Tiberius his Familiars, he Discovered
both the Matter and the Man. How after this Libo was treated by Tiberius and
made much of, until Accusations were brought against him in such abundance,
that he was forced to Kill Himself; Tacitus Annal. 2. will tell you at large,
to whom I had rather Refer you, than Exceed the bounds I had proposed to my
self in this Treatise.

Styppiota, whose Deceit in supplanting Hagiotheodorita, I told you of before,
could not avoid being Circumvented Himself, as Sabinus the Roman was; the
Contriver of that Plot was Camaterus Logotheta, who being an Enemy to
Styppiota, Accused him before the Emperor as an Impostor, and one that intended
to Betray Sicily. And to the end he might give some face of Truth to his
Calumny, he hides the Emperor in his Chamber, and in his hearing begins on
purpose to discourse of the Affairs of Sicily. At which time many things fell
from the heedless Styppiota that were very displeasing unto Caesar; not content
with this, Camaterus causes Counterfeit Letters to be mingled amongst
Styppiota's Papers, which being searched by the Emperor's Order, were the cause
of Styppiota's Condemnation, and the Loss of his Eyes.

This Story leads me to speak of another means of Rendering Slanders probable,
to wit, by Counterfeiting Letters; A Deceit indeed that for the most part
breaks out at last to the prejudice of him that uses it, but nevertheless is of
great Power to make deep impressions of suspicion in the Prince's Mind, and to
Alienate his Favor: Which being once observed by the Accused, will either
induce him to Withdraw himself willingly from Business, and the Court, least
something worse should follow; or else cast him upon such Attempts and
Practices, as will Confirm the Slander. Which appears by that example of
Sylvanus I mentioned before.

The perfidy of False Witnesses is no slender confirmation of Slanders, and
this is chiefly necessary against such as are Accused of Treason, and Capital
Crimes; And truly Domestic Servants as most proper, so oftnest are made use of
in this nature. In the Reign of Arcadius, Eutropius seeking the destruction of
Timasius, a great Captain, and a man of much Authority; Corrupts his Friend or
rather his Inseparable Companion Bargus to Accuse him of Affecting the Empire.
The Friendship between Bargus and Timasius gave Credit to the Accuser, all men
believing, that he would not unless the Crim was most Certain, Accuse him; To
this Counterfeit Letters were added, to prove the Treason, by which means the
Innocent Man and his Son were sent into Banishment, to the Isle of Oasis, from
whence neither of them ever Returned.

Caius Petronius was for his skill in Pleasures preferred before Tigellinus by
Nero, whereupon the other out of Envy, Accused his Rival of Scaevinus his
friendship, (who was convicted of a Conspiracy against Nero) and brought to
witness it a Servant of Petronius Corrupted by him.

CHAP. XXX. Confirmation of Slanders under the Color of a Feigned Friendship;
and the Inclinations of the Prince the Accuser.
I Said before that to Confirm Calumnies, the Affection of the Prince to the
Slanderer did much Conduce, and for this Reason did Sejanus, endeavoring to
make the Empress Livia jealous of Agrippina, Germanicus his Widow, choose
Julius Posthumus to do it; who as Tacitus affirms, by Reason of his Adulteries
with Mutilia Prisca, the Empresses favorite, was very Gracious with Livia. But
Calumnies never succeed so easily, as when they are used against One already
Suspected by the Prince: For it is very Probable, That then the Accuser shall
not only Ruin the other, but also Exalt Himself. The Familiars of Vitellius
durst not Set upon Junius Blaesus, Till they Observed him to grow less in
Vitellius his Favor, and they compassed their desires much sooner, because
Lucius Vitellius, the Emperor's Brother, lent them his assistance.

Gracchus, a freed man of Caesar's, and one as Tacitus says, Annal. 13. All
his life bread up in, and by a long Experience, well Practiced in the Princes
house, thought it the best way to preserve himself in the favor of the Prince,
to Accuse Cornelius Sylla, whom Nero he knew was jealous of already. The same
art did Tigellinus use against this Sylla, and Plautus afterward, of which
Tacitus, Annal. 14. writes thus. But Tigellinus 's credit increased daily, who
thinking that his lewd practices, wherein he was a great proficient should be
more acceptable, if he could engage the Prince into the Communion of his
Villainies, began diligently to Pry into all his Fears, and perceiving that
Plautus and Sylla were above others Suspected: Plautus being banished into
Asia, and Sylla into France, he enters into discourse of their Nobility, and
how one was too near the Army of the East, and the other to that of Germany:
That Sylla was poor and needy, only Counterfeiting a Laziness; and Plautus
Abounding in Wealth, did not so much as Pretend a desire of a Quiet life.

I told you above of Vrsicinus accused by Eusebius the Eunuch, to the Emperor
Constantius, who was already Shie toward him, by reason of his kindred to
Gallus; but I did not set down the Success of the Cause, which was thus. The
Accusation Faultring. because the Arguments whereby the Crime was to be proved,
were Slender; the Eunuch intending a new Mischief, causes the Accused to be
Enlarged: And things standing in this posture undecided, he does strive to
indear Vrsicinus to himself, whom he would seem to have delivered from the
Danger of a Trial; but withal, removes him from the Court (where all his
Thoughts were placed) notwithstanding this face of Friendship he put on,
persuading the Emperor underhand against him.

CAAP. XXXI.
The Chief Arts and Ways of Slanderers.

WHen any one is Accused to have spoke Ill of the Prince, how much the nearer
these Reproaches come to Truth, by so much the Easilier is the Accusation
credited; as appears in the example of Granius Marcellus, of whom Tacitus,
Annal. 1. Whom Coepio Crispinus accused to have Reviled Tiberius, which was an
Inevitable Accusation, for he having chosen out the greatest blemishes of
Tiberius his life, did impose them on the accused; which because they were
True, were believed to have been spoken. This example have many Slanderers
followed, Reproaching many Princes of their Vices, under Pretense of Informing
them of other men's Detractions; which one would think should be a sufficient
Reason to persuade them from giving ear to these Calumniators.

And Tiberius truly, who though he was a lover of Informations, yet he Hated
his own Reproaches; and therefore least he should hear them in the Senate where
they were occasionally brought in by way of Accusing Others, retired to Caprea,
Believing (as Tacitus avers) that he ought to Avoid the Assemblies of the
Senate, least he should be Compelled to hear Reproachful, but yet true things,
uttered o himself in his own hearing.

This way also do some take only to Reprove Princes for their vices; as they
that would reprove Nero for his Mother's Murder, did use to inveigh against
others for the like Acts in his hearing; yet more with a design to corre the
fault in Caesar, than to ruin those that they accuse. These are the Choicest
Ways that Slander takes, but who will undertake to Trace her in all her
Turnings? For Calumny is a Monster that has a Thousand shapes, and a Thousand
sleights to do Mischief with.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Deceits and Danger of Courtpraises, and Masqued Courtiers. Lastly, The
Third way of Oppressing our Courtier by Force.

FRom Slanders, let us come to Praises, of which also as we have Hinted before,
there is great use in Undermining others; for many men do by this means,
Palliate Secret Hate, Envy, and Emulation, to the end, they may Deceive more
Easily. So Fabius Valens with Secret Criminations, Defamed Martius Valens that
suspected no such thing from Him; who to betray him more securely, did always
speak well of him in Public, Tacitus Hist. 1. So Arbetio with the
Blandishments of a Great Kindness, did assault Vrsicinus, and frequently call
him in public, A Valiant Gallant person, thereby Craftily to Entangle in more
Deadly snares, that Harmless, and Well-meaning man. Ammianus Marcellinus, Lib.
15.

Alphonsus, King of Arragon, as one was Praising another man Unreasonably in
his presence, beyond his wont, Turning about to a friend said, Without doubt
this Fellow seeks the Destruction of him he Praises: Neither was the King
deceived in his opinion, for six months after, this Intemperate Praiser,
accused before the Seat of Justice, him that he had so Highly Extolled; and had
undone him, had not the King interposed for his preservation.

Mucianus having in the Senate heaped many Praises upon Antonius Primus, whom
he could not openly oppress; loads him also with Secret Promises, and Points
him out the further Spain, left void for him by the decease of Cluvius Rufus,
giving to his Friends and Followers, several Commands in the Army. And
afterward, when he had filled him with Ambition, and Desire, he suddenly
Undermines his Power by taking from him the Seventh Legion, which was
exceedingly devered to Anthony.

Neither is this way Traced by Courtiers only, but also by Princes themselves,
when they desire to Abate or Take down any Body. For Tiberius did thus confer
the Praetorship upon, and invite to his Table, Libo, (whom he Secretly
Suspected and Hated) without change of Countenance or showing Anger in his
words, till he saw his time (he had so Concealed his Indignation) as Tacitus
tells you, Annal. 2. By the same Artisice, you saw he Overthrew Sejanus:
Domitian was never more to be feared, than when he Smiled; the Praises of
Andronicus were the beginning of Injuries. Nicetas called his Liberality, An
Earnest of the Confiscation of that man's Goods, and his Lenity a forerunner
of a Certain Death.

Yet there are some that seek by their Applauses only, to stir up the Prince's
Envy toward them they Praise, for so Tacitus tells, Julius Agricola was Ruined
with Domitian. The cause of his Destruction was no Crime nor Complaint against
him, but the Prince's Envy to the Virtues and Glory of the man, Stirred up by
the worst kind of Enemies, Unseasonable and Treacherous Praisers. There is
extant, a saying of the Emperor Julian, That there are no more dangerous
Enemies in the world, than Masked Courtiers; whom Mammertinus describes in a
Panegyric saying, That with a Crafty Artifice they did in all company, Slander
Men by way of Praises, and under the Titles of Friendship.

But we see that some have used these Praises toward one, with an Intention of
Reproaching Another; whom they desired to Affront with the Dissimilitude of his
Merit: Plutarch accuses Herodotus with this spightful kind of dealing in his
commendations of the Athenians, for the brave repulse they gave the Persians,
which says he, was not intended so much for the Athenians honor, as the Shame
and Disgrace of the other Greeks, Seneca attests, that Kings are wont to praise
their Dead Servants, to make those Blush that are Alive: So did Augustus Extol
the faithful services of Maecenas, and Agrippa when his Daughters Lusts being
discovered; he seeking thereby to Reprove his Familiars and Servants, as
Negligent and Careless of the Hovor and Service of their Prince.

The same was Augustus his end in Praising and Dispraising of Tiberius, of whom
Tacitus writes thus; Augustus when a few years before he demanded the
Tribunitial power in the Senate for Tiberius, although he did in his Speech
Touch upon many things of his behavior, his habit, and manner of living;
which, as it were by way of Excuse he did Reproach him with, etc. Therefore
these things ought to warn us to look as well into the Intention of those that
Praise us, as of those that Caluminate us.

These two first ways of Undermining our Countier, to wit, Of Removing him out
of the way, under some Fair Pretense; or of making him Hated, or Suspected by
the Prince; being sufficiently discoursed of, there remains only untouched,
the Third and Last way of all, Open Violence; which principally takes place,
when either the People or the Soldiery offended with the Dignity or Manner of
the Favorite, run into a Public Sedition. The Tumults of the Parisians, when
the people raged at the Captivity of their King John, with the English, are
sufficiently known; as also the fortune of those, upon that sedition, who bore
the Principal offices under his Son, then supplying his Father's place in the
Government.

But few years since, the Janissaries, more than once, have by Sedition deprived
the Turkish Emperors of their Ministers of Greatest Trust and Authority: Out of
more ancient stories, the time of Arcadius will furnish us with some examples;
Ruffinus was amongst others, principally beloved by this Emperor with whom
Stilico being Offended, and determining his Destruction, sent Gainas with his
forces, as it were, to Assist the Emperor, but indeed to deprive him of
Ruffinus, as it came to pass: For Ruffinus going to the Army, the Soldiers of
Gainas upon the Signal given, Ran together, and compassing Ruffinus in, Tore
him in pieces.

Eutropius being then put in Ruffinus his place, when the chief Courtiers
likewise grew discontented with him, by the contrivance of the same Gainas,
Tribigildus raises a Rebellion, overrunning and spoiling all Asia, and denies
to accept any Conditions of a peace, till Eutropius were removed out of the
way; which by the persuasion of Gainas, the Emperor consented at last unto:
Neither was this enough, for Gainas being afterward openly joined with
Tribigildus, to the end he might suffer himself to be Reconciled to Arcadius
the Emperor, demanded, That Aurelius Saturnius, and John Chrysostom, then the
Chief Moderators of the Emperor's Affairs, should be given up to him; which
being done, he sent them into banishment, contenting himself with giving them
(before their departure out of his presence) the Edge of his Sword for to
handle; that they might feel how sharp it was.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Sometimes the Prince's own Ill and Cruel Nature, Envying the Deserts of his
Servants, is Cause of the Courtiers Fall; and This, How it is to be Handled.

OFtentimes, although our Courtiers Underprop themselves with all Other
Supports, yet the Nature of the Prince, as being either Over Light, Vain,
Jealous, Envious, Covetous, Cruel, or Timorous, makes their Ruin inevitable.
These Diseases as being Incorporated into them, do for the most part Elude, and
Overgrow the Circumspection of the Prudentest Men. Seneca, whose authority had
with Nero far more of Liberty, than Flattery, in the beginning, being Wise and
Skilful in the Arts of Court, was fain to yield at last, as quite Overcome by
the Malice of the Prince's Nature: First, he was Envied by him for his
Eloquence, then for his Riches, and lastly, being oppressed with Malicious
Slanders, he lost both the Prince's Favor, and his Life.

The Jealousy and Envy of Princes, has been so formidable to some, that they
had rather be Lessened to their Loss, than incur their Envy by doing their
business Prosperously and well. Publius Ventidius fearing the Envy of Mark
Anthony, under whom he served, Contented himself to have beaten the Parthians
by Three Victories into Media, and would not prosecute his Good Fortune any
farther. Agathias tells us, that during the Reign of Justinian, the same was
done by Belisarius; least the Greatness of his Victories, and the Acclamations
of the People, should stir up the Hate of the Peers, and Envy of the Prince
against him.

Truly such as these do not Mind their own Honor, and the Profit of the Prince,
as they ought to do; but the fault is not so much in them, as in the Prince
himself; And therefore it was, that Maecenas persuaded Augustus, not to Impute
his Ill Successes to his Ministers, nor Envy their Prosperous Actions. For
(says he) many of them that Manage Public Affairs, have done it very
Negligently, for fear of Envy choosing rather to hazard their Glory, than their
Safety. Yet I do much more Approve their way, who to avoid Envy, what ever
Great and Fortunate Actions they did, would needs Ascribe the Glory of it to
the Prince, though absent. Agrippa, Augustus his Son in Law, persuades us to
Undertake Great Adventures; but having performed them to Attribute the Glory of
it to the Prince, as he himself was always wont to do.

So Joab besieging Rabatham, though he could, Refused to take it in, before
David himself came thither. Craterus, when the business of Artacena was to be
Determined, waits for Alexander's coming; Julius Agricola (as Tacitus Writes)
never did Boastingly Apply his Acts to his own Glory, but Cast all upon
Fortune, as the Author and Guide of All he did, who was but her servant.

This Envy and Emulation, though they are diseases incident to the Generousest
Princes (such as Philip and Alexander were) yet they are more Predominant and
Malignant in some, than others. Theodosius, the second Emperor of that Name,
committed the charge of Building a Wall at Constantinople from Sea to Sea unto
Cyrus, which work he Effecting in Threescore days; This great Dispatch was so
Grateful to the People, that they cried out in the Streets, That Constantine
built the City, and Cyrus had Restored it; which being heard by the Emperor,
brought so great an Envy upon Cyrus, that he could not Expiate it any other
way, but by putting on a Religious Habit.

He that has to do with such Princes, is to Consider, That he Walks upon
Ashes, under which Fire lies Concealed; and therefore must he still Examine
their Inclinations with great Diligence, to the end, he may either Defend
himself against them; or, if it fall out that he cannot, that he may have this
satisfaction of mind at least, That he has done his Duty, and all that in
Prudence he ought.

CHAP. XXXIV.
How to Preserve our Favor and Office with the Succeeding Prince.

HE is deservedly to be remembered amongst the Darlings of Fortune, whose
Authority and Interest being great with one Prince, continues so with his
Successor. It is truly a thing very Rare in Courts, because He that is to
Succeed, is for the most part Suspected by the Present Prince; and therefore,
they who Manage his Affairs, are necessitated to be Adverse unto the Heir
Apparent; from whence, commonly, Deadly Enmities arise. Besides this also, the
Succeeding Prince has, for the most part, Servants Known, and Endeared unto
him, by a Long Fidelity, and Many Services; for whose Advancement to Dignity,
that he may make way, he will Ordinarily, either of his own Accord, or by the
Persuasion of those that desire to Succeed, lay aside the Servants of the
Deceased Prince.

Yet there are some, whom either the State of Affairs, for which they are more
Able, and Apt than Others; or some other Dexterous Quality, and Taking Humor,
does so Insinuate them into the succeeding Prince, That one Prince Dying, they
lose nothing thereby, but his Person. Macro, that he might obtain Caligula his
Favor, sets his own Wife Ennia upon him, to Inveigle him with Love, and Bind
him in a Marriage. The same man Commanded Tiberius to be Smothered with
Clothes, as he was Sick and Dying, as Tacitus affirms. Julian the Emperor
retained Arbetio still, because he thought him Useful, although he hated him
for his Pride, and Turbulent Disposition. And Valentinian, after him, Called
the same Man unto him to Oppose against Procopius.

We have hitherto Handled only such things as our Courtier, who will Enjoy the
Prince's Favor, ought to Avoid; But the sum of all Counsels that can here be
given to him, is, A Modesty toward the Prince, such as becomes a Man, More
Mindful of his Duty, than of his Swelling Fortune; let him never Boast, nor do
any thing Irreverently; and as much as possibly he can, let him Avoid Envy;
which has been so Dreadful to many, and those Great Men, That Some of them
with pretending a Love of Ease, others Embracing a Retirement to Study, have
showed themselves Averse to Public Affairs. Examples in both which cases, the
Historians give us in Domitian and Galba. He must take heed, he pass not over
Carelessly, either those Treacherous kind of Praises we spoke of before, nor the
Slanders that are Cast upon him: They that Calumniate us, do say, That Either
we are Wanting in some thing that is Necessary to serve the Prince Well; or
else, That we Have Said, or Done Something, either Really, or Intentionally, to
the Prejudice of Him, or His Service. As to the Defects Imputed unto us, we
must either Modestly Excuse, and Justify Our selves, or else Amend them; or
lastly, Endeavor with some other Virtues to Recompense those Wants. Our Words
and Actions ought to be so Moderated and Weighed, That they may not be
Obnoxious to Ill Interpretations; we ought Always to Endeavor to Search into
Other Men's Opinions, and Inclinations, before we Discover our Own; And if
either by Chance or Negligence, any thing Slip from us, which may possibly
Offend, we must, when we Reflect upon it, by some Respective Means, or by some
kind of Occasional Interpretation, amongst other Discourse, let them see, what
we spoke was not with an Intention of Offending any body.

If we shall once Discover, that we are Calumniated by any one, we ought as
little as may be, be Absent from the Prince, to whom we are Slandered; for
besides that, Love abates toward those that are Absent, Detraction also in
time takes Root, if it be not Seasonably Contradicted with Truth; for a
Jealousy being once put into the Prince's Head, in Time, through the Many
Suggestions of the Accuser, there being no body to Gainsay; takes such Footing
at last, That oftentimes the Prince Hates the Person Accused, before he
Examines the Crime.

He therefore that will Provide for his Safety, must Make himself at Court, one
Friend or more, to Defend him in his Absence against the Dangerous Assaults of
Calumny: But withal, he must take Care they be Persons of Condition and Honor,
or at least, Men of Interest, and such as have Access to the Prince's Ear, as
Readily as our Enemies. I confess, the Store of such Friends in Court, is but
very Small, where it is the Usual Custom, almost amongst all, if not to
Persecute their Companions themselves, at least to Suffer Them to be Oppressed
by Others. But yet it happens sometimes, That there is One that either out of
Gratitude for Benefits Received, or With a Desire of Obliging us, or else out
of Hatred, Toward our Accusers, will Perform that Office.

CHAP. XXXV.
Ostentation of the Prince's Favor to be Avoided: Something also Concerning our
Friends and Followers.

LEt our Courtier Avoid all Ostentation of the Prince's Favor, not only to
Avoid the Envy of the Rest of his Companions, but also of the Prince himself:
For lately, when the Grandees of Spain went about to Supplant Cardinal Spinosa,
under Philip the Second, See with what a Wile they Circumvented him: They all
Struck Sail to him, they all seemed to Acknowledge, that their Fortunes
Depended upon His Favor; the very Domestic Servants of the King, showed
themselves very Obedient, and Ready at his Beck: Which when the Prince
observed, he was removed from Court, and all that power and Greatness which he
had Acquired, in less than Two years fell to Nothing.

Let therefore our Courtier learn to be Contented with a Modest Train of
Attendants, and with a Rate of living rather Beneath the Dignity wherewith he
is honored by the Prince, than Above it; which he must be sure Never to
exceed. It is Unseasonable to lessen your Attendants, when your Fortune is
Declining. It availed Seneca nothing, after he had lost Nero's Favor, to Hide
himself in his Private House, and betake himself to his Studies, nor to Shut
out Visitants with his Pretense of Want of Health. Neither did it Advantage
Agricola a whit, to have Entered the City by Night, and with a Slender Company
of Followers: Wherefore it is necessary, That we put on a Face of Modesty
Betimes, and Hold on So.

Yet although I would not have our Courtier be Besieged with too Great a Throng
of Friends and Servants, I would not have him neglect to make Many Creatures
and Followers; not to serve him in his Pomp, but to Support and Comfort him, if
any Adversity should happen: For although an Adverse Fortune finds Few of these
Prove Friends, yet there are, for the most part, Some among them, who will
Endeavor to Shelter and Assist you; if not out of Friendship, yet out of
Respect to their own Advantage, which they may well expect from the
Restoration of your Fortune.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How to Manage and Dispense the Prince's Favor, Advices, and Comforts in
Adversity, with other Rules.

BUt as it is a Great Content and Help in Adversity, to have Communicated your
Prosperity Freely and Generously to many, in using the Favor of the Prince, to
their Assistance and Advantage; so our Courtier is to be Warned, That he Warily
and Industriously Dispense These Benefits; for it is certain, That whatsoever
the Prince shall at our Entreaty Do for any Man, a great part of it is by him
Imputed, as Done to us. Wherefore, unless the Prince's Favor toward us, be
Very Large, we must not be too Prodigal of Sharing it amongst Others: And very
seldom must we Introduce, or Commend any unto the Prince, who are not, in some
measure, Known unto him, as well as to Our selves, whose Deserts we ought first
Carefully to look into, observing that saying of Horace, Till thou art Certain
what his Virtues be,
In no Man's Praises be thou Over-free;
Least he Transgress, and purchase Shame to thee.


Moreover, let those Favors also, which you Demand for any body from the
Prince, be Fit for the Person, and Suitable to the Times, Consistant also with
the Dignity, and Emolument of the Prince; and lastly, such as you know have
been Formerly Obtained by Others. If the Prince grants it, we must let him see
we take it as a Great Favor done unto our selves; if he Refuse, we must take
heed that he do not Perceive we are Offended.

That is also to be Observed here, which we have Touched upon before, That we
must never Vainly make show of the Prince's Favor, nor give it out, That he is
Governed by us; for we have told you before, how ill that succeeded with some.
Princes whatsoever they do, desire to be thought to Do it of themselves,
without the Help and Authority of any others, especially their Subjects.

If the Prince shall lay any Weighty Command upon us, we endeavor to have it
in writing, and as Clearly Interpreted unto us, as is possible: We must not
omit to Represent unto Him, such Difficulties before we Undertake the Business,
as we apprehend will Occur unto us in the Execution. If it be a thing Committed
to us in Secrecy, and Unfit to be written, we are to Repeat the Commands Over
and Over (yet without absurdity) in the Prince's Presence, to the end we may
better understand the Intention of Him that Gives them, and also that he may
not Forget what Orders he gave us.

We must also show our selves Ready for the Meanest Employments the Prince will
cast upon us; for many times a Small Matter is the occasion of a Great Fortune;
and Princes would have their commands to be weighed not by the Importance of
the Affair, but by the Greatness and Dignity of Him the Giver; being no less
Incensed at our refusal of slight Enterprises, than our Declining of Great and
Hazardous Undertakings, when Imposed by Him upon us. When we are Attending upon
the Prince, we ought to watch Diligently, that we be not Surprised nor
Overwhelmed with Sudden Commands; And to that end, always as much as may be, we
ought to Ruminate before hand All things then afoot, and to Prepare our Mind
and Understanding for whatever may come in Agitation. We must likewise take
heed, that we Importune not the Prince with unseasonable nor Impertinent
Discourses, but only with what we both know to be certain, and judge to be Fit
for him to Hear. When the Prince speaks we must appear Attentive not as if we
Thought of Something else; not Sad, not Musing, least we should seem either to
Slight, or Dislike what he says.

If any one Disgusted, or Injured by the Prince, shall come and make his
Complaint to us, we must let him see we are sorry for his Misfortune;
Persuading him to Patience, and Silence, and Encouraging him to Hope well;
lessening the Injury, and Excusing the Prince. But with such as these, we must
deal warily, for there are those that Counterfeit Wrongs and Discontents, to
see if they can Draw any Testimony of an Ill will to the Prince out of us, that
thence they may take an occasion to Undo us: Others are Injured Indeed, but yet
are Weak and Imprudent, not being able to Conceal what is out of Friendship
Communicated to them in Secret.

If our Condition be such, that we keep a Train of Servants, we are to take
great care that none of them speak Licentiously, either of the Prince, or his
Favorites; for many times the Servant's Fault is cast upon the Master, from
whom his Words and Actions are often thought to Proceed. Amongst the principal
rules of a Courtier's Prudence, this is one, To Discover and Smell out betimes,
the Change and Diminution of the Prince's Affection toward us, to the end,
that the Knot of love between you, may rather be Gently untied, than cut in
sunder. For so many times the Cause of our Distaste being Removed, or Worn way,
there is sometimes an easy return for us unto our former Favor, especially,
if we seem, either not to Remember, or not to have Understood the Injury.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How to Make a Judgment of the Constancy, or Change of the Prince's Affection
to us.

TO the end our Courtier may judge of Constancy of the Prince's Favor toward
him, It is not Enough that he know the Prince's Humor, with the Authority and
Power, both of his Friends and Enemies in Court; but he must Principally weigh
the Original Cause of the Prince's Love toward him: For, if That once Cease,
or be found more Prevalent in Another, without doubt, the Affection of the
Prince will either wholly Cool, or at least be much Diminished.

Yet sometimes it is hard to Divine what is the Reason, that you are so
Beloved; and truly, it is sometimes only a Fortunate Felicity, for which no
Reason can be given, though ordinarily the Prince's love arises, either out of
Similitude of Disposition, out of the Pleasingness of your Humor and Manners,
out of your Services Done him, or from your Virtue; or lastly, from your
Obsequious Pliableness to his Will, That love which comes from the similitude
or Takingness of your Manners, although it seem very Great for a Time, yet it
wears out Soonest of all; both, because as we have said before the Nature of
man Changes daily with Age, or with Variety of Business; and also because it is
Hard to find two Dispositions so Symphathizing together, as that they Differ in
nothing; and many times that wherein they differ, is of more Power to Divide
them, than all the rest to Unite them together.

Yet I know not what Star does so Tune and Temper some men still to the
Prince's Liking, and Disposition, that they can Hardly, if they would, do any
Dissonant or Displeasing thing to him: And I do confess, That these men may
make the Best Harvest, with a Prince of all others; especially, if they know
skilfully how to Choose and Use their Times and how to Take in their Sails
seasonably before a Storm.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The Prince's favor to Women: Instructions for the Prince's Mistresses;
Benefits Conferred on Princes, often Make Those Persons Hated by Them, with
other Documents.

PRinces do sometimes also bestow this Favor on Women, according as they are
more or less Prone to Venereal Pleasures; but they also do frequently Fall from
Favor, if not by their own Faults, yet out of the Prince's Satiety, or finding
out a fairer Mistress. Wherefore, such Women as are Crafty, are wont to Divert
Princes, as Much as may be, from all Commerce with other Women, especially such
as may be likely to Entangle the Prince's Mind; some also, by Counterfeiting
Disdain, and Keeping State, have Preserved their Lover; and lastly, some more
Audacious and Bold, when they saw the Prince once Truly Love Them, have kept
him still Drunk in Lust, and Drowned in Pleasure.

Which arts Poppaea Practiced upon Nero: For when she saw that he was Enamoured
of her becoming Proud, If she Entertained him a might or two, it was all she
could Afford him, saying, She was a Married Wife, and could not Abandon her
Husband Otho, who for his Parts and Behavior Exceeded Nero: That in using a
Bondslave for his Concubine, had learned nothing from that Servile Familiarity,
but Baseness and Nigardice: Thus Tacitus reports her Discourses, Annal. 13. And
soon after, Annal. 14 the same Poppaea Despairing now of Marrying Nero, or of
seeing him Divorced from Octavia, as long as Agrippina lived, sometimes
Tauntingly, and sometimes Merrily, began to Reproach the Prince, calling him a
Ward, and Subject to others Controulment; and said, he was so far from the
Government of the Empire, That he Wanted his own Liberty. Some Princes
Mistresses have by this Means held their Affections Faster, than by the
Dallyings and Blandishments of Pleasure; yet, as I said before, there is no
Constancy in this kind of Affection to be relied upon long.

Truly one would think that Love, which you have Gained by your services,
should be Stable and more Firm, than what comes from Flattery or Pleasure, as
arising out of an Honest Cause; and which being Cherished in you, is apt to
stir up others to Merit as well by Virtuous Undertakings. Yet experience often
Teaches us, that very Great Services have in Courts been the Ruin of those
that have Performed them; by reason, that Princes are wont to Hate, whom they
cannot Requite. They will not be Indebted to a Subject, and therefore do Fly
the Sight of Those that have Exceeding well Deserved of Them, as if they did
with their Looks Reproach them of Ingratitude; which is the Reason, why the
Condition of such Men in Courts, is much to be Pitied; for when they have
Obliged the Prince by any Service, they are Ashamed by and by, to ask a Reward,
least they should seem not to have Given, but Sold the Benefit they did him;
who in the mean time, as Princes are often Regardless of the Service Received,
and Slow to Reward, Draws out, day after day, till the Memory of the Benefit
Wears out in the Minds of those that were Privy to it; whose Silent Reproaches
he feared before.

Which some men observing, have judged it fit, to Strike the Iron whilst it was
Hot; and when they were Designed for any Business to Look to their Reward,
before they Undertook the Employment; knowing well that with Princes the hope
of Future Services, is more Prevalent to Induce Reward, than the Memory of
Those that are Past; and that it is Better to be Obliged to Princes than to
have them Obliged to us; Because they believe, Whoever they have Obliged, do
wish well to them, whilst He that they are Indebted unto, because he is
Believed not to Love the Prince that has Denied him, what he Pretended unto is
Recompensed only with Hate. This Commines tells us, was Lewis the Eleventh his
Opinion.

The love of Princes Toward the Ministers of their Pleasure, would seem to be
Stable; and Truly, it is of some Continuance, as long as the Inclinations of
the Prince to Pleasure Continue; but those Changing, the Affections to those
that Fed them, Change also. Sometimes likewise, the Prince Inclining to the
Love of Virtue, does Reject and Abominate Those that are Instruments of his
Pleasures. But as some of the Inclinations of Princes are more Durable than
others, so also is their Favor (as I said) of a Proportioned Continuance,
toward the Servants of those Several Inclinations.

CHAP. XXXIX. Sundry Precepts Concerning the Pleasures, and Inclinations of the
Prince, etc.
I Will not Touch here upon all Pleasures whereunto the Nature of the Prince is
Prone, because All of them are not fit, or apt to have the Greatness of any
man's Fortune built upon them. Those Passions that are of greatest sway in
Princes Minds, and familiar unto them, are three, to wit, Wanton Love, Cruelty,
and Avarice: The first, as it is more Vehement than All the Rest, so it is More
Uncertain, and Inconstant; for though the Vice still remains as to the Subject,
yet it keeps not Fixed still upon the Same Object: nevertheless, many have used
this as a Foundation, whereupon to Build their Fortunes, not sticking to
Prostitute their Wives, so they might gain the Favor of the Prince; as we Read
in Tacitus, that Otho did, although it sell not out well with him; for Nero
removed him from Court, least he should have a Rival there.

Others that they might Bind their Princes unto Them, made themselves Witnesses
and Companions of their Wickedness and Lusts by the Example of Tigellinus.
These Men do not think that Princes have a Trick to Free themselves of Public
Blame and Envy, to sacrifice oftentimes such kind of men unto it. And all those
Servants of their Lusts are to Expect the same fortune as happened to Remirus de
Orco, the Minister of Caesar Borgia his Cruelties; whom at last, Borgia caused
to be Murdered, as Guilty of All the Ill that he had done.

And from the Example of this Remirus, we may also Read their Destiny, who
serve the Prince in his Cruelties; for the Prince's Affection seldom endures
toward them, both because he does, as it were, daily read his Wickedness in
seeing them, and also is Afraid of them, whom he knows so Apt to Villainy. Nero
although hardened in Vice, and of a Cruel Nature, yet after his Mother's death
Hated Anicetus, as one whose face Daily Reproached him with his Mother's
murder.

The Affections of Avarice are least of all changeable; the diversity of the
Object does not vary in these as in those of Love; it is not Diminished, but
Increases with Age; and although it is as Hateful to the People, as Cruelty,
yet it is Longer Endured, because it Covers and Cloaks all Exactions, under the
pretense of Public Necessity, Parsimony, and the Common good. Therefore, those
that upon this score serve Princes, may long preserve themselves in their
Favor, whilst (which is rare in these kind of men) they do not become Froward
and Peevish, nor too much intend Enriching Themselves.

Frowardness, which for the most part is likewise Contumelious, begets Hatred
both to the Prince, and to it self; The author of which, the Prince will at
last cast away, to Remove the Envy of it from himself.

Riches are also obnoxious to Envy, not of the People only, but sometimes of
the Prince himself; who if he be Truly Avaritious, will hardly be Content, till
he have Squeezed the Full Sponge, as we read that Vespasian was wont to do; but
will rather Imitate the Country Clowns, who when they have Fatned their Hogs,
do Kill and Devour them. Truly, France has seen many such, who being Proud and
Peevish, and who making too much Have to be Rich, have thereby, and by their
Insolence, from a great Height of Fortune, fallen to Nothing.

In the time of Philip le Belle, Peter Berchius, High Chamberlain, and
Treasurer of France, was strangled at Paris; Lewis, Philip's Son, afterward
coming to the Crown, Enguerrandus Marigny met with the same Misfortune: Under
Charles the Seventh, Gyacensis, in Dignity Equal to Berchias, was Brought to
the Bar, and afterward Sowed in a Sack, and Crowned; his Successor Caenus
Beaulieu was Killed at Poicters; and the Same End had come under Philip the
First, to Peter Essart, if with an Hundred thousand Florins he had not Redeemed
his Life.

I could Recount More nearer us, but that I am willing to spare their Memory:
In the mean time these Examples are sufficient to Instruct, That as the too
Great Easiness of these Ministers brings too Great a Detriment upon the
Prince's Profit; so their Insolent Griping, and Frowardness, Draws Hate and
Destruction upon themselves: And that as we ought not to Refuse a just occasion
of enriching our selves, so we must not show our selves too Greedy after
Riches, nor Amass so much together, as may Expose us to the Public Envy.

CHAP. XL.
Concluding with Many, Choice, and Necessary Admonitions.

THere Remains only now unhandled the last Cause, why Courtiers are Beloved by
their Princes; to wi^, An Aptness, and Singular Ability to Dispatch, and Manage
their Affairs: For which reason, When we see that we are become Acceptable to
the Prince, we must consider, Whether He Love this Aptness for business,
because of the Usefulness and necessity of it; or else, because the Prince
desires to Acquire from us that Aptitude to Himself. If it be Grateful, because
it is Necessary, his Favor to us will endure as Long as the Necessity Remains;
but his Love; will rather be a Forced, than Voluntary Love.

If we see the Prince Aspire to the Glory of this Aptitude for business, there
is no doubt, but when he sees, that he cannot Either Equal, or Excel us, we
shall become an Eyesore, and Unacceptable to him; for there is in Princes an
Innate Desire, as well as in all other Men, of Excelling All Persons in those
Arts they Addict themselves unto; and therefore no Man, almost, is Pleased to
be Excelled in them by his own Servant. Asinius Pollio, some Exhorting him to
make a Reply to those Verses Augustus Caesar had made against him, Answered,
That he would not, by Contending, to seem the Better Scribe, draw his Envy upon
him, that had Power to Proscribe him. There Arising a Dispute once between
Favorinus the Philosopher, and the Emperor Adrian, about some word, wherein the
Philosopher at last seemed to yield; his Friends wondering at it, he said, I am
not Ashamed to be Overcome in Knowledge by Him that Commands Thirty Legions.

To this Purpose, that Saying of Solomon is very Notorious, Do not Seem Wise
before the King. It is necessary therefore, That whosoever desires to Purchase
a Prince's Favor, must set aside the desire of his Own Glory; and not only in
Verbal Disputes, but in every thing else, yield him the day: And to that end,
it will not be amiss, on purpose to Commit some Errors and Over-sights; so that
they be not Two Gross, nor like to take too much from our Repute.

Out of our Discourse hitherto, it is evident, how little Certainty is in all
the Greatness and Favor at Court; Wherefore, the best Counsel that can be given
to all Courtiers, is; To Prepare Themselves for their Fall; for although it is
Thought a more Generous Thing to Fight, than to Fly, when you are once entered
these lists; yet if you are to do it with Greater Hazard of Danger, than Hope
of Success, it is not Indiscreet to Sound a Retreat Betimes, and, in Imitation
of the Parthians, to Fight Flying.

As it is also a more Glorious thing to descend gently by steps, and as it
were, to go out at the Door, than to be Cast Headlong out at the Window; so it
is less shameful, under Color of some Specious and Contrived Pretenses, to bid
Adieu to your Honors and Offices, than to Expect to be Stripped Disgracefully of
them: And hereunto may fitly be applied the saying of an ancient Roman.

Why do thou Weary Tired Fortune so?
Depart the Court, Before thou art Forced to go.
Seneca says, it is Happiness to Die in the Midst of your Felicity; but I on
the other side think That Courtier happy, who in the Midst of his Prosperous
Race Makes a Retreat. Perhaps he that shall do So, shall not be Applauded by
all, but by some that look upon the Outsides of things, be Judged unworthy of
the Fortune that he has so abandoned. Yet he that is wise, not Regarding such
Idle Discourses, will provide for his own Safety, and remember, that in all
Games, it is Better to give over a winner, than a loser; as also, that no
Prudent Man will exchange, or adventure Certain Things, for Things so Very
Uncertain.

Though our Ascent to These Heights of Fortune and Dignities, is, as it were,
by steps in order; yet our Descents, if not Timely foreseen, are for the most
part Headlong, and Sudden: So that those that are Flourishing in Favor and
Authority, if they chance once to Slip, or Stumble, their Falls are commonly
Desperate and Fatal.

Behold here the Compendium of All, that I desired to say, for our Courtiers
Instruction: Whether these Precepts be Pertinent, and Select or no, I will not
Determine, but leave that to the Judgment and Experience of my Friends. For my
own part, I confess, I have at present no Great Use of them, and am so far from
being Transported with Sadness, at my Private and Retired Condition, that I do
heartily say with Seneca;

Let him that will ascend the Tottering Seat
Of Courtly Grandeur, and become as Great
As are his Mounting Wishes; as for Me
Let Sweet Repose, and Rest, my Portion be.
Give me some Mean Obscure Recess, a Sphere
Out of the Road of Business, or the Fear
Of falling Lower, where I sweetly may
My Self, and Dear Retirement still enjoy.
Let not my Life, or Name be known unto
The Grandees of the Times, Tossed to and fro
By Censures or Applause; but let my Age
Slide Gently by, not overthwart the Stage
Of Public Action; unheard, unseen,
And Vnconcern'd, as if I never had been.
And thus, while I shall Pass my Silent Days
In Shady Privacy, free from the Noise
And Bustles of the World, then shall I
A Good Old Innocent Plebeian Die.
Death is a mere Surprise, a very Snare
To him that makes it his Life's Greatest care
To be a Public Pageant, Known to All,
But unacquainted with Himself, does fall.
Persons Characterized.
OBservations on Queen Elizabeth, and Her Times Page 159 On Leicester p. 179 On
Sussex p. 184 On Lord Burleigh p. 186 On Sir Philip Sidney p. 192 On Sir
Francis Walsingham p. 194 On Willoughby p. 197 On Sir Nic. Bacon p. 198 On Lord
Norris p. 200 On Knowls p. 201 On Sir John Perrot p. 203 On Hatton p. 209 On
Lord Effingham p. 210 On Sir John Packington p. 213 On Lord Hunsden p. 214 On
Sir Walter Raleigh p. 215 On Grevil p. 220 On Essex p. 221 On Buckhurst p. 228
On Mountjoy p. 231 On Cecil p. 236 On Vere p. 242 On Worcester p. 244
Fragmenta Regalia: OR, OBSERVATIONS On the Late QUEEN ELIZABETH Her Times, and
Favorites.

WRITTEN By Sir Robert Naunton, Master of the Court of Wards.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Gilliflower, at the Spread-Eagle in
Westminster Hall, M DC XCIV.

Fragmenta Regalia: OR, OBSERVATIONS On the Late Queen ELIZABETH Her Times, and
Favorites.
TO take Her in the Original, She was Daughter to Henry the Eighth, by Anne
Bullen, the second of six Wives which He had, and one of the Maids of Honor to
the Divorced Queen Katharine of Austria (or as they style it) Infanta of Spain,
and from thence taken into the Royal Bed.

That She was (...) of a most Noble and Royal Extract by Her Father, will not
fall into question: for on that side there was Disimbogued into her veins by a
confluence of Blood the very Abstract of all the greatest Houses in
Christendom; and remarkable it is concerning that violent desertion of the
Royal House of the Britains, by the invasion of the Saxons, and afterward by
the Conquest of the Normans, that by the vicissitude of times, and through a
discontinuance (almost a thousand years) the Royal Scepter should fall back
into the Current of the old British blood, in the person of her Renowned
Grandfather Henry the Seventh, together with whatsoever the German, Norman,
Burgundian, Castalian, and Erench Achievements, with the Intermarriaages,
which Eight hundred years had acquired, incorporated, and brought back into the
old Royal Line.

By her Mother She was of no Sovereign descent, yet Noble, and very Ancient in
the Name and Family of Bullen, though some Erroneously brand it with a Citizens
rise or original, which was yet but of a second Brother, who (as it were)
Divining the Greatness and Luster to come to his House, was sent into the City
to acquire wealth, ad aedificandum antiquam domum. Unto whose achievements
(for he was Lord Mayor of London) fell in, as it was averred, both the blood
and inheritance of the eldest Brother, for want of issue Male, by which
Accumulation, the House within a few descents mounted in Culmen honoris, and
was suddenly Elated into the best Families of England and Ireland, as Howard,
Ormund, Sackvile, and diverse others. Having thus Touched, and now leaving her
Stirp, I come to her Person; and as she came to the Crown by the decease of her
Brother and Sister. Under Edward She was His, and one of the Darlings of
Fortune: for besides the consideration of Blood, there was between these two
Princes a Concurrency and Symphathy in their Natures and Affections, together
with the Celestial bond (conformity in Religion) which made them One, and
Friends; for the King ever called her his Sweetest and Dearest Sister, and was
scarce his own man, She being absent, which was not so between him and the Lady
Mary. Under his Sister She found her condition much altered: For it was
resolved, and her Destiny had Decreed to set her an Apprentice in the School of
Affliction, and to draw her through the Ordeal fire of trial, the better to
Mould and Fashion her to Rule and Sovereignity; which finished, and Fortune
calling to mind, that the time of her servitude was expired, gave up her
Indentures, and therewith delivered up into her custody a Scepter, as a reward
for her Patience, which was about the twenty sixth year of her Age; a time in
which (as for Externals) she was full Blown, so was she for her Internals grown
Ripe and seasoned with Adversity, and in the Exercise of her Virtue: for it
seems Fortune meant no more, than to show her a piece of her variety, and
Changeableness of her Nature, and so to conduct her to her destined Felicity.
She was of Personage Tall, of Hair and Complexion Fair, and therewith well
favored, but high nosed, of limbs and feature neat, and which added to the
Luster of those Exterior Graces, of Stately and Majestic Comportment;
participating in this more of her Father than Mother, who was of an inferior
Allay, Plausible, or as the French has it, more debonaire and Affable, virtues
which might well suit with Majesty; and which descending, as Hereditary to the
Daughter, did render her of a more sweet Temper, and Endeared her more to the
love and liking of the people; who gave her the name and fame of a most
Gracious and Popular Princess; the atrocity of her Father's nature, being
Rebated in hers, by the Mother's sweeter Inclinations. For to take, and that no
more than the Character, out of his own mouth; He never spared man in his
anger, nor woman in his lust.

If we search further into her Intellectuals and abilities, the whole course of
Government decyphers them to the Admiration of posterity; for it was full of
Magnanimity, tempered with Justice, and Piety; and to speak truly, noted but
with one act or taint; all her deprivations either of life or liberty, being
legal, and necessitated: She was learned (her sex, and the time considered)
beyond Common belief; for letters about this time, and somewhat before, began
to be of Esteem and in fashion, the former ages being overcast with the Mists
and Fogs of the Roman ignorance; and it was the maxim that overruled the
foregoing times, That ignorance was the mother of devotion. Her wars were a
long time more in the Auxiliary part, in Assistance of foreign Princes and
States, than by Invasion of any, till common policy Advised it for a safer
way, to strike first abroad, than at home to Expect the ware, in all which she
was happy and victorious. The Change and Alteration of Religion upon the
Instant of her Accession (the smoke and fire of her Sister's Matyrdomes
scarcely quenched) was none of her least remarkable Accounts: But the support
and establishment thereof, with the means of her subsistence, amidst so
Powerful Enemies abroad, and those many Domestique Practices, were (methinks)
works of Inspiration, and of no humane providence, which on her Sister's
departure she most religiously acknowledged, ascribing the glory of her
deliverance to God alone: for she received the news both of the Queens death,
and her Proclamation, by the general Consent of the House, and the Public
suffrage of the people, whereat, falling on her knees (after a good time of
Respiration) she uttered this Verse of the Psalms, A Domino factum est istud,
and est mirabile in oculis nostris, which we find to this day on the stamp of
her gold, with this on her silver, Posui Deum adjutorem meum. Her Ministers and
Instruments of State, such as were participes curarum, and bore a great part of
the burden, were Many, and those Memorable, but they were only Favorites,
not Minions; such as Acted more by her own Princely rules and judgments, than
by their own wills and appetites, which she Observed to the last: for we find
no Gaveston, Vere, or Spencer, to have swayed alone, during forty four years;
which was a well settled and Advised Maxim; for it valued her the more, it Awed
the most secure, and it took best with the people, and it starved all
Emulations, which are apt to rise and vent in obloquious acrimony (even against
the Prince) where there is only Amator Palatii.

The Principal note of her Reign will be that she ruled much by Faction and
Parties, which her self both made, upheld, and weakened, as her own great
judgment advised. For I disassent from the common received opinion, that my
Lord of Leicester was Absolute and Above all in her Grace: and though I come
somewhat short of the knowledge of those times, yet (that I might not Rove, and
shoot at Random) I know it from assured Intelligence, that it was not so. For
proof whereof (among many that I could present) I will both relate a short, and
therein a known truth, And it was thus. Bowyer, a Gentleman of the Black rod,
being charged by her Express Command to look Precisely to all Admissions into
the Privy-Chamber, one day stayed a very Gay Captain, and a follower of my Lord
of Leicester's, from Entrance: For that he was neither well known, nor a Sworn
Servant to the Queen: at which Repulse, the Gentleman bearing high on my Lord's
favor, told him, he might perchance procure him a Discharge: Leicester coming
into the Contest, said Publicly (which was none of his wont) that he was a
Knave, and should not continue long in his Office; and so turning about to go
in to the Queen, Bowyer (who was a bold Gentleman, and well beloved) stepped
before him, and fell at her Majesty's feet, Related the story, and humbly
craves her Grace's Pleasure; and whether my Lord of Leicester was King, or her
Majesty Queen? Whereunto she replied with her wonted Oath (God's death) my
Lord, I have wished you well, but my favor is not so locked up for you, that
others shall not partake thereof; for I have Many Servants, unto whom I have,
and will at my Pleasure bequeath my Favor, and likewise Resume the same; and
if you think to Rule here I will take a Course to see you forth Coming, I will
have here but one Mistress, and no Master, and look that no ill happen to Him,
lest it be severely Required at your hands. Which so quelled my Lord of
Leicester, that his Feigned Humility was long after one of his best virtues.
Moreover the Earl of Sussex, then Lord Chamberlain, was his professed Antagonist
to his dying day. And for my Lord of Hunsdon and Sir Thomas Sackvile, after
Lord Treasurer, (who were all Contemporaties) he was wont to say of them, that
they were of the Tribe of Dan, and were Noli me tangere's; Implying, that they
were not to be Contested with; for they were indeed of the Queen's near
kindred. From whence, and in more instances I Conclude, that she was Absolute
and Sovereign Mistress of her Graces; and that all those, to whom she
distributed her Favors, were never more than Tenants at will and stood on no
better ground than her Princely Pleasure and their own Good behavior. And this
also I present as a known Observation, that she was (though very capable of
Counsel) absolute enough in her own Resolutions; which was ever Apparent even
to her last, in that her Aversation to grant Tirone the least drop of her
Mercy, though Earnestly and Frequently Importuned by the whole Council of
State, with very many Pressing Reasons, and as the state of her Kingdom then
stood (I may speak it with Assurance) Necessitated Arguments. If we look into
her Inclination, as it is disposed either to Magnificence or Frugality, we
shall find in them many Notable Considerations, for all her Dispensations were
so poysed, as though Discretion and Justice had both agreed to stand at the
beam, and see them weighed out in due Proportion, the Maturity of her Years and
Judgment meeting in a concurrency, and at such an Age as seldom lapseth to
Excess. To consider them apart: We have not many Precedents of her Liberality,
or of any large Donatives to particular men; my Lord of Essex Book of Parks
only Excepted, which was a Princely gift, and some few more of a lesser Size to
my Lord of Leicester, Hatton, and others. Her Rewards consisted chiefly in
Grants of Leases of Offices, Places of Judicature: but for Ready Money, and in
any Great sums, she was very sparing; which we partly conceive was a Virtue
rather drawn from Necessity, than her Nature, for she had many layings out, and
to her last Period. And I am of opinion with S. Walter Raleigh that those many
Brave Men of our Times, and of the Militia, Tasted little more of her Bounty
than in her Grace and Good word, with their due Entertainment, for She ever
paid the Soldiers well, which was the Honor of her Times, and more than her
Great Adversary of Spain could Perform. So that when we come to the
consideration of her Frugality, the observation will be little more, than that
her Bounty and it were so Inter-woven together, that the one was suited by an
honorable way of Spending, the other limited by a Necessitated way of Sparing.
The Irish Action we may call a malady, and a Consumption of her Times, for it
Accompanied her to her End; and it was of so Profuse and vast an Expense, that
it drew near a distemperature of State, and of Passion in her self: For toward
her last she grew Hard to Please; her Arms being Accustomed to prosperity, and
the Irish prosecution not answering her Expectation and wonted success for a
good while, it was an Unthrifty and Inauspicious war, which did much disturb
and Mislead her judgment, and the more for that it was a Precedent which was
taken out of her own pattern: For as the Queen (by way of diversion) had at the
coming to the Crown supported the revolted States of Holland, so did the King
of Spain turn the Trick on her self toward her going out, by cherishing the
Irish rebellion. Where it falls into consideration, what the State of the
Kingdom and the Crown Revenues were then able to Embrace and Endure; if we look
into the Establishment of those times, with the list of the Irish Army,
considering the defeatments of Blackwater, with all precedent Expenses, as it
stood from my Lord of Essex's undertaking to the surrender of Kingsale under
the General Mountjoy, and somewhat after; we shall find the Horse and Foot
Troops were for three or four years together, much about 20000. Which besides
the Naval charge, which was a dependant of the same War, in that the Queen was
then forced to keep in continual pay a strong Fleet at Sea, to Attend the
Spanish Coasts and Ports, both to alarm the Spaniard, and to intercept his
Forces designed for the Irish assistance: so that the charge of that War alone
did cost the Queen 300000 l. per annum at least, which was not the Money of her
Disbursements, an Expense which (without the public said) the State and the
Royal Receipts could not have much longer endured; which out of her own
frequent Letters and complaints to the Deputy Mountjoy, for casheering part of
that List as soon as he could, may be collected; for the Queen was then driven
into a strait.

We are naturally prone to Applaud the Times behind us, and to vilify the
present: for the current of her Fame carries it to this day, how Royally and
Victoriously she lived and dyed, without the grievance and grudge of the
people; yet that truth may appear without retraction from the Honor of so
great a Princess, it is manifest she left more debts unpaid, taken upon the
credit of her Privy Seals, than her Progenitors did, or could have taken up
that way, in a hundred years before her; which was an enforced piece of State,
to lay the burden on that horse, that was best able to bear it, at the dead
lift, when neither her Receipts could yield her Relief at the pinch, nor the
urgency of her Affairs endure the delays of a Parliamentary Assistance: And for
such aids it is likewise apparent, That she received more, and with the love of
the people, than any two of her Predecessors, that took most; which was a
Fortune strained out of the Subject, through the Plausibility of her
Comportment, and, as I would say without offense, the Prodigal Distribution of
her Graces to all sorts of Subjects: For I believe, no Prince living, that was
so Tender of Honor, and so exactly stood for the preservation of Sovereignty,
that was so great a Courtier of her people, yea, of the Commons, and that
Stoopt and Descended lower in presenting her person to the public view, as she
past in her Progresses and Perambulations; and in the Ejaculation of her
prayers on her people. And truly, though much may be given in praise of her
Magnanimity, and therewith comply with her Parliaments, and for all that come
off at last with honor and profit; yet must we ascribe some part of the
Commendation to the wisdom of the times, and the choice of Parliament Men: for
I find not that they were at any time given to any violent or pertinacious
dispute, Elections being made of Grave and Discreet persons, not Factious and
Ambitious of Fame; such as came not to the House with a Malevolent spirit of
Contention, but with a Preparation to Consult on the Public Good, rather to
Comply than Contest with her Majesty: Neither do I find, that the House was at
any time weakened and pestered with the admission of too many Young heads, as it
has been of later times; which remembers me of Recorder Martin's Speech, about
the tenth of our late Sovereign Lord King James, when there were Accounts taken
of forty Gentlemen, not above Twenty, and some not exceeding Sixteen, which
moved him to say, That it was the Ancient custom for Old men to make Laws for
young ones, but that then he saw the case altered, and that there were Children
Elected unto the great Council of the Kingdom which came to invade and invert
nature, and to Enact Laws to Govern their Fathers. Sure we are, the House
always took the Common Cause into their Consideration, and they saw the Queen
had just occasion, and need enough to use their Assistance; neither do I
remember that the House did ever Capitulate or Prefer their Private to the
Public, the Queen's necessities, etc. but waited their times, and in the first
place gave their Supply, and according to the Exigency of her Affairs; yet
failed not at last to obtain what they desired, so that the Queen and her
Parliaments had ever the good Fortune to depart in love, and on reciprocal
Terms, which are considerations which have not been so Exactly observed in our
last Assemblies, as they might, and I would to God they had been: for
considering the great debt left on the King, and in what Encumbrances the House
it self had then Drawn him, his Majesty was not well used, though I lay not the
blame on the whole suffrage of the House, where he had Many good Friends; for I
dare Avouch, had the House been freed of half a dozen of Popular and
Discontented Persons, such as (with the fellow that burnt the Temple at
Ephesus) would be talked of, though but for Doing of Mischief, I am confident
the King had obtained, that which in Reason, and at his first Accession, he
ought to have Received Freely, and without any Condition. But pardon the
Digression, which is here Remembered, not in the way of Aggravation, but in true
zeal to the public good, and presented in Caution to future times; for I am
not Ignorant how the spirit of the Kingdom now moves to make his Majesty Amends
on any occasion, and how desirous the Subject is to Expiate that offense at any
Rate, may it please his Majesty graciously to make trial of his Subjects
Affection, and at what price they now value his Goodness and Magnanimity. But
to our purpose; the Queen was not to learn, that as the strength of her Kingdom
consisted in the Multitude of her Subjects; so the Security of her Person
Rested in the Love and Fidelity of her people; which she politickly Affected
(as it has been thought) somewhat beneath the Height of her Spirit, and
Natural Magnanimity. Moreover it will be a true note of her Providence, that
she would always listen to her Profit, for she would not refuse the
Informations of Mean Persons, with purposed improvement, and had learned the
Philosophy of Hoc agere, to look into her own work; of the which there is a
notable Example of one Carwarden, an under-Officer of the Custom-House, who
observing his time, presented her with a paper, showing how she was abused in
the under-renting of her Customs, and therewithal humbly desired her Majesty
to Conceal Him, for that it did concern two or three of her great Councillors
whom Customer Smith had Bribed with 200l. a man, so to lose the Queen 200 l.
per annum, which being made known to the Lords, they gave strict order, that
Carwarden should not have Access to the back-stairs; till at last, her Majesty
Smelling the Craft, and Missing Carwarden, She sent for him back, and
encouraged him to stand to his Information; which the poor man did so
Handsomely, that within the space of ten years, he brought Smith to Double his
Rent, or to leave the customs to new Farmers. So that we may take this also
into observation; that there were of the Queen's Council, that were not in the
Catalogue of Saints.

Now as we have taken a view of some particular Notions of her Times, her
Nature and Necessities: It is not beside the text, to give a short Touch on the
Helps, and Advantages of her Reign, which were without Parallel, for she had
neither Husband, Brother, Sister, nor Children to Provide for, who as they are
Dependants of the Crown, so do they Necessarily draw maintenance from thence,
and do oftentimes Exhaust and Draw deep, especially when there is an ample
fraternity of the blood Royal, and of the Princes of the Blood, as it was in
the time of Edward the third, and Henry the fourth: for when the Crown cannot,
the Public ought to give them Honorable Allowance; for they are the Honor
and Hopes of the Kingdom and the Public, which enjoys them, has a like
interest in them with the Father that begot them and our Common Law, which is
the Inheritance of the Kingdom, did ever of old provide aids for the
Primogenitures, and the eldest Daughter. So that the multiplicy of Courts, and
the Great Charge which necessarily follow a King, and Queen, a Prince and the
Royal Issue, was a thing which was not in rerum natura, during the space of
forty years, and which by time was worn out of memory, and without the
consideration of the present times. Insomuch, that the aids given to the late
and right noble Prince Henry, and to his Sister the Lady Elizabeth, were at
first generally received for impositions of a new Coynage. Yea, the late
impositions for Knighthood (though an ancient Law) fell also into the
imputation of a Tax of novelty, for that it lay long covered in the embers of
division, between the Houses of York and Lancaster, and forgotten, or connived
at by the succeeding Princes: So that the strangeness of the observation, and
difference of those later reigns is, that the Queen took up beyond the power of
the Law, which fell not into the murmur of the people; and her successors
nothing but by warrant of the Law, which nevertheless was conceived (through
disuse) to be Injurious to the Liberty of the Kingdom.

Now before I come to any further mention of her Favorites, (for hitherto I
have delivered but some Obvious Passages, thereby to prepare and smooth a way
for the rest that follows) it is requisite that I Touch on the Relics of the
other Reign, I mean the Body of her Sisters Council of State, which she
Retained entire; neither Removing, nor Discontenting any, although she knew
them averse to her Religion (and in her Sisters time Perverse toward her
Person) and privy to her Troubles and Imprisonment; A prudence which was
incomparible with her Sisters nature, for she both dissipated and Persecuted
the major part of her Brother's Council. But this will be of certainty, that
how Compliable soever and Obsequious she found them, yet for a good space she
made little use of their Counsels, more than in the Ordinary course of the
Board, for she held a Dormant Table in her own Princely Breast: yet she kept
them together, and their Places, without any sudden Change: so that we may say
of them, That they were of the Court, not of the Council. For whilst she
Amused them with a kind of Promissive Disputation concerning the Points
Controverted by both Churches, she did set down her own Reservations, without
their Privity, and made all her Progressions Gradations. But so, that the
Tenants of her secrecy, with intent of her establishment, were Pitched, before
it was known where the Court would sit down. Neither do I find, that any of her
Sisters Council of State were either Repugnant to her Religion, or Opposed her
doings ( Englefield Master of the Horse excepted, who withdrew himself from the
Board, and shortly after from out her Dominions) so Pliable and Obedient they
were to Change with the Times, and their Princes. And of this there will fall
in here a Relation both of Recreation, and of known Truth.

Paulet, Marquess of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer, having served then four
Princes in as Various and Changeable seasons, that I may well say, time, nor
any age has yielded the like precedent. This Man being noted to grow High in
her Favor (as his Place and Experience required) was questioned by an Intimate
friend of his, how he stood up for Thirty years together, amidst the Changes
and Reigns of so many Chancellors and Great Personages; Why, quoth the
Marquess, Ortus sum ex salice, non ex quercu, I was made of the pliable Willow,
not of the stubborn Oak. And truly the Old Man has Taught them all, especially
William Earl of Pembroke; for they two were ever of the King's Religion, and
over-zealous professors. Of these it is said, that being both younger Brothers
(yet of Noble Houses) they spent what was left them, and came on trust to the
Court; where upon the bare stock of their Wits they began to Traffic for
themselves, and prospered so well, that they Got, Spent, and Left more than any
Subjects from the Norman Conquest to their own Times: whereunto it has been
prettily replied, that they lived in a Time of Dissolution.

To conclude then, of any of the former reign, it is said, that these two lived
and dyed chiefly in her favor. The latter, upon his son's marriage with the
Lady Katharine Gray, was like utterly to have lost himself: But at the Instant
of the consummation, Apprehending the insafety and danger of an inter-marriage
with the Bloud-Royal, he fell at the Queen's feet, where he both Acknowledged
his Presumption with tears, and projected the Cause and the Divorce together;
and so quick he was at his work, (for it stood him upon) that upon Repudiation
of the Lady, he clapped up a marriage for his Son the Lord Herbert, with Mary
Sidney, daughter to Sir Henry Sidney, then Lord Deputy of Ireland; the blow
falling on Edward late Earl of Hereford, who to his cost took up the Divorced
Lady, of whom the Lord Beauchamp was born, and William Earl of Hereford is
descended. I come now to present Those of her own Election, which she either
admitted to her secrets of State, or took into her Grace and Favor: of whom,
in their order, I crave leave to give unto posterity a cautious description,
with a short Character or Draught of the persons themselves. For without
offense to others, I would be true to my self, their memories and merits
distinguishing them of the Militia from the Togati: and of these she had as
many, and those as able Ministers, as any of her Progenitors.

Leicester.
IT will be out of doubt, that my Lord of Leicester was one of the first whom
she made Master of the Horse: he was the youngest Son then living of the Duke
of Northumberland, beheaded primo Mariae; and his Father was that Dudley, which
our Histories couple with Epson; and both so much Infamed for the Caterpillars
of the Commonwealth, during the reign of Henry the seventh; who being of a
Noble extract, was Executed the first year of Henry the eighth: but not thereby
so Extinct, but that he left a plentiful Estate, and such a Son, who, as the
vulgar speaks it, could live without the Seat; for out of the ashes of his
Father's Infamy, he rose to be a Duke, and as High, as subjection could Permit,
or Sovereignty endure; and though he could not find out any Appellation to
assume the Crown in his own Person, yet he projected, and very nearly Effected
it for his Son Gilbert, by Inter-marriage with the Lady Jane Gray, and so by
that way to bring it about into his loins. Observations, which though they lie
behind us, and seem impertinent to the Text, yet are they not much Extravagant:
for they must lead, and show us how the After-passages were brought about with
the Dependances; and on the hinges of a collateral workmanship: and truly, it
may amaze a well-setled judgment, to look back into those times, and to
consider how this Duke could attain to such a pitch of Greatness; his Father
dying in Ignominy, and at the Gallows, his Estate confiscate, and that for
Peeling and Polling, by the Clamor, and Crucifige of the People; but when we
better think upon it, we find that he was given up, but as a Sacrifice to
please the People, not for any offense committed against the Person of the
King; so that upon the matter he was a Martyr of the Prerogative, and the King
in honor could do no less, than give back to his Son the Privileges of his
blood, with the acquirings of his Father's profession, for he was a Lawyer, and
of the King's Counsel at Law, before he came to be ex interioribus consiliis,
where, besides the licking of his own fingers, he got the King a mass of
Riches, and that not with the hazard, but the loss of his fame and life for the
King's Father's sake. Certain it is, that his Son was left rich in Purse and
Brain, which are good foundations, and full to ambition; and it may be
supposed, he was on all occasions well heard of the King, as a Person of mark
and compassion in his eye: but I find not that he did put up for Advancement,
during Henry the Eighth's time, although a vast Aspirer, and Provident storer.
It seems he thought the King's reign was given to the falling sickness: but
espying his time fitting, and the Sovereignty in the hands of a Pupil Prince,
he thought he might as well then put-up for it as the best, for having then
possession of blood, and a purse, with a headpiece of a vast extent, he soon
got Honor, and no sooner there, but he began to side it with the best, even
with the Protector, and in conclusion got his, and his Brother's heads; still
aspiring, till he Expired in the loss of his own: so that Posterity may, by
Reading the Father and Grandfather, make judgment of the Son; for we shall
find, that this Robert (whose original we have now traced, the better to
present him) was inheritor of the Genius and Craft of his Father, and Ambrose
of the estate, of whom hereafter we shall make some short mention.

We take him now as he was admitted into the Court, and the Queen's favor,
where he was not to seek to play his part well, and dexterously. But his play
was chiefly at the fore game; not that he was a learner at the latter, but he
loved not the after-wit, for they report (and I think not untruly) that he was
seldom behind-hand with his Gamesters, and that they always went away with the
loss.

He was a very Goodly Person, and singular well-Featured, and all his youth
well Favored, and of a Sweet aspect, but High-foreheaded, which as I should
take it, was of no Discommendation: but toward his latter end (which with old
Men, was but a middleage) he grew High-colored and Red-faced. So that the
Queen in this, had much of Her Father, for (excepting some of Her Kindred, and
some few that had handsome wits in crooked bodies) she always took Personage in
the way of her election; for the people has it to this day in Proverb, King
Harry loved a Man. Being thus in her grace, she called to mind the sufferings
of his Ancestors, both in her Fathers and Sisters Reigns, and restored his and
his brothers blood, creating Ambrose, the elder, Earl of Warwick, and himself
Earl of Leicester, etc. And he was ex primitiis, or of her first choice; for he
Rested not there, but long enjoyed her favor: and therewith much what he
listed, till Time and Emulation (the companions of great ones) had resolved on
his Period, and to cover him at his setting in a cloud at Cornbury, not by so
violent a death, and by the fatal Sentence of Judicature, as that of his
Fathers and Grandfathers was; but as it is suggested, by that Porson which he
had prepared for others, wherein they report him a rare Artist. I am not bound
to give cred^t to all vulgar Relations, or to the Libels of the Times, which
are commonly forced, and falsified suitable to the Moods and Humors of Men in
Passion and discontent: But that which leads me to think him no good Man, is
amongst others of known truth, that of my Lord of Essex death in Ireland, and
the Marriage of his Lady yet living, which I forbear to press, in regard that
he is long since dead, and others living whom it may concern.

To take him in the observations of his Letters and Writings (which should best
set him off) for such as fell into my hands, I never yet saw a style or phrase
more seeming Religious, and fuller of the streams of Devotion; and were they
not sincere, I doubt much of his well-being; and I may fear he was too well
seen in the Aphorisms and Principles of Nicholas the Florentine, and in the
Reaches of Caesar Borgia. Hitherto I have touched him in his Courtship; I
conclude him in his Lance. He was sent Governor by the Queen to the United
States of Holland; where we read not of his wonders; for they say that he had
more of Mercury than of Mars; and that his device might have been, without
prejudice to the Great Caesar, Veni, vidi, redii.

Sussex.
HIs Corrival before mentioned, was Thomas Radcliffe Earl of Sussex, who in his
Constellation was his Direct Opposite; for he was indeed one of the Queen's
Martialists, and did very good service in Ireland at her first Accession, till
she Recalled him to the Court, where she made him Lord Chamberlain; but he
Played not his Game with that Cunning and Dexterity as Leicester did, who was
much the more Facete Courtier, though Sussex was thought much the Honester Man,
and far the Better Soldier: but he lay too open on his Guard.

He was a goodly Gentleman, and of a brave Noble nature, True and Constant to
his Friends and Servants: He was also of a very Noble and Ancient Lineage,
honored through many Descents by the Title of Viscounts Fitzwalters. Moreover,
there was such an Antipathy in his nature to that of Leicester's, that being
together in Court, and Both in high Employments, they grew to a direct
Frowardness, and were in continual Opposition; the one setting the Watch, the
other the Sentinel, Each on the Others Actions and Motions; for my Lord of
Sussex was of a great spirit, which, Backed with the queen's special favor, and
Supported by a Great and Ancient Inheritance, could not brook the others
Empire: Insomuch as the Queen, upon sundry occasions, had somewhat to do to
Appease them, until death parted the competition, and left the place to
Leicester, who was not long alone without his Rival in Grace and Command. And
to conclude this Favorite: it is Confidently Affirmed, that lying in his last
sickness, he gave this Caveat to his Friends: I am now passing into another
World, and I must now leave you to your Fortunes, and to the Queen's Grace and
Goodness: but beware of the Gypsy, meaning Leicester, for he will be too Hard
for you all, you know not the Beast so well as I do.

Lord Burleigh.
I Now come to the next, which was Secretary William Cecil; For on the death of
the old Marquess of Winchester, he came up in his room. A Person of a most
Subtle and Active spirit, who, though he stood not altogether by the way of
Constellation, and making up of a Party and Faction, for he was wholly
attentive to the service of his Mistress, and his Dexterity, Experience, and
Merit Challenged a room in the Queen's favor, which Eclipsed the others
overseeming Greatness, and made it appear, that there were others that Steered
and Stood at the Helm besides Himself, and more Stars in the Firmament of her
Grace than Vrsa major, or the Bear with the Ragged Staff.

He was born, as they say, in Lincolnshire; but as some upon knowledge Averr,
of a younger Brother of the Cecils of Hartfordshire, a Family (of mine own
knowledge) though now private, yet of no mean Antiquity. Who being exposed, and
sent to the City, as poor Gentlemen use to do their younger Sons; he came to be
a Rich man on London bridge; and purchasing in Lincolnshire, where this man was
born, he was sent to Cambridge, then to the Inns of Court, and so he came to
serve the Duke of Somerset in the time of his Protectorship as Secretary; and
having a Pregnancy to Great Inclinations, he came by degrees to a higher
Conversation with the Chiefest Affairs of State and Councels: but on the fall
of the Duke he stood some years in umbrage, and without Employment, till the
State found and needed his Abilities: and though we find not that he was taken
into any place, during Mary's Reign, unless (as some have said) toward the
last; yet the Council, on several occasions, made use of him, and at the
Queen's entrance he was Admitted Secretary of State, afterward he was made
Master of the Court of Wards, then Lord Treasurer: A person of most exquisite
Abilities. And indeed the Queen began then to need, and to seek out for Men of
both Garbs, and so I conclude, and rank this great Instrument of State amongst
the Togati, for he had not to do with the Sword, more than as the great
Play Master, and Contriver of War, which shortly followed, wherein he
Accomplished much through his Theorical knowledge at home, and Intelligence
abroad, by unlocking the Councels of the Queens Enemies.

We must now take (and that of truth, into observation, That until the 10th of
her Reign her Times were Calm and Serene, though sometimes a little over-cast,
as the most Glorious Sun-risings are subject to shadowings and droppings. For
the Clouds of Spain, and Vapors of the Holy League, began then to Disperse and
Threaten her Serenity; Moreover, she was then to provide against some Intestine
Storms, which began to gather in the very heart of her Kingdom; all which had a
Relation and Correspondency each with other, to Dethrone her, and to Disturb
the public Tranquillity, and therewithal (as a principal work) the Established
Religion; for the name of Recusant began then, and first to be known to the
World, and till then the Catholics were no more than Church-Papists; but were
commanded by the Pope's Express Letters to Appear, and Forbear Churchgoing, as
they tender their Holy Father, and the Holy Catholic Church their Mother: so
that it seems the Pope had then his Times to take a true Muster of his
Children; but the Queen had the greater Advantage, for she likewise took Tale
of her Apostate Subjects, their Strength, and how many they were that had given
up their Names unto Baal. He then by the Hands of some of his Proselytes, fixed
his Bulls on the Gates of Paul's, which Discharged her Subjects of all
fidelity, and laid siege to the received Faith, and so under the veil of the
next Successor, to Replant the Catholic Religion; so that the Queen had then a
new Task and Work in hand, that might well awake her best Providence, and
required a Mester of Men and Arms, as well as Courtships and Councels; for the
Times began to be Quick and Active, and fitter for stronger Motions, than those
of the Carpet; and it will be a true note of her Magnanimity, that she loved a
Soldier, and had a Propension in her nature to Regard, and always to Grace
them: which the Courtiers taking into observation, took it as an invitation to
win Honor, together with her Majesty's Favor, by exposing themselves to the
Wars; especially, when the Queens and the Affairs of the Kingdom stood in some
Necessity of a Soldier: For we have many instances of the Sallies of the
Nobility and Gentry; yea, and out of the Court, and her Privy Favorites (that
had any touch or tincture of Mars in their inclinations) and to steal away
without License, and the Queen's privity, which had like to have cost some of
them dear; so predominant were their Thoughts and Hopes of Honor growing in
them; as we may truly observe in the dispositions of Sir Philip Sidney, my Lord
of Essex, Mountjoy, and diverse others, whose Absence, and the Manner of their
Eruptions was very Distastful to her: whereof I can here add a True, and no
Impertinent Story, and that of the last Mountjoy; who having twice or thrice
stolen away into Britain (where under Sir John Norris he had then a Company)
without the Queen's leave and privity; she sent a Messenger unto him, with a
strict charge to the General to see him sent home: when he came into the
Queen's Presence, she fell into a kind of Reviling, Demanding how he durst go
over without her leave; Serve me so (quoth she) once more, and I will lay you
Fast enough for Running; You will never leave it until you are knocked on the
head, as that inconsiderate Fellow Sidney was; You shall Go when I send you, in
the mean Time see that you lodge in the Court (which was then at White Hall)
where you may follow your Book, Read and Discourse of the Wars.

But to our purpose: It fell out happily to Those, and (as I may say) to Those
Times, That the Queen, during the Calm of her Reign, was not idle, nor rockt
asleep with Security; for she had been very Provident in the Reparation and
Augmentation of her Shipping and Ammunition: and I know not whether by a
foresight of Policy, or an Instinct, it came about, or whether it was an Act
of her Compassion; but it is most certain, That she sent Levies, and no small
Troops to the assistance of the Revolted States of Holland, before she had
received any Affront from the King of Spain, that might Deserve, or Tend to a
breach in Hostility; which the Papists to this day Maintain, was the
Provocation and Cause of the after-wars: but omitting what might be said to
this point, those Netherland wars were the King's Seminaries, and the Nurseries
of very many Brave Soldiers; and so were likewise the Civil Wars of France
(whither she sent five several Armies) the French-Schools that inured the Youth
and Gallantry of the Kingdom, and it was a Militia wherein they were daily in
acquaintance with the discipline of the Spaniards, who were then turned the
Queen's Inveterate Enemies.

And this have I taken into observation of her Dies Halcyonii, those years of
hers which were more Serene and Quiet than those that followed; which though
they were not less propitious, as being Touched more with the point of Honor
and Victory, yet were they Troubled, and ever Clouded over both with Domestic
and Foreign Machinations; and it is already quoted, they were such as awakened
her Spirits, and made her cast about how to Defend, rather by Offending, and by
the way of diverting to Prevent all Invasions, than to Expect them, which was a
piece of Policy of the times: and with this I have noted the causes or
Principia of the Wars following, and likewise pointed to the Seed-plots from
whence she took up those Brave Men, and Plants of Honor, which Acted on the
Theater of Mars, and on whom she dispersed the Rays of her Grace, which were
Persons in their kinds of Rare Virtues, and such as might (out of height of
Merit) pretend interest to her Favor; of which rank, the number will equal, if
not exceed that of the Gown-men. In recount of whom, I proceed with Sir Philip
Sidney.

Sir Philip Sidney.
HE was Son to Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of
Wales; a Person of Great Parts, and in no Mean Grace with the Queen; his Mother
was Sister to my Lord of Leicester, from whence we may conjecture, how the
Father stood up in the place of Honor and Employment, so that his Descent was
Apparently Noble on both sides: For his Education it was such as Travel, and
the University could afford, or his Tutors infuse; for after an incredible
Proficiency in all the species of Learning; he left the Academical life, for
that of the Court, whither he came by his Uncle's Invitation, famed aforehand
by a Noble Report of his Accomplishments, which together with the state of his
Person, framed by a Natural Propension to Arms, he soon Attracted the good
opinion of all men, and was so highly prized in the good opinion of the Queen,
that she thought the Court Deficient without him: And whereas (through the fame
of his Deserts) he was in the Election for the Kingdom of Poland, she refused
to further his Advancement, not out of Emulation, but out of Fear to lose the
jewel of her Times: He married the daughter and sole heir of Sir Francis
Walsingham, then Secretary of State, a Lady destinated to the Bed of Honor,
who (after his Deplorable death at Zutphen in the Netherlands, where he was
Governor of Vitishing at the time of his Uncle's being there) was married to
my Lord of Essex, and since his death to my Lord of Saint Albans, all persons
of the sword, and otherwise of Great Honor and Virtue.

They have a very quaint and facetious figment of him, That Mars and Mercury
fell at Variance whose servant he shoul be. And there is an Epigrammist that
says, that Art and Nature had spent their Excellencies in his fashioning; and
fearing they should not end what they begun, they bestowed him on Fortune, and
Nature stood Musing and Amazed to behold her own work; but these are the
fictions of Poets.

Certain it is, He was a Noble and Matchless Gentleman, and it may be justly
said without Hyperboles of fiction, as it was of Cato Vticensis, That he seemed
to be born to that only which he went about, Versatilis ingenii, as Plutarch
has it. But to speak more of him, were to make him less.

Sir Fra. Walsingham.
SIr Francis Walsingham (as we have said) had the honor to be Sir Philip
Sidney's Father in Law: He was a Gentleman (at first) of a Good House, but of
better Education, and from the University Traveled for the rest of his
Learning. He was doubtless the Best Linguist of the times, but knew best how to
use his own Tongue, whereby he came to be employed in the Chiefest Affairs of
State. He was sent Ambassador into France, and stayed there a Leiger long, in
the heat of the Civil wars, and at the same time that Mounsieur was here a
Suitor to the Queen; and if I be not mistaken, he played the very same part
there, as since Gundamore did here: At his return, he was taken Principal
Secretary, and was one of the Great Engines of State, and of the times, high in
the Queen's Favor, and a watchful servant over the safety of his Mistress.

They note him to have had certain Curiosities, and Secret ways of Intelligence
above the rest: But I must confess I am to seek wherefore he suffered Parry to
play so long on the hook, before he hoysed him up; and I have been a little
curious in the search thereof, though I have not to do with the Arcana Imperii.
For to know is sometimes a burden; and I remember that it was Ovid's crimen
aut error, That he saw too much. But I hope these are Collaterals of no danger.
But that Parry intending to kill the Queen, made the way of his Access by
betraying of others, and impeaching of the Priests of his own correspondency,
and thereby had Access and Conference with the Queen, and also oftentimes
familiar and private Conference with Walsingham, will not be the Quaere of the
mystery; for the Secretary might have had his end of discovery on a further
Maturity of the Treason: but that after the Queen knew Parry's intent, why she
should then admit Him to Private Discourse, and Walsingham to suffer it,
considering the condition of all Assailings, and permit him to go where and
whither he listed, and only on the security of a dark sentinel set over him,
was a piece of Reach and Hazard beyond my Apprehension.

I must again profess, That having read many of his Letters (for they are
commonly sent to my Lord of Leicester, and Burleigh, out of France) containing
many fine passages and secrets; yet if I might have been beholding to his
Ciphers, whereof they are full, they would have told Pretty Tales of the times.
But I must now close up, and rank him amongst the Togati, yet chief of those
that laid the foundation of the Dutch and French Wars, which was another piece
of his fineness, and of the times: with one observation more, That he was one
of the Great Allies of the Austrian Embracements: For both himself, and
Stafford that preceded him, might well have been compared to the Fiend in the
Gospel, that sowed his tares in the night; so did they their seeds of division
in the dark. And it is a likely report that they father on him, at his return,
That he said unto the Queen, with some sensibility of the Spanish designs on
France: Madam, (...) beseech you be content not to fear; The Spaniard has a
great Appetite, and an Excellent Digestion, but I have fitted him with a bone
for this Twenty years, that your Majesty shall have no cause to doubt him;
provided that if the fire chance to slack which I have kindled, you will be
ruled by me, and now and then cast in some English fuel, which will revive the
flame.

Willoughby.
MY Lord Willoughby was one of the Queen's first Swordmen: He was of the
Ancient Extract of the Bartues, but more ennobled by his Mother, who was
Duchess of Suffolk.

He was a great Master of the Art Military; and was sent General into France,
and commanded the Second of Five Armies that the Queen sent thither in aid of
the French. I have heard it spoken, that had he not slighted the Court, but
Applied himself to the Queen, he might have enjoyed a plentiful portion of her
Grace: And it was his saying, (and it did him no good) That he was none of the
Reptilia, intimating, that he could not creep on the ground, and that the Court
was not in his Element; for indeed, as he was a Great Soldier, so was he of a
Suitable Magnanimity, and could not brook the Obsequiousness and Assiduity of
the Court; and as he then was somewhat descending from youth, happily he had an
animam revertendi, and to make a safe Retreat.

Sir Nicholas Bacon.
I Come to another of the Togati, Sir Nicholas Bacon, An arch-piece of Wit and
Wisdom. He was a Gentleman, and a man of Law, and of great knowledge therein;
whereby, together with his other parts of Learning and Dexterity, he was
promoted to be Keeper of the Great Seal: and being of kin to the Treasurer
Burleigh, had also the help of his hand to bring him into the Queen's favor;
for he was abundantly factious, which took much with the Queen, when it was
suited with the season, as he was well able to judge of his times. He had a
very quaint saying, and he used it often to good purpose; That he loved the
jest well, but not the loss of his Friend. He would say, That though he knew
Vnusquisque suae fortunae faber, was a true and good principle; yet the most in
number were those that marred themselves. But I will never forgive that man,
that loses himself, to be rid of his jest.

He was Father to that Refined Wit, which since has acted a disastrous part on
the public stage, and of late sat in his Father's room as Lord Chancellor.
Those that lived in his age, and from whence I have taken this little Model of
him, gives him a lively Character; and they decypher him for another Solon, and
the Synon of those times, such a one as Oedipus was in dissolving of Riddles.
Doubtless he was as able an Instrument; and it was his commendation, that his
head was the Mawl (for it was a great one) and therein he kept the Wedge that
entered the knotty pieces that came to the Table. And now I must again fall back
to smooth and plain a way to the rest that is behind, but not from the purpose.

There were about these times two Rivals in the Queen's favor; Old Sir Francis
Knowls Comptroller of the House, and Sir Henry Norris, whom she called up at a
Parliament to sit with the Peers in the higher House, as Lord Norris of Ricot,
who had married the daughter and heir of the old Lord Williams of Tame, a Noble
person, and to whom in the Queen's adversity she had been committed to safe
custody, and from him had received more than ordinary observances. Now such was
the goodness of the Queen's Nature, that she neither forgot good turns received
from the Lord Williams, neither was she unmindfull of this Lord Norris, whose
Father, in her Father's time, and in the business of her Mother, died in a
Noble cause, and in the justification of her innocence.

Lord Norris.
MY Lord Norris had by this Lady an ample Issue, which the Queen highly
respected: for he had Six Sons and all Martial brave men: The first was William
his eldest, and Father to the late Earl of Berkshire; Sir John, vulgarly called
General Norris; Sir Edward, Sir Thomas, Sir Henry, and Maximilian; Men of an
haughty courage, and of great experience in the conduct of Military affairs:
And to speak in the Character of their merit, they were persons of such renown
and worth, as future times must out of duty owe them the debt of an honorable
memory.

Knowls.
SIr Francis Knowls was somewhat of the Queen's affinity, and had likewise no
incompetent Issue; for he had also William his eldest, and since Earl of
Banbury, Sir Thomas, Sir Robert, and Sir Francis; if I be not a little mistaken
in their names and martialling; and there was also the Lady Lettice, a Sister,
of these, who was first Countess of Essex, and after of Leicester. And these
were also brave men in their times and places; but they were of the Court, and
Carpet, not led by the genius of the Camp.

Between these two Families, there was (as it falls out amongst Great ones,
and Competitors for favor) no great correspondency: and there were some seeds,
either of emulation or distrust cast between them, which had they not been
disjoined in the residence of their persons, (as it was the fortune of their
employments, the one side attending the Court, the other the Pavilion) surely
they would have broken out into some kind of hostility, or at least they would
have wrestled one in the other, like Trees incircled with Ivy: For there was a
time when (both these Fraternities being met at Court) there passed a challenge
between them at certain exercises, the Queen and the old men being spectators,
which ended in a flat quarrel amongst them all. And I am persuaded (though I
ought not to judge) that there were some relics of this feud, that were long
after the causes of the one Families (almost utter) extirpation, and of the
others improsperity. For it was a known truth, that so long as my Lord of
Leicester lived, who was the main pillar of the one side, as having married the
Sister, none of the other side took any deep rooting in the Court, though
otherwise they made their ways to Honor by their swords: And that which is of
more note, (considering my Lord of Leicester's use of Men of Arms, being
shortly after sent Governor to the Revolted States, and no Soldier himself)
is, that he made no more account of Sir John Norris, a Soldier then deservedly
famoused, and trained from a Page, under the discipline of the great Captain of
Christendom, the Admiral Castilion, and of Command in the French and Dutch wars
almost twenty years. It is of further observation, that my Lord of Essex (after
Leicester's decease) though initiated to Arms, and houred by the General in the
Portugal expedition, whether out of instigation (as it has been thought) or
out of ambition, and jealousy to be eclipsed and over-shadowed by the fame and
splendor of this great Commander, loved him not in sincerity. Moreover,
certain it is, he not only crushed, and upon all occasions quelled the growth
of this brave man, and his famous Brethren; but therewith drew on his own fatal
end, by undertaking the Irish Action, in a time when he left the Court empty of
friends and f^ll fraught with his professed enemies. But I forbear to extend my
self in any further relation upon this subject; as having left some notes of
truth in these two Noble Families, which I would present; and therewith touched
somewhat, which I would not, if the equity of the Narration would have admitted
an intermission.

Sir John Perrot.
SIr John Perrot was a goodly Gentleman, and of the Sword: And as he was of a
very ancient descent, as an heir to many abstracts of Gentry, especially from
Guy de Bryan of Lawhern, so was he of a vast Estate, and came not to the Court
for want. And to these adjuncts, he had the endowments of courage, and height
of spirit, had it lighted on the allay of temper and discretion; the defect
whereof, with a native freedom and boldness of speech, drew him on to a clouded
setting, and laid him open to the spleen and advantage of his enemies, amongst
whom Sir Christopher Hatton was professed. He was yet a wise man, and a brave
Courtier; but rough, and participating more of active than sedentary motions,
as being in his constellation destinated for Arms. There is a quaere of some
denotations, how he came to receive his foyl, and that in the Catastrophe; for
he was strengthened with honorable Alliances, and the privy friendships of the
Court; My Lord of Leicester and Burleigh, both his Contemporaries, and
Familiars; but that there might be (as the Adage has it) falsity in
friendship; and we may rest fatisfied, that there is no disputing against fate.

They quote him for a person that loved to stand too much alone, and on his own
legs, of too often recesses, and discontinuance from the Queen's presence: A
fault which is incompatible with the ways of Court and favor,

He was sent Lord Deputy into Ireland, (as it was thought) for a kind of
haughtiness of spirit; and repugnancy in Councels; or as others have thought,
the fittest Person then to bridle the insolency of the Irish; And probable it
is, that both these (considering the sway that he would have at the Board, and
head in the Queen's favor) concurred, and did a little conspire his remove,
and his ruin: But into Ireland he went, where he did the Queen very great and
many services, if the surplussage of the measure did not abate the value of the
merit; as aftertimes found that to be no paradox: For to save the Queen's
purse, (which both her self, and my Lord Treasurer Burleigh, ever took for good
services) he imposed on the Irish the charge of bearing their own arms; which
both gave them the possession, and taught them the use of weapons; which proved
in the end a most fatal work, both in the profusion of blood and treasure.

But at his return, and on some account sent home before touching the state of
the Kingdom, the assiduous testimonies of her grace were toward him; till by
his retreat to his Castle at Carry, where he was then building, and out of
desire to be in command at home, (as he had been abroad together with the
hatred and practice of Hatton, then in high favor, whom not long before he had
too bitterly taunted for his Dancing. He was accused of High Treason, and for
high Words, and a forged Letter, Condemned; though the Queen, on the News of
his Condemnation, Swore by her wonted Oath, That they were all Knaves. And they
deliver with assurance, That on his return to the Tower, after his Trial, he
said in Oaths, and in Fury, to the Lieutenant Sir Owen Hopton, What, will the
Queen suffer her Brother to be offered up as a Sacrifice to the Envy of my
Frisking Adversaries? Which being made known to the Queen, and the Warrant for
his Execution tendered, and somewhat enforced; she refused to Sign it, and
Swore he should not die, for he was an honest and a faithful Man. And surely,
though not altogether to set up our rest and faith upon Tradition, and upon old
Reports, as that Sir Thomas Perrot his Father was a Gentleman of the
Privy-Chamber to Henry the Eighth, and in the Court married a Lady of Great
Honor, of the King's Familiarity, which are presumptions of some implication:
But if we go a little further, and compare his Picture, his Qualities, Gesture,
and Voice, with that of the King's, which memory retains yet amongst us, they
will plead strongly, that he was a Subreptitious Child of the Blood Royal.

Certain it is, that he lived not long in the Tower; and that after his
decease, Sir Thomas Perrot his Son (then of no mean esteem with the Queen)
having before married my Lord of Essex's Sister, since Countess of
Northumberland, had restitution of all his Lands; though after his decease also
(which immediately followed) the Crown resumed his Estate, and took the
advantage of the former Attainder. And to say the truth, the Priest's Forged
Letter was, at his Arraignment, thought but a Fiction of Envy, and was soon
after exploded by the Priest's own confession. But that which most exasperated
the Queen, and gave advantage to his Enemies, was (as Sir Walter Raleigh takes
into his observation) words of disdain. For the Queen, by sharp and
reprehensive Letters, had netled him; and shortly after sending others of
approbation, commending his Service, and intimating an Invasion from Spain;
which he no sooner perused, but he said publicly in the Great Chamber at
Dublin; Lo, now she is ready to Piss her self for fear of the Spaniard, I am
again one of her White-boys.

Words which are subject to a various construction, and tended to some
disreputation of his Sovereign: and such as may serve for instruction to
persons in place of honor and command, to beware of the violences of nature,
but especially of the exorbitances of the tongue. And so I conclude him with
this double observation, The one of the innocence of his intentions, exempt and
clear from the guilt of treason and disloyalty; The other, of the greatness of
his heart: For at his arraignment, he was so little dejected by what might be
alleged and proved against him, that he rather grew troubled with choler, and
in a kind of exasperation despised his Jury, though of the Order of Knighthood,
and of the special Gentry, claiming the privilege of trial by the Peers and
Baronage of the Realm: so prevalent was that of his native Genius, and the
hautiness of his spirit, which accompanied him to his last, and till (without
any diminution of courage) it brake in pieces the cords of his magnanimity, for
he died suddenly in the Tower, and when it was thought the Queen did intend his
enlargment, with the restitution of his possessions which were then very great,
and comparable to most of the Nobility.

Hatton.
SIR Christopher Hatton came into the Court as his opposite; Sir John Perrot,
was wont to say by the Galliard, for he came thither as a private Gentleman of
the Inns of Court in a Mask; and for his activity and Person, which was tall
and proportionable, taken into Favor: he was first made Vice-Chamberlain, and
shortly afterward advanced to the place of Lord Chancellor: a Gentleman, that
besides the graces of his Person, and Dancing, had also the adjectaments of a
strong and subtle capacity, one that could soon learn the discipline and garb
both of the times and Court; the truth is, he had a large proportion of gifts
and endowments, but too much of the season of Envy; and he was a mere vegetable
of the Court, that sprung up at night, and sunk again at his noon.

Lord Effingham.
MY Lord of Effingham, though a Courtier betimes, yet I find not, that the
Sunshine of her Favor broke out upon him, until she took him into the Ship,
and made him High-Admiral of England. For his extract, it may suffice, that he
was the Son of a Howard, and of a Duke of Norfolk: And as for his Person, as
goodly a Gentleman as the Times had any; if Nature had not been more intentive
to complete his Person, than Fortune to make him rich: For the times
considered, which were then active, and a long time after lucrative, he died
not wealthy, yet the honester man; though it seems the Queen's purpose was to
tender the occasion of his advancement, and to make him capable of more Honor;
which at his return from Cardize-Accounts she conferred on him, creating him
Earl of Nottingham; to the great discontent of his Colleague, my Lord of Essex,
who then grew excessive in the appetite of her favor; and, in truth, was so
exorbitant in the limitation of the Sovereign aspect, that it much alienated
the Queen's grace from him, and drew others together with the Admiral to a
combination, and to conspire his ruin. And though I have heard it from that
party, (I mean of the Admirals faction) that it lay not in his proper power to
hurt my Lord of Essex, yet he had more Followers, and such as were well skilled
in setting of the Gyn. But I leave this to those of another Age.

It is out of doubt, that the Admiral was a good, honest, and a brave Man, and
a faithful servant to his Mistress, and such a one as the Queen, out of her own
Princely Judgment, knew to be a fit Instrument for that service, for she was no
ill Proficient in the Reading of Men, as well as Books; and his sundry
expeditions, as that aforementioned, and 88. does both express his worth, and
manifest the Queen's Trust, and the opinion she had of his Fidelity and Conduct.

Moreover, the Howards were of the Queen's Alliance, and Consanguinity by her
Mother, which swayed her Affection, and bent it toward this Great House; and it
was a part of her Natural Propension, to Grace and Support Ancient Nobility,
where it did not entrench, neither invade her Interest; for on such trespasses
she was quick and tender, and would not spare any whatsoever; as we may observe
in the case of the Duke, and my Lord of Hereford, whom she much favored and
countenanced, till they attempted the Forbidden Fruit; The fault of the last,
being in the severest interpretation but a trespass of incroachment; But in the
first, it was taken for a Riot against the Crown, and her own Sovereign power:
and as I have ever thought, the cause of her aversion against the rest of the
House, and the Duke's great Father-in-law Fitz Allen Earl of Arundel, a person
of the first rank in her affections, before these; and some other jealousies,
made a separation between them; this Noble Lord, and the Lord Thomas Howard,
since Earl of Suffolk, standing alone in her Grace, the rest in Umbrage.

Sir John Packington.
SIr John Packington was a Gentleman of no mean family, and of form and feature
no way despisable; for he was a brave Gentleman, and a very fine Courtier; and
for the time he stayed there, (which was not lasting) very high in her grace;
but he came in, and went out, and through disassiduity, drew the Curtain
between himself and the light of her grace; and then death overwhelmed the
remnant, and utterly deprived him of recovery: And they say of him, that had he
brought less to the Court than he did, he might have carried away more than he
brought; for he had a time on it, but an ill husband of opportunity.

Lord Hunsdon.
MY Lord of Hunsdon was of the Queen's nearest Kindred; and on the decease of
Sussex, both he and his Son took the place of Lord Chamberlain; he was a fast
Man to his Prince, and firm to his Friends and Servants; and though he might
speak big, and therein would be born out, yet was he not the more dreadful, but
less harmful, and far from the practice of my Lord of Leicester's Instructions,
for he was downright; and I have heard those that both knew him well, and had
interest in him, say merrily of him, that his Latin and his Dissimulation were
both alike; and that his custom of Swearing, and obscenity in Speaking, made
him seem a worse Christian than he was, and a better Knight of the Carpet than
he should be: As he lived in a ruffling time, so he loved Sword and Buckler
Men, and such as our Fathers were wont to call Men of their hands; of which
sort he had many brave Gentlemen that followed him; yet not taken for a popular
and dangerous Person. And this is one that stood amongst the Togati, of an
honest stout heart, and such a one (as upon occasion) would have fought for his
Prince, and his Country, for he had the charge of the Queen's Person, both in
the Court, and the Camp at Tilbury.

Raleigh.
SIR Walter Raleigh was one, that (it seems) Fortune had picked out of purpose,
of whom to make an Example, or to use as her Tennis-Ball, thereby to show what
she could do; for she tossed him up of nothing, and too and fro to Greatness,
and from thence down to little more than to that wherein she found him, (a bare
Gentleman.) Not that he was less, for he was well-descended, and of good
alliance, but poor in his beginnings; and for my Lord of Oxford's Jest of him,
(the Jack, and an Upstart) we all know, it savours more of Emulation, and his
Humor, than of Truth; and it is a certain Note of the Times, that the Queen in
her Choice, never took into her Favor a mere New Man, or a Mechanic, as
Comines observes of Lewis the Eleventh of France, who did serve himself with
Persons of unknown Parents; such as was Oliver the Barber, whom he created Earl
of Dunoyes, and made him ex secretis consiliis, and alone in his favor and
familiarity.

His approaches to the University and Inns of Court, were the grounds of his
improvement; but they were rather excursions, than sieges or settings down, for
he stayed not long in a place; and being the youngest Brother, and the House
diminished in Patrimony, he foresaw his own destiny; that he was first to roll
(through want and disability to subsist otherways) before he could come to a
repose, and as the Stone does, by long lying, gather Moss: He first exposed
himself to the Land service of Ireland, a Militia which then did not yield him
food and raiment, (for it was ever very poor) nor had he patience to stay
there, though shortly after he came thither again under the Command of my Lord
Gray; but with his own Colors flying in the field; having, in the interim,
cast a new chance, both in the Low Countries, and in a Voyage to Sea; and if
ever Man drew Virtue out of Necessity, it was he: therewith was he the great
example of Industry; and, though he might then have taken that of the Merchant
to himself, Per mare, per terras, currit mercator ad Indos, He might also have
said, and truly with the Philosopher, Omnia mea mecum port; for it was a long
time before he could brag of more than he carried at his back; and when he got
on the winning side, it was his commendations, that he took pains for it, and
underwent many various adventures for his after-perfection, and before he came
into the public note of the World: And that it may appear how he came up (Per
ardua) Per variot causus, per tot discrimina rerum, not pulled up by chance, or
by any gentle admittance of Fortune; I will briefly describe his native parts,
and those of his own acquiring, which was the hopes of his rising.

He had in the outward man, a good presence, in a handsome and well compacted
person, a strong natural wit, and a better judgment, with a bold and plausible
tongue, whereby he could set out his parts to the best advantage; and to these
he had the adjuncts of some general Learning, which by diligence he enforced
to a great augmentation, and perfection; for he was an indefatigable Reader,
whether by Sea or Land, and none of the least observers both of men and the
times; and I am confident, that among the second causes of his growth, that
variance between him, and my Lord Gray, in his descent into Ireland, was a
principal; for it drew them both over the Council Table, there to plead their
cause, where (what advantage he had in the cause, I know not) but he had much
better in the telling of his tale; and so much, that the Queen and the Lord's
took no slight mark of the man, and his parts; for from thence he came to be
known, and to have access to the Queen, and the Lords; and then we are not to
doubt how such a man would comply, and learn the way of progression. And
whether Leicester had then cast in a good word for him to the Queen, which
would have done no harm, I do not determine: But true it is, He had gotten the
Queen's ear at a trice, and she began to be taken with his elocution, and loved
to hear his reasons to her demands: and the truth is, she took him for a kind
of Oracle, which netled them all; yea, those that he relied on, began to take
his sudden favor for an Alarm, and to be sensible of their own supplantation,
and to project his, which made him shortly after sing, Fortune my foe, etc. So
that finding his favor declining, and falling into a recess, he undertook a
new peregrination, to leave that Terra infirma of the Court, for that of the
Wars, and by declining himself, and by absence, to expel his, and the passion
of his enemies, which in Court was a strange device of ecovery, but that he
knew there was some ill office done him, that he durst not attempt to mind any
other ways, than by going aside; thereby to teach envy a new way of
forgetfulness, and not so much as to think of him; howsoever, he had it always
in mind, never to forget himself; and his device took so well, that at his
return he came in (as Rams do, by going backward) with the greater strength,
and so continued to her last; great in her grace, and Captain of the Guard,
where I must leave him; but with this observation, That though he gained much
at the Court, yet he took it not out of the Exchequer, or merely out of the
Queen's purse, but by his wit, and the help of the Prerogative; for the Queen
was never profuse in the delivering out of her treasure, but paid many, and
most of her servants part in money, and the rest with grace, which as the case
stood, was taken for good payment, leaving the Arrear of recompense due to
their merit, to her great Successor, who paid them all with advantage.

Grevil.
SIR Foulk Grevil, since Lord Brook, had no mean place in her favor, neither
did he hold it for any short term, for if I be not deceived, he had the longest
lease, and the smoothest time without rub, of any of her Favorites. He came to
the Court in his youth and prime, for that is the time, or never; He was a
brave Gentleman, and honorably descended, from William Lord Brook, and Admiral
to Henry the seventh. Neither illiterate; for he was, as he would often
profess, a friend to Sir Philip Sidney, and there are of his now extant, some
fragments of his Poem, and of those times, which do interest him in the Muses;
and which shows, the Queen's election had ever a noble conduct, and its motions
more of verture and judgment, than of fancy.

I find, that he neither sought for, or obtained any great place or preferment
in Court during all the time of his attendance, neither did he need it; for he
came thither, backed with a plentiful Fortune, which as himself was wont to say,
was the better held together by a single life, wherein he lived and dyed a
constant Courtier of the Ladies.

Essex.
MY Lord of Essex (as Sir Henry Wotton a Gentleman of great parts, and parley of
his time and retinue, observes) had is introduction by my Lord of Leicester,
who had married his Mother, a tie of affinity; which, besides a more urgent
obligation, might have invited his care to advance him, his Fortune being then
(and through his Fathers infelicity) grown low. But that the son of a Lord
Ferrers of Chartley, Viscount Hartford, and Earl of Essex, who was of the
ancient Nobility) and formerly in the Queen's good grace, could not have room
in her favor without the assistance of Leicester, was beyond the rule of her
nature, which as I have elsewhere taken into observation, was ever inclinable
to favor the Nobility: Sure it is, That he no sooner appeared in Court, but he
took with the Queen and Courtiers; and I believe, they all could not choose but
look through the Sacrifice of the Father, on his living Son, whose image by the
remembrance of former passages, was afresh (like the bleeding of men murdered)
represented to the Court, and offered up as a subject of compassion to all the
Kingdom. There was in this young Lord, together with a most goodly Person, a
kind of urbanity or innate courtesy, which both won the Queen, and too much
took upon the people, to gaze upon the new adopted Son of her favor.

And as I go along, it were not amiss to take into observation two notable
quotations. The first was, a violent indulgency of the Queen (which is incident
to old age, where it encounters with a pleasing and suitable object) toward
this Lord; all which argued a non-perpetuity: The second was, a fault in the
Object of her grace, my Lord himself, who drew in too fast, like a child
sucking an over uberous Nurse; and had there been a more decent decorum
observed in both, or either of those, without doubt the unity of their
affections had been more permanent, and not so in and out as they were, like an
Instrument ill tuned, and lapsing to discord.

The greater error of the two (though unwillingly) I am constrained to impose
on my Lord of Essex, or rather on his youth; and none of the least of his blame
on those that stood Sentinels about him, who might have advised him better, but
that like men intoxicated with hopes, they likewise had sucked in with the most,
and of their Lords receipt, and so like Caesar's, would have all or none; A
rule quite contrary to nature, and the most indulgent Parents, who, though they
may express more affection to one in the abundance of bequests, yet cannot
forget some Legacies, just distributives, and divide^ds to others of their
begetting: And how hateful partiality proves; every days experience tells us,
out of which common consideration might have framed to their hands a maxim of
more discretion for the conduct and management of their now graced Lord and
Master.

But to omit that of Infusion, and to do right to truth: My Lord of Essex,
(even of those that truly loved and honored him) was noted for too bold an
Ingrosser both of fame and favor; And of this (without offense to the living,
or treading on the Sacred Urne of the Dead) I shall present a Truth, and a
passage yet in memory.

My Lord Mounjoy, (who was another Child of her favor) being newly come to
Court, and then but Sir Charles Blunt, (for my Lord William, his elder brother,
was then living) had the good fortune one day to run very well a Tilt; and the
Queen therewith was so well pleased, that she sent him in Token of her Favor,
a Queen at Chesse, of Gold, Richly Enamelled, which his Servants had the next
day fastened on his Arm with a Crimson Ribband; which my Lord of Essex, as he
passed through the Privy Chamber, espying, with his Cloak cast under his Arm,
the better to commend it to the view, enquired what it was, and for what cause
there fixed? Sir Foulk Grevil told him, That it was the Queen's Favor, which
the day before, and after the Tilting, she had sent him; whereat my Lord of
Essex, in a kind of Emulation, and as though he would have limited her Favor,
said, Now I perceive every Fool must have a Favor.

This bitter and Public Affront came to Sir Charles Blunt's ear, who sent him
a Challenge, which was accepted by my Lord, and they met near Mary-bone-Park,
where my Lord was hurt in the Thigh, and Disarmed: the Queen missing the Men,
was very curious to learn the truth; and when at last it was whispered out, she
Swore by God's Death, it was fit that some one or other should take him down,
and teach him better Manners, otherwise there would be no rule with him. And
here I note the inition of my Lord's Friendship with Mountjoy, which the Queen
her self did conjure.

Now for fame, we need not go far; for my Lord of Essex having born a grudge
to General Norris, who had (unwittingly) offered to unpertake the Action of
Britain with fewer men, than my Lord had before demaned: on his return with
Victory, and a glorious report of his valor, he was then thought the only man
for the Irish War; wherein my Lord of Essex so wrought, by despising the
number, and quality of Rebels, that Norris was sent over with a scanted force,
joined with the relics of the veterance Troops of Britain, of set purpose (as
it fell out) to ruin Norris; and the Lord Burrowes, by my Lord's procurement,
sent at his heels, and to command in chief; and to confine Norris only to his
Government at Munster, which brake the great heart of the General, to see
himself undervalued and underminded by my Lord and Burrowes, which was as the
Proverb speaks it, Imberbes docere senes.

My Lord Burrowes, in the beginning of his prosecution died; whereupon the
Queen was fully bent to have sent over Mountjoy, which my Lord of Essex utterly
disliked, and opposed with many reasons, and by arguments of contempt against
Mountjoy, his then professed friend and familiar; so predominant were his
words, to reap the honor of closing up that War, and all other.

Now the way being opened and plained by his own workmanship, and so handled
that none durst appear to stand for the place, at last with much ado he
obtained his own ends, and with all his fatal destruction, leaving the Queen
and the Court (where he stood firm and impregnable in her grace) to men that
long had sought and watched their times to give him the trip, and could never
find any opportunity but this of his absence, and of his own Creation. And
these are the true observations of his appetite and inclinations, which were
not of any true proportion, but carried and transported with an over-desire and
thirstiness after fame, and that deceitful fame of popularity. And to help on
his Catastrophe, I observe likewise two sorts of people that had a hand in his
fall; the first was the Soldiery, which all flockt unto him, as foretelling a
mortality; and are commonly of blunt and too rough Counsels, and many times
dissonant from the time of the Court and the State. The other sort were of his
family, his servants, and his own creatures, such as were bound by the rules of
safety, and obligations of fidelity, to have looked better to the steering of
that Boat, wherein they themselves were carried, and not have suffered it to
float and run on ground, with those empty Sails of Fame and Tumor of popular
applause. Me thinks one honest man or other, that had but the office of
brushing his clothes, might have whispered in his ear, My Lord, look to it,
this multitude that follows you, will either devour you, or undo you; strive
not to rule, and over rule all, for it will cost hot water, and it will procure
envy; and if needs your. Genius must have it so, let the Court, and the Queens
presence be your station. But as I have said, they had sucked too much of their
Lord's milk, and instead of withdrawing, they blew the coals of his ambition,
and infused into him too much of the spirit of glory; yea, and mixed the
goodness of his nature with a touch of revenge, which is ever accompanied with
a destiny of the same fate. And of this number there were some insufferable
Natures about him, that toward his last gave desperate advice, such as his
integrity abhorred, and his fidelity forbade; Amongst whom, Sir Henry Wotton
notes (without injury) his Secretary Cuffe a vile man, and of a perverse
nature: I could also name others, that when he was in the right course of
recovery, and settling to moderation, would not suffer a recess in him, but
stirred up the dregs of those rude humors, which by time, and his affliction,
out of his own judgment he sought to repose; or to give them all a vomit. And
thus I conclude this Noble Lord, as a mixture between prosperity and adversity;
once the Child of his great Mistresses favor, but the Son of Bellona.

Buckhurst.
MY Lord of Buckhurst was of the Noble House of the Sackvils, and of the Queens
consanguinity; his Father was Sir Richard Sackvil, or as the people then called
him, Fill sack, by reason of his gaeat wealth, and the vast patrimony which he
left to his Son; whereof he spent in his youth the best part, until the Queen
by her frequent admonitions diverted the torrent of his profusion. He was a
very fine Gentleman of person and endowments both of art and nature; but
without measure magnificent, till on the turn of his humor, and the allay that
his years and good counsels had wrought upon those immoderate courses of his
youth, and that height of spirit inherent to his House. And then did the Queen,
as a most judicious and indulgent Prince, when she saw the man grow stayed and
settled, give him her assistance, and advanced him to the Treasurship, where he
made amends to his House for his misspent time, both in the increasement of
Estate and Honor, which the Queen conferred on him, together with the
opportunity to remake himself, and thereby to show that this was a Child, that
should have a share in her grace, and a taste of her bounty.

They much commend his Elocution, but more the excellency of his Pen, for he
was a Scholar, and a person of a quick dispatch, (Faculties that yet run in
the blood.) And they say of him, that his Secretaries did little for him by the
way of Indictment, wherein they could seldom please him, he was so facete and
choice in his Phrase and Style: And for his Dispatches, and the content he gave
to Suitors, he had a Decorum seldom since put in practice; for he had of his
Attendants that took into Roll the names of all Suitors, which the Date of
their first Addresses; and these in their Order had hearing; so that a fresh
man could not leap over his head, that was of a more ancient edition except in
the urgent affairs of State.

I find not, that he was any ways inshared in the factions of the Court, which
were all his times strong, and in every man's note; The Howards and the Cecils
on the one part, My Lord of Essex, etc. on the other part. For he held the
staff of the Treasury fast in his hand, which once in the year made them all
beholding to him. And the truth is, (as he was a wise man, and a stout) he had
no reason to be a partaker; for he stood sure in blood, and in grace, and was
wholly intentive to the Queens service; and such were his abilities, that she
received assiduous proofs of his sufficiency; and it has been thought, that
she might have had more cunning instruments, but none of a more strong judgment
and confidence in his ways, which are symptoms of magnanimity and fidelity;
whereunto me thinks this Motto has some kind of reference, Aut nunquam tents,
aut perfice, As though he would have charactered in a word the Genius of his
House, or expressed somewhat of an higher inclination, than lay within his
compass. That he was a Courtier, is apparent, for he stood always in her eye
and favor.

Lord Mountjoy.
MY Lord Mountjoy was of the ancient Nobility, but utterly deceived in the
support thereof, Patrimony, through his Grandfather's excess in the Action of
Bullen, his Father's vanity in the search of the Philosophers stone, and his
Brother's untimely prodigalities; all which seemed by a joint conspiracy to
ruin the House, and altogether to annihilate it.

As he came from Oxford, he took the Inner Temple in his way to Court; whither
he no sooner came, but (without asking) he had a pretty strange kind of
admission, which I have heard from a discreet man of his own, and much more of
the secrets of those times. He was then much about twenty years of age, of a
brown hair, a sweet face, a most neat Composure, and tall in his person. The
Queen was then at White Hall, and at dinner, whither he came to see the fashion
of the Court: the Queen had soon found him out, and with a kind of an affected
frown, asked the Lady-Carver, What he was? she answered, She knew him not;
Insomuch as enquiry was made from one to another, who he might be; till at
length it was told the Queen, he was Brother to the Lord William Mountjoy. This
inquisition, with the eye of Majesty fixed upon him, (as she was wont to do,
and to daunt men she knew not) stirred the blood of this young Gentleman,
insomuch, as his color came and went; which the Queen observing, called him
unto her, and gave him her hand to kiss, encouraging him with gravious words,
and new looks; and so diverting her speech to the Lords and Ladies, she said,
That she no sooner observed him, but that she knew there was in him some Noble
blood, with some other expressions of pity toward his house: And then again
demanding his name, she said, Fail you not to come to the Court, and I will
bethink my self how to do you good. And this was his inlet, and the beginnings
of his grace. Where it falls into consideration, That though he wanted not Wit
and Courage, (for he had very fine Attractions, and being a good piece of a
Scholar) yet were they accompanied with the retractiveness of bashfulness, and
a natural Modesty, which (as the Tone of his House, and the Ebb of his Fortune
then stood) might have hindered his Progression, had they not been reinforced
by the infusion of Sovereign Favor, and the Queen's Gracious Invitation. And
that it may appear how low he was, and how much that Heretic Necessity will
work in the dejection of good spirits, I can deliver it with assurance, that
his exhibition was very scant until his Brother died, which was shortly after
his admission to the Court, and then was was it no more than 1000 Marks per
Annum, wherewith he lived plentifully in a fine way and garb, and without any
great Sustentation, during all her Times. And as there was in his nature a kind
of backwardness, which did not befriend him, nor suit with the motion of the
Court, so there was in him an inclinations to Arms, and a humor of
Traveling: which, had not some wise Men about him labored to remove, and the
Queen her self laid in her commands, he would (out of his natural propension)
have marred his own market: For as he was grown by reading, (whereunto he was
much addicted) to the Theory of a Soldier, so was he strongly invited by his
Genius to the acquaintance of the Practick of the War; which were the causes of
his excursions; for he had a Company in the Low Countries, from whence he came
over with a Noble acceptance of the Queen; but somewhat restless in honorable
thoughts, he exposed himself again and again, and would press the Queen with
the pretenses of visiting his Company so often, that at length he had a flat
denial; and yet he stole over with Sir John Norris into the Action of Britain,
(which was then a hot and active War) whom he would always call his Father,
honoring him above all men, and ever bewailing his end: so contrary he was in
his esteem and valuation of this great Commander, to that of his Friend, my
Lord of Essex. Till at last, the Queen began to take his Decessions for
Contempts, and confined his residence to the Court, and her own Presence: And
upon my Lord of Essex's fall, (so confident she was in her own Princely
judgment, and opinion she had conceived of his worth and conduct) that she
would have this Noble Gentleman, and none other, to finish and bring the Irish
War to a propitious end: For it was a prophetical Speech of her own, That it
would be his fortune, and his honor, to cut the thread of that fatal Rebellion,
and to bring her in peace to the Grave. Where she was not deceived; for he
achieved it, but with much pains and carefulness, and not without the fears
and many jealousies of the Court and Times, wherewith the Queen's age, and the
malignity of her setting times were replete.

And so I come to his dear Friend in Court, Master Secretary Cecil, whom, in
his long absence from Court he adored as his Saint, and courted for his only
Maecenas, both before and after his departure from Court, and during all the
time of his Command in Ireland, well knowing that it lay in his power, and by a
word of his mouth, to make or mar him.

Cecil.
SIR Robert Cecil, since Earl of Salisbury, was the Son of the Lord Burleigh,
and the Inheritor of his Wisdom, and, by degrees, Successor of his Places and
Favors, though not of his Lands; for he had Sir Thomas Cecil, his Elder
Brother, since Created Earl of Exeter. He was first Secretary of State, then
Master of the Wards, and in the last of her Reign came to be Lord Treasurer;
all which were the steps of his Father's greatness, and of the Honor he left
to his House. For his person, he was not much beholding to Nature, though
somewhat for his Face, which was the best part of his outside: but for his
inside, it may be said, and without soloecisme, that he was his Father's own
Son, and a pregnant proficient in all Discipline of State: He was a Courtier
from his Cradle, (which might have made him betimes) yet at the Age of Twenty
and upwards, he was much short of his after-proof; but exposed, and by change
of Climate, he soon made show what he was, and would be: He lived in those
times wherein the Queen had most need, and use of Men of Weight; and amongst
able ones, this was a Chief, as having his sufficiency from his Instructions
that Begat him, the Tutorship of the Times, and Court, which were then the
Academies of Art and Cunning; for such was the Queen's condition from the Tenth
or Twelfth of her Reign, that she had the happiness to stand up (whereof there
is a former intimation) though environed with more Enemies, and assaulted with
more dangerous Practices, than any Prince of her Times, and of many Ages
before. Neither must we, in this her Preservation, attribute too much to Humane
Policies: for that God in his Omnipotent Providence, had not only ordained
those Secondary Means, as Instruments of the Work, but by an Evident
Manifestation, that the same Work which she acted, was a Well-pleasing Service
of his own, out of a peculiar care had decreed the Protection of the
Work-Mistriss, and thereunto added his abundant blessing upon all, and
whatsoever she undertook; which is an observation of satisfaction to my self,
that she was in the right; though to others now breathing under the same form,
and frame of her Government, it may not seem an Animadversion of any worth: but
I leave them to the peril of their own folly.

And so again to this great Master of State, and the Staff of the Queen's
declining Age; who, though his little crooked Person could not promise any
great supportation, yet it carried thereon a Head, and a Headpiece of a vast
content, and therein it seems Nature was so diligent to complete one, and the
best part about him, as that to the perfection of his Memory, and
Intellectuals, she took care also of his Senses, and to put him in Linceos
Oculos, or to pleasure him the more, borrowed of Argus, so to give unto him a
prospective sight; and for the rest of his sensitive virtues, his Predecessor
Walsingham had left him a Receipt, to smell out what was done in the Conclave;
and his good old Father was so well seen in the Mathermaticks, as that he could
tell you through all Spain, every part, every Ship, with the Burdens, whither
bound with preparation, what impediments for diversion of Enterprises,
Counsels, and Resolutions. And, that we may see (as in a little Map) how
docible this little man was: I will present a taste of his Abilities.

My Lord of Devonshire, (upon the certainty the Spaniard would invade Ireland
with a strong Army) had written very earnestly to the Queen and the Council,
for such Supplies to be sent over, that might enable him to march up to the
Spaniard, if he did Land, and follow on his prosecution against the Rebels. Sir
Robert Cecil, (besides the general dispatch of the Council, as he often did)
Wrote this in private; for these two began then to Love dearly.

My Lord,
Out of the abundance of my affection, and the care I have of your well-doing;
I must in private put you out of doubt, (for of fear I know you cannot be
otherwise sensible, than in the way of Honor) that the Spaniard will not come
unto you this year; for I have it from my own, what preparations are in all his
parts, and what he can do: for be confident, he bears up a reputation by
seeming to embrace more than he can gripe; but the next year, be assured, he
will cast over unto you some forlorn hopes, which, how they may be reinforced
beyond his present ability, and his first intention, I cannot as yet make any
certain judgment, but I believe out of my intelligence, that you may expect
their Landing in Munster, and the more to distract you, in several places, as
at King's-Saile, Beer-haven, Baltimore, where you may be sure (coming from Sea)
they will first fortify and learn the strength of the Rebels, before they dare
take the field; howsoever (as I know you will not) lessen not your care,
neither your defenses l^and whatsoever lies within my power to do you and the
public service, rest thereof assured.


And to this I would add much more, but it may (as it is) suffice to present
much as to his abilities in the Pen, that he was his Crafts-master in foreign
intelligence: And for domestique affairs, as he was one of those that sat at
the Stern to the last of the Queen, so he was none of the least in skill, and
in the true use of the Compass.

And so I shall only vindicate the scandal of his death, and conclude him. For
he departed at St. Margaret's near Marleborough, in his return from the Bath;
as my Lord Viscount Cranborn, my Lord Clifford his Son, and Son-in-law, my
self, and many more can witness. But that the day before he swounded in the
way, was taken out of the Litter, and laid into his Coach, was a truth, out of
which that falsehood, concerning the manner of his death, had its derivation,
though nothing to the purpose, or to the prejudice of his worth.

Vere.
SIR Francis Vere was of the ancient and of the most Noble extract of the Earls
of Oxford: And it may be a question, whether the Nobility of his House, or the
Honor of his Achievements might most commend him; but that we have an
authentic Rule to decide the doubt: Nam genus and proavos, and quae non
fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.
For though he were an Honorable Slip of that ancient Tree of Nobility, (which
was no disadvantage to his virtue) yet he brought more glory to the Name of
Vere than he took of Blood from the Family. He was amongst the Queens Swordmen
inferior to none, but superior to many: Of whom it may be said, To speak much
of him, were the way to leave out something that might add to his praise, and
to forget more that could add to his Honor.

I find not that he came much to the Court, for he lived almost perpetually in
the Camp: but when he did, no Man had more of the Queen's Favor, and none less
envyed; for he seldom troubled it with the jealousy and alarms of
supplantations; his way was another sort of undermining. They report, that the
Queen (as she loved Martial Men) would Court this Gentleman, as soon as he
appeared in her Presence. And surely he was a Soldier of great worth, and
Commanded Thirty years in the Service of the States, and Twenty years over the
English in Chief, as the Queen's General: and he that had seen the Battle of
Newport, might there best have taken him, and his Noble Brother my Lord of
Tilbury, to the Life.

Worcester.
MY Lord of Worcester I have here put last, but not least in the Queen's
Favor. He was of the ancient and Noble Blood of the Bewfords, and of her
Grandfather's Line by the Mother; which the Queen could never forget;
especially where there was a concurrency of old blood with fidelity, a mixture
which ever sorted with the Queen's Nature. And though there might appear
something in this House which might avert her Grace, (though not to speak of my
Lord himself, but with due reverence and Honor) I mean contrariety or
suspicion in Religion; yet the Queen ever respected this House, and principally
this Noble Lord, whom she first made Master of the Horse, and then admitted of
her Council of State. In his youth (part whereof he spent before he came to
reside at Court) he was a very fine Gentleman, and the best Horseman and Tilter
of the Times, which were then the Manlike and Noble Recreations of the Court,
and such as took up the Applause of Men, as well as the Praise and
Commendadation of Ladies. And when years had abated these Exercises of Honor,
he grew then to be a faithful and profound Counselor. And as I have placed him
last, so was he the last Liver of all the Servants of her Favor, and had the
honor to see his Renowned Mistress, and all of them laid in the places of
their Rest: And for himself, after a Life of a very Noble and Remarkable
Reputation, he died Rich, and in a Peaceable Old Age. A fate, (that I make the
last, and none of the slightest Observations) which befell not many of the rest;
for they expired like unto Lights blown out, with the Snuff stinking, not
commendably extinguished, and with Offense to the standers by.

And thus have I delivered up this my poor Essay; A little Draught of this
great Princess, and her Times, with the Servants of her State and Favor. I
cannot say, I have finished it; for I know how defective and imperfect it is,
as limbed only in the original nature, not without the active blemishes; and
so left it as a task fitter for remote times, and the sallies of some bolder
Pencil to correct that which is amiss, and draw the rest up to life. As for me
to have endeavored it, I took it to consideration, how easily I might have
dashed in too much of the strain of pollution, and thereby have defaced that
little which is done: For I profess, I have taken care so to master my Pen,
that I might not ( ex animo, or of set-purpose) discolor truth, or any of the
parts thereof, otherwise than in concealment. Happily there are some which will
not approve of this modesty, but will censure me for pusillanimity, and, with
great cunning Artists attempt to draw their Line further out at large, and,
upon this of mine; which may with somewhat more ease be effected, for that the
frame is ready made to their hands; and then happily I could draw one in the
midst of theirs. But that modesty in me forbids the defacements of Men
departed, whose Posterity yet remaining, enjoys the merit of their virtues, and
do still live in their Honor. And I had rather incurr the censure of
abruption, than to be conscious, and taken in the manner of eruption, and of
trampling upon the Graves of Persons at rest; which living, we durst not look
in the face, nor make our Addresses to them, otherwise than with due regard to
their Honors, and renown to their Virtues.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Matthew Gillyflower, at the Spread-Eagle in
Westminster Hall.
CAbala, sive Scrinia Sacra, or Mysteries of State and Government, in Letters
of Illustrious Persons and great Ministers of State in the Reigns of Henry 8th.
Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charles; wherein such secrets of Empire and
public Affairs as were then in agitation, are faithfully represented.

The Complete Gardener; or Directions for Cultivating and right Ordering of
Fruit-Gardens and Kitchen-Gardens; with Diverse Reflections on several Parts of
Husbandry. In Six Books. By the Famous Monsieur De La Quintinye, Chief director
of all the Gardens of the French-King. To which is added his Treatise of
Orange Trees, with the Raising of Melons, omitted in the French Editions. Made
English by John Evelyn Esquire, Illustrated with Copper Plates.

Brownlow Latin Redivivus, a Book of Entries of such Declarations,
Informations, Pleas in Bar, and Abatements, Replications, etc. now in use in
Personal and mixed Actions, contained in the first and second Parts of the
Declarations, and Pleadings of Richard Brownlow Esquire, now Published in Latin
their Original Language, with Additions of Authentic, Modern Precedents
inserted under every Title, with a Copious Table according to Townsend.

The Fables of Aesop, and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and
Reflections, by Sir Roger L' Estrange.

Salmon's Complete English Physician, or the Druggist's Shop Opened,
explicating all the particulars of which Medicines are at this day Compounded
and made, showing their various Names and Natures, their several Preparations,
Uses and Doses, as they are applicable to the whole Art of Physic, together
with their experimental uses in most Mechanical Arts. A work of exceeding Use
to all sorts of Men, of what Quality or Profession soever. By William Salmon
Professor of Physic.

Essays of Michael Signeur De Montaigne. With Marginal Notes, and Quotations of
the cited Authors. Made English by Charles Cotton Esquire. To which is added a
short Character of the Author and Translator by way of Letter written by the
Marquess of Hallifax.

Plutarch's Morals, Translated from the Greek by several Hands. The Second
Edition.

The Faithful Register; or, the Debates of the House of Commons in three
Several Parliaments; Viz. 1. That held at Westminster, October. 21. 1680. 2. That
held at Oxford, March 21. 1680. 3. That held at Westminster, November 9. 1685.
Wherein, the Points of Prerogative, Privil^ges, Papish Designs Standing Army,
County-Militia, Supplies, and other Grand Mysteries of State are fully
Discussed.

Mr. Hobbs's Tripos in three Discourses. 1. of Humane Nature or the Fundamental
Elements of Policy. 2. De Corpore Politico, or the Elements of Law Moral and
Politic. 3. Of Liberty Necessity and Chance.

Angliae Notitia, or the Present State of England Complete, the XVII. Edition,
with Additions and Alterations according to the present Establishment, under
their Majesty's, K. William and Q Mary.

The Ladys New-Years-Gift, advice to a Daughter, under these following Heads;
Religion, Husband, House and Family, Servants, Behavior and Conversation,
Friendships, Censure, Vanity and Affectation, Pride, Diversions, Dancing. The
same in French.

Miscellanea Parliamentaria. Containing I. Memorials of the manner of passing
Bills, together with the Orders of the House. Collected by Observation, and out
of the Journals, from the time of King Edward the Sixth. By Henry Scobel Esquire
Cler. Parl. II. Precedents of Elections, Proceedings, Privileges, and
Punishments in Parliament. Collected out of the Common and Statute Laws, by R.
C. of the Middle Temple, Esquire. With so much of the Learned Sir Thomas Smith
as relates to this Subject. III. The Opinion of most Learned Antiquaries
Touching the Antiquity, Power, State, and Proceedings in Parliament. IV. The
Method of passing Bills in the Lords House, under twelve principal Heads. By
Henry Elsyng, Cler. Parl. Never before printed.

Kalendarium Hortense, or the Gard'ner's Almanac, directing what he is to do
Monthly throughout the Year, to which is now added in this Eighth Edition a new
Conservatory or Green House, with many other useful Additions, by John Evelyn
Esquire Fellow of the Royal Society.

The Refined Courtier, or a Correction of several Indecencies crept into Civil
Conversation. Written originally in Italian by John Casa, from thence into
Latin by Nathan Chytraeus, and from both, by way of Paraphrase, made English,
by N. W.

Moral Maxims and Reflections, in Four Books. By the Duke de Rochefoucault.
Just Finished.

The End of the Catalogue.

