THREE SERMONS Preached in St. Mary's Church IN CAMBRIDG, UPON THE Three
Anniversaries OF THE Martyrdom of Charles I. Jan. 30. Birth and Return of
Charles II. May 29. Gunpowder Treason, November. 5.


By JAMES DUPORT D. D. Dean of Peterborough, and Master of Magdalen College in
Cambridg, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard the West
end M DC LXXVI.

REVERENDO DOCTISSIMOQUE VIRO ROBERTO HITCH S. T. P. ECCLESIAE METROPOLITICAE
EBORACENSIS DECANO TUTORI SUO AETERNUM COLENDO TRES HASCE CONCIONES LEVIDENSE
QUIDEM MUNUSCULUM INDUBIUM TAMEN GRATI ANIMI AMORIS ET OBSERVANTIAE PIGNUS AC
MONUMENTUM LUBENS MERITO D. D. D.

JACOBUS DUPORT.

IMPRIMATUR
To. Mapleloft Procan. Ja. Fletewood. Ri. Minshull. Jo. Pearson: now Lord
Bishop of Chester.
A SERMON Preached upon the Anniversary of the Martyrdom of King CHARLES the
First.
Acts 7. 60. -- Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.
IT is the Prayer of St. Stephen the Proto-Martyr for his Persecutors and
Murderers: and it was the Prayer of our late Royal Martyr for his Persecutors
and Murderers too; for these were his words in his Speech at his Death, I pray
God, with St. Stephen, that this be not laid to their charge. And this is one
part of the Parallel may be drawn between these two Martyrs, to make the Text
verbum diei, suitable to the time. Another may be taken from the 9 and 10 Verses
of the foregoing Chapter, where we find the Synagogue of the Libentines and
others, disputing with Stephen; and they were not able to resist the wisdom and
the spirit by which he spoke. And did not our Royal Martyr too dispute with the
Libertines? (for Liberty was the pretense both in Church and State) did he not
dispute with the Kirk-men of Scotland, and others here at home, and so confound
'um, that they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he
spoke, as is notoriously known, and yet to be seen in his incomparable Works?
3. Was it not for the Cause (and Non poena sed causa facit Martyrem. S. Aug.
Epist. 61.
it is the Cause that makes the Martyr) of God and a good Conscience, and the
Gospel, and the Church of Christ, and true Religion, that he suffered as well
as Stephen? 4. Some part of a parallel, by way of allusion, may be in the name:
Stephen signifies a Crown, and ever since it is called the Crown of Martyrdom,
Martyrium Stephani Martyrii Stephanus: it is not mine, but Gregory Nyssen's in
his. Encomiastic Oration upon him: Stephen (...) (...) Greg. Nyss. Tom. 3.
Orat. in S. Steph.
was the first that wore the Crown of Martyrdom. And was not the Murder of our
Royal Charles the Martyrdom of a Crown? for our Regicides did not only kill the
King, but the Crown it self, as much they could, not only an anointed Crowned
King, but the Crown and Kingdom too. Thus they found out a way to bring
Caligula's wish to effect, and by a Compendium of Cruelty, uno ictu to decoll
the whole Kingdom; for when they cut off his Head, they cut off the Head of the
People (so Carolus in Greek signifies (...)) and they made account the People
should never have a head more, but be Acephali both in Church and State; not any
one head, no Monarch, nor King, but I know not what; and so they should have
been a kind of a Hydra, or bellua multorum capitum. 5. And lastly, St. Stephen
was the Proto-Martyr, or first Martyr; and so was our St. Charles: but how can
this be? you will say: is not this a contradiction, that there should be two
Proto-Martyrs, two first Martyrs, and those so long one after another? but my
meaning is, ours was the first that ever was Murdered or Martyred in the like
kind: for was it ever heard of, recorded or read in any Story, that there ever
was in any age of the world the like horrid Barbarity, such a quintessence of
Treason, Rebellion and Cruelty, as was acted this day upon his Sacred Person?
He being the first crowned and anointed King that was thus murdered by his own
Subjects at his own Palace-gate, and that by a Mock-High-Court of Justice, or
rather by a deepdissembling Court of most high Injustice; the first example in
this kind, and so a Proto-Martyr too. But I shall leave these, and return to
that part of the Parallel, which we meet withal here, viz. his praying for his
Enemies, Persecutors, and Murderers, as St. Stephen does in the words of the
Text, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. In which words observe with me
these five particulars.

1. Here Is Designatio criminis, the designation of a Crime, or Sin; the
pointing out of some special, signal, remarkable Sin, this Sin.

2. Reatus, or meritum peccati, the guilt or demerit of Sin in general, it is to
be laid to the Sinner's charge.

3. Misericordia Dei, the mercy of God in giving a discharge to Sinners
sometimes, and not laying their sins to their charge. This supposed, else it
had been in vain for Stephen to have made such a Prayer.

4. Virtus Orationis, the efficacy and power of Prayer in procuring a pardon,
and prevailing with God to grant a discharge, and not to lay sin to the charge
of a Sinner.

5. And lastly, Officium Christiani, the duty of Christians under the Cross, by
St. Stephen's example to pray for their Persecutors, as he did here, Lord, lay
not, etc.

1. Here Is Designatio criminis, the pointing out of some special, signal,
remarkable Sin, this Sin: some extraordinary great Sin sure it was, a Sin of
the first magnitude, crimen majoris abollae. This appears by our Martyr's
Praying, and Praying so earnestly with a loud voice, for the pardon and
forgiveness of it, lay not this sin, this Sin; with an emphasis; this great,
grievous, heinous Sin, lay not this Sin to their charge. It Is true, there is no
Sin but stands in need of pardon; yet all Sins are not equal (as the Stoics
wu'd have them) but some greater than others, and so require a greater measure
of repentance; and men must pray and cry louder than ordinary for the pardon
and forgiveness of them: Especially when we pray for the pardon of other men's
Sins, making particular mention of 'um, we do not commonly take notice of Gnats
but Camels, not of Moats but Beams, not of Mole-hills but Mountains: I mean, we
do not use to specify or particularize any with a demonstrative, hoc peccatum,
this Sin, unless it be some extraordinary heinous crying Sin; and such a one
(it seems) was this here; a crying Sin, or else Stephen wu'd never have cried
so loud for the pardon, and non-imputation of it. Indeed this was the last Sin
he knew they were guilty of, and they were now flagrant in the actual
commission of it, and so he might be the more concerned for 'um, and the more
sensible of it; and the rather because he felt the fruit or rather the smart of
it, while the stones came rattling about his ears. But this was not it; sure
there was more in it then so: for what cu'd his crying out avail him, or do him
good as to that? he knew they were implacably set against him: he knew he cu'd
not hold their hands from stoning him, but he hoped God might hold his from
striking them; 'twas not then his own particular interest that made him put an
emphasis upon the Sin, this Sin: 'twas not the stones on his head that troubled
him so much, nor the stones i'their hands, but the stone i'their hearts, their
hard, and obdurate, and stony hearts; of which their (...), and hardness of
heart, this Sin in stoning him was too evident, and pregnant a proof. And
though this was the last Sin he knew of 'um, yet he knew 'twas not the least,
but rather the greatest that ever they had committed, the most heinous, and
barbarous, and bloody Sin that ever they were guilty of, next to that of
crucifying their King, and Murdering his and their Lord and Savior. And
therefore in his Sermon to 'um, of all their other Sins, he only takes notice
of this, and upbraids 'um with it, v. 52, As your fathers did, so do ye; which
of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? And so our blessed Savior in
that pathetical exclamation of his, where he so passionately bewails and
laments the sinful estate of Jerusalem, though he knew her to be guilty of many
other heinous and grievous Sins, yet he singles out this Sin above all, as the
most capital Crime, and chief of all, O Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. 37.
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, etc. This then was the Sin, this
Sin here in the Text, killing a Prophet, stoning a Minister and Messenger of
God, that was sent unto 'um to teach 'um the way of Salvation, and Murdering
him, only for preaching Christ and the Gospel, and standing stoutly in defense
of the truth. And was not this a Sin (as I may say) with a witness, thus to
slay a Witness and Martyr of the Lord Jesus? Homicide in general, the murder of
any man whomsoever, is a heinous and bloody Sin, one of those three crying
Sins, so called in Scripture, and I think the chief of the three, that cry loud
to Heaven for vengeance. And as it was the Sin of Adam's firstborn, so it was
the firstborn Sin we read of next to Adam and Eve's; and we find God setting a
brand and a mark upon it (as he did upon Cain the first committer of it) and
threatening it with a special curse of retaliation, He that sheddeth man's
blood, by Genesis 9. 6.
man shall his blood be shed: and this long before the giving of the Moral Law
by Moses; it being one of the seven Precepts given to the Sons of Noah, not to
kill, or commit Murder; a Sin so foul and heinous in its own nature, and so
directly against the Law of Nature, that the very Heathen by the Divine light
of natural reason, saw the ugliness and deformity of it; and therefore did hate
and abhor it, and made it a capital Crime, and so to be punished with Lex
talionis, according to the forenamed Divine Law. Such is this Sin, this Sin
here of Bloodshed and Murder in general, a black, foul, grievous, and horrid
Crime, a crying Sin, a Sin that cries loud to Heaven for vengeance: but much
more when it is the shedding of innocent blood, the putting of a just and
righteous man to death: and how much more yet, when it is the killing of a
Prophet, a Minister and Messenger of God, and that for no other cause in the
world, but for speaking the truth in the name of the Lord, and in the very act
of his preaching to them the truth of God; the Murder of a Martyr and witness
of Christ, yea and of his very witness too which he bare, and the thing
witnessed, (what in them lay) Now such as was the stoning of Stephen, who here
seals the truth of the Gospel, and of Christian Religion with his blood, and
thus prays for his Murderers, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. This the
Sin in the Text; and what think ye of the Sin of the Day? Stoning of Stephen, the
Sin in the Text; Killing the King, the Sin of the Day. Something I premised in the
beginning concerning these two Martyrs and their Sufferings by way of Parallel.
And though I confess the stoning of Stephen as to the ground and cause of his
suffering scarce admits of any Parallel since the crucifying of Christ, the
Martyrdom of St. Stephen being a direct Murdering of Christ again, in the first
preaching of the Gospel to God's ancient people by his inspired Evangelist and
Prophet; yet, in some respects at least, I think I may safely say, the
transcript not only equals, but even exceeds the Proto-type, and the Copy
outdoes the Original, I mean, the Sin of the Day outgoes the Sin in the Text;
whether we consider the rank and quality of the Sufferers, or the malice of the
Murderers, or the manner of the proceedings, clothed with many black, foul,
aggravating circumstances; of which I shall not need now to speak particularly,
they being so well known to the world. I shall only at present take notice of
the rank and quality of the Sufferer, or Person of our Royal Martyr; which
alone is sufficient to aggravate this Sin, to enhance and heighten it to the
highest point and pitch of impiety. And here I shall take a brief view of him
in a double capacity, first in his Political capacity, as a King; then in his
Moral or Personal capacity, as a man, or a Christian: And I hope I may make a
better use of this distinction, than some have formerly done. First, look upon
him as a King; he was a Royal Martyr. St. Stephen though he had a Crown in his
name, and wore the Crown of Martyrdom, and that set with stones, and those
precious stones (for Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Psalm. 116. 15,
death of his Saints); yet he had no Crown on his head; I mean, he never wore a
Crown of Gold, as our Royal Martyr did, who was a crowned and anointed King,
and so his Person Sacred and inviolable; Sacrosanct a Regum Majestas, being
generally owned and acknowledged by all, even the most barbarous Nations; and
the Supreme Majesty having a stamp of Divinity, and so a Noli me tangere set
upon it by the Laws both of God and Man. Such was the Martyr of the day, our
late dread Sovereign Charles the First of ever blessed and glorious Memory,
whose Sacred Majesty cu'd not not secure it self from the malice and cruelty of
blood-thirsty men, though his own natural professed Subjects. The Jews that
stoned Stephen, were his Enemies; but they were not his Subjects: they might be
sworn against him, be his sworn Enemies, but they were not sworn to him, not
his sworn Subjects: he was not their Liege Lord and Master; they never swore
fealty nor allegiance to him as our Jews had done to our Martyr-King. Those
Jews that put Stephen to death, Persecutors they were, and Murderers; but they
were not Traitors nor Rebels, as ours were: they were guilty of shedding
innocent blood, but yet they were not guilty of shedding Royal blood, as our
Jews were: Homicides they were, yea and Propheticides (as I may say), they
killed a Prophet, a Preacher of righteousness, a Deacon, a Churchman; but they
were not Regicides, not guilty of Rebellion and Treason, as ours were to
purpose. In stoning of Stephen, they did not Murder their Lord and Master,
their Liege Lord and Sovereign King, as ours did this day: Traitors they were
not, they did not betray him, nor did they conspire and contrive and plot his
death by any premeditated malice; but transported with a rash blind zeal, and
hurried on with a sudden impetuous fury, they ran upon him with one accord
(says the Text) and cast V. 57. 58.
him out of the City, and stoned him: but our Jews did their work in a more
deliberate way; they did plot and forecast; and drive on their design by a long
train and mine of mischief; they wove a curious web of wickedness, spun a fine
thread of Rebellion and Treason, and then cut it, or rather cut him, off, in a
methodical way, by a Pageantry of villainy, by a Mock-Court of Justice killed
their King, and embrew'd their hands (animus meminisse horret) in the blood
o'their Sovereign, the Lord's anointed. That for his Political capacity, as
King and Supreme. Now for his Moral or Personal, take him as a Man or a
Christian, (...); -- so just, so sober, so chaste, so temperate, so prudent, so
gentle, so merciful, so patient, so charitable, so religious (witness his duly
and daily frequenting his Closet and Chapel, besides his private Devotions);
in a word, so virtuous and free from vice, that even malice or slander could
fasten nothing upon him: yea some of the chief Rebels confessed he was too good
for us; this sinful Nation was not worthy of him, yea the world was not worthy
of him; and therefore by a new kind of Ostracism, far worse than that of
Athens, he must be banished from off the face of the earth, only because he was
so good and so excellent a Person. I read in a very good Author of a strange
custom among a people of Scythia called Grot. De Satisfact. cap. 10. De Albanis
hoc specialiter proditum, solere ab ipsis immolari eum, quem crederent
Sanctimonia maxim pollere.
Albani (and Strabo lib. 11, has something like it, speaking of the same
people) who were wont to offer up that man in Sacrifice to their gods, whom
they thought to be most eminent for holiness of life (ye know what Country is
called Albania, and ye know who delivered up our Royal Martyr, though I will
not say they offered him up, with an intent he should be made a Sacrifice, as it
afterward proved). I shall leav it to you to apply it. Thus the case stood
between the King and the Rebels; because he did Sanctimonia maxim pollere, was
so holy a man, a most gracious King, therefore they proceeded to make him a
most glorious King too; and so they did, by bestowing upon him the glorious
Crown of Martyrdom. Whatever they pretended, to palliate so foul a cause, yet
their Conscience told 'um, they cu'd find no fault in him; as Pilat said, I
find no fault in this man. Our Schismatics of neither hand, neither Papal, nor
the other, cu'd Joh. 19. 6. Talis cum sis, utinam noster esses! Nunt. a Mort.
Nemo, demta haer^seos labe aut justior, aut sanctior, etc. p. 7.
find any fault in him, but only that he was not theirs; Nuntius a Mortuis, who
knows the mind, and speaks the sense, of his Brethren of Rome, confesses
plainly that he was so good and virtuous a Prince, nothing cu'd stick upon him,
or be laid to his charge, but only that he persisted in the Schism, forsooth,
and Heresy, begun by his Predecessor Henry the Eighth; that is, that he
continued firm and constant, and immovable in the profession and maintenance
and defense of the true Protestant Reformed Religion. They on the other side
quite contrary, blamed him for nothing else, at least for nothing so much, as
his inclination to Popery; and all because he wu'd not dance after their pipe,
nor suffer himself to be carried with the stream of the Faction, nor swim with
them down the Leman lake; but stood firm for the Church of England, in
opposition to both extremes. Thus he was crushed between two milstones, and
Crucified like Christ by Jew and Gentile, and between two thievs: For 'twas
resolved and decreed, one man must dye for the people, as Caiaphos said: for
the people indeed, he must be made a Sacrifice, and a Martyr for the Laws and
Liberties, and Religion too, of the Church of England, as it stood by Law
established both for Doctrine and Discipline. I hope, after all this, ye do not
expect, I should give you a complete Character of him, nor an exact Catalogue
of all those virtues and graces, of which I named but a few even now, that were
so eminent and exemplary in him, and shined so remarkably in his Royal Person.
This is a task I wu'd not, nay cu'd not undertake, (...): I should wrong both
Him, and you, and my self, if I should go about it. Look not then that I should
draw a Portraicture or Picture of him with my rude unskilful pencil; it is done
already, and done to the life, and no Apelles can draw it so well, as he has
done himself with his own hand, in his most exquisite and incomparable piece,
called (...); a Book which so confounded his Adversaries, that when they cu'd
not contradict nor confute it, they were fain calumniari fortiter, yea, and
meutiri turpiter, by denying it to be his own. And now methinks I may say, as
Pilat did of him whose example this our Royal Martyr followed, Behold your Joh.
19. 14. Joh. 19. 5.
King, and again, Behold the man: Look upon him as a King, and look upon him as
a Man, he was a Mirror of both, the best of Kings, and the best of Men. And may
I not then upbraid our Jews, as St. Stephen does his here, v. 52, by calling
our Martyr the Just one, of whom they have been the betrayers and murderers, and
apply that in Daniel to Him in a qualified sense, the Messiah was Dan. 9. 26.
cut off (our Anointed, so Messiah signifies) but not for himself, i. e. not
for his own Sins, but the Sins of the people. Thus in all respects the Sin of
our Regicides, the Sin of this day, was a bloody and a scarlet Sin; and
therefore the Pilat of this day might well be clad in Scarlet, when the Sin he
acted was so deep-dy'd; and all of 'um, both they and their President, were so
scarletted all over, so dibaphi, double-dy'd, and twice dipped, dipped in the blood
of a gracious King, and dipped in the blood of a righteous man. But I labor in
vain to show you the ugliness of this most execrable and heinous Crime: to
describe and portray this horrid Monster in its full proportion, in all its
lineaments and lively colors, wu'd require a volume, or rather many volumes,
to be writ of it: yea, he that wu'd paint out this Sin in its colors, must not
do it in writing, not in black and white, but in black and red; for 'twas as
black as hell, and as red as blood; as red as the red Dragon, yea as red as
Scarlet, as the Scarlet whore, if Rome be she; and sure the hand of Joab, the
Jesuit with his King-killing Doctrine, was in all this, and every one of the
Regicides had a Pope in his belly, to give him a Dispensation, and absolv him
from his Oath of Allegiance. This was the Sin of the day, hoc peccatum, this
Sin; and so much for the first particular; wherein the longer I have been, the
shorter I must be in the rest that follow.

2. Reatus or meritum peccati, the demerit and guilt of Sin; in common right
and justice it is to be laid to the Sinners 2.
charge; it is to be imputed to him, and laid upon him. 'Twas God's saying to
Cain, (the Ringleader of Homicides, the first man that ever committed Murder)
Sin lies Genesis 4. 7.
at the door. Every sin, especially this bloody crying Sin, lies at the door,
at the Sinner's own door, and he must take the brat home to himself, and not
father it upon any other; none else to bear the blame of it, nor to be
chargeable with it, neither (...), nor (...), nor (...), (by his leav in Homer)
neither God, nor Fate, nor Destiny, nor Chance, nor Providence, nor Nature,
unless it be corrupt nature; and that is the Sinner himself. No, nor yet is the
Devil by himself alone chargeable with it; he is suasor, but not actor; the
Tempter, but not the Sinner; speaking of this Sin, you may call him the Father
of it, as he is of every Sin; for as he is a liar, and the Father of it, so he
was a murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44.
and the father of it: so then he may pass for the father, if ye will; but the
flesh, or our sinful corruption is the mother, and that is the surer side; and
so every man's Sin to be laid to his own charge, at his own door, Noxa caput
sequitur. Now of all others* a Murderer is a Sinner in grain, a deep died
Sinner, as deepdy'd as blood can make him; and as every Murderer is such an
egregious Sinner, so every Sinner is an egregious Murderer, for he is (...), a
Self-murderer, he is felo de se, guilty of his own death, he contracts a guilt,
and incurs a penalty, and that no less than of death, and that as due as the
workman's wages, for the wages of sin is Romans 6. 23.
death: there is a charge drawn up against him under his own hand in the Court
of Heaven, a guilt cleavs unto him, and that not only reatus simplex, as they
call it, or a guilt in actu 10, but also reatus redundans in personam, or a
guilt in actu 20, without the mercy of God through the merits of Christ
interceding for him. This St. Stephen supposes, that in the ordinary course of
God's justice Sin is laid to the Sinner's charge; and he to bear the burden,
and to undergo the penalty of it: and yet he supposes withal, that the mercy of
God sometimes intervenes, and takes off the charge.

And that is the third Particular, Misericordia Dei, the 3.
mercy of God in giving a discharge to Sinners sometimes, and not laying their
Sins to their charge: were it not for this, and for hope of this, neither of our
Martyrs wu'd have thus prayed for their Murderers. When a Sinner is arraigned
and condemned at the bar of God's justice, he sometimes finds both a reprieve
and a pardon at his mercy seat; when he is cast in Law, and the Cause carried
against him in the ordinary Court of justice, he finds some relief and favor
by getting a pardon under the broad seal of Heaven, the Gospel of Grace, signed
and sealed with the blood of Christ. Were it not so, woe worth the day V^ etiam
laudabili vitae hominum. Aug. Conf. l. 1. c 22. Si quoties peccant homines, sua
fulmina mittat.
that ever we were born, the best of us all; if God should charge home upon us,
and lay all our Sins to our charge. But, blessed be God, there is hopes, yea
very good hopes to the contrary, be our sins never so great and grievous;
that is our comfort, and that is the ground of our Martyr's Prayer, Lord, lay not
this sin, this heinous and crying Sin, Lay not this sin to their charge. Sins
may always be laid to the Sinner's charge, that is their merit; but they are not
always so laid, that is God's mercy: they may de jure, that is the guilt o'Sin;
but they are not de facto, that is the goodness o'God. But I shall wave the
further prosecution o'these, and pass to the

4th. Particular, and that is Virtus Orationis, the efficacy 4.
and power of Prayer, in procuring a pardon, not only for our selves, but for
others; I say, in procuring a pardon, and prevailing with God to grant a
discharge, and not to lay sin to the charge of a Sinner, though never so great
and grievous. That God is a God forgiving iniquity, and Exodus 34. 7.
transgression, and sin (as he says himself), i. e. all manner of Sin, Sins of
all sorts and sizes; that he sometimes acquits and discharges even the greatest
Sinners, releasing 'um from the penalty and guilt o'their Sins, non imputat,
that we had before, and St. Stephen takes it for granted: but now, Quare non
imputat, whence comes it to pass, by what means or motives is God prevailed
with, and wrought upon, so as non imputare, to deal so graciously with the
wretchedest and vilest Sinners, as not to lay their sins to their charge, no,
not hoc peccatum, not this Sin, though never so foul, horrid and heinous? this
we have here, viz. St. Stephen's earnest and fervent Prayer for 'um. Stephen
was a righteous man; justitia causae, and justitiae personae, both met in him,
and that in an eminent manner; he was a righteous man, and had a righteous
cause: and the Prayer of such a man (says St. James) of a righteous man (...),
is very Jam. 5. 16.
effectual, and avails much. O the persuasive Rhetoric of a good man's
Prayer! The Prayer of a Saint, of a Martyr especially, is very powerful and
prevalent for procuring a pardon, and that not only of his own Sins, but of the
Sins of others, even to a ne imputes, so as to take off the charge, and free
'um from the guilt and penalty of 'um. But what? shall we then make Saints and
Martyrs our joint-Mediators and Intercessors? or shall we say, that their
Blood, and Tears, and Prayers procure a discharge, and sue out a pardon, and
obtain a non-imputation of Sin? Is not this derogatory to the mercy of God, and
the merit of Christ? not at all: for the Prayers of the Saints are prevalent
only through his merits and mediation. Indeed it is the free Grace and Mercy of
God, that is the prime and principal proegumenous cause, whereby God is
inwardly moved and inclined to give a discharge and release to Sinners, and to
grant pardon and forgiveness of Sin: and it is the allsufficient merit and
mediation of Christ, that is the prime and principal procatarctic cause, the
only impulsive meritorious cause, whereby God is moved and induced to show pity
to poor Sinners: It Is Christ alone that is our Advocate with the Father, and he
is the propitiation for 1 John 2. 1, 2.
our sins, says St. John; though, if Socinus say true, the blood of Martyrs may
avail almost as much for the expiation and pardon of Sins, as the blood of
Christ; yet the same Apostle tells us, that (not the blood of Martyrs, but
only) the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses 1 John 1. 7. Heb. 9.
22.
us from all sin. Without shedding of blood (his blood) no remission of Sin,
not of the Sin of Bloodshed and Murder, this Sin, to be sure: it is his blood
alone can wash out this blood, the guilt and stain of this Crimson and Scarlet
Sin, especially the stain of innocent and Royal blood, the Sin of this day.
It Is not the blood of all the Martyrs and Holy men that ever were slain since
the beginning of the world, not all the righteous blood Matthew. 23. 35:
shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of our
righteous King Charles the First, that can make an atonement or propitiation
for any one Sin. The blood of Saints and Martyrs may cry aloud to Heaven for
vengeance, but it can never cry for mercy; no, that is proper and peculiar to
the blood of Christ alone: No other propitiatory nor deletory of Sin, but only
the blood of that immaculate Lamb. Nor have we any other Advocates in Heaven,
that we know on, nor Mediators of intercession, no more than of Redemption, but
only that one Mediator between God and 1 Timothy 2. 5.
men the man Christ Jesus. I say, no other Advocates nor Mediators in Heaven;
yet we have a sort of inferior Advocates and Intercessors on earth, viz. our
fellow. Christians, that may and do make intercession for us, and are daily
Orators in our behalf at the throne of Grace; praying to God for us, that he
wu'd not impute our Sins unto us. Some on earth then we have, that intercede
and pray for us, but none in Heaven, but our Savior Christ; I mean none that
pray for us in particular,"though in the general, the Church Triumphant in
Heaven, may pray for the Church Militant here on earth; yet, I scy, no Saints
departed pray for us in partkcular, for ought we know, and Viventes pro
viventibus, ergo Defuncti, is no good consequence by the Cardinal's leav; for
they that live and converse with us here on earth, may see and know our wants,
or we may impart our thoughts and desires, our needs and necessities to 'um:
but that the Saints in Heaven either know my wants, or hear my Prayers, I have
no ground to believ, because no warrant at all in Scripture; therefore I cannot
in Faith call upon 'um, nor pray unto 'um to pray, and intercede for oe: and
though St. Stephen's Prayer might prevail for his Persecutors, while he was
upon earth, yet it cannot prevail with me to say, Sancte Stephane, or a me, now
he is in Heaven. However this benefit and advantage we have by that Article of
our Creed, the Communion of Saints, that we who are members of the Catholic
Church here on earth, reap the fruit of one another Prayers. Nor is this sweet
perfume of the Prayers of the Saints confined within the verge and pale of the
Christian Church, but extends it self to the benefit even of Jews, Turks,
Infidels and Heretics; so that when this alabaster box is broken, and these
Prayers poured forth, the whole world is filled with the odor of the Ointment.
Though then the mediation and intercession of Christ in Heaven be the sole
meritorious cause of a ne imputes, of not laying sin to the sinner's charge:
yet by the virtue of his merit and mediation, the Prayers and Intercessions of
Holy men upon earth are very prevalent, and impetratorious in their kind, as
motives and inducements to God to give a discharge, not as meriting, but
procuring causes, or rather not causes but occasions, of the remission of Sins;
and not only of their own, but even of other men's Sins. Yet is not this done
per saltum neither, but by degrees, I mean, by some previous qualifications and
conditions requisite to be performed by the Sinner himself, to render him
capable of so great a favor as this non-imputation; such as godly sorrow, and
hearty repentance, and, an unfeigned purpose of amendment o'life: therefore,
Qui vult finem, vult media: he that prays for another, that God wu'd not lay
his sins to his charge, is presumed to pray withal, that God wu'd give him
Grace to repent of his Sins; this latter being the way and means to procure and
obtain the former: for as without shedding of blood (the blood of Christ) so
without shedding of tears (the tears of a Sinner) i. e. without godly sorrow
and repentance, there is no remission. So then the Prayers of the faithful are
a powerful and prevalent means, whereby God is moved and inclined to give
repentance to Sinners, and consequently remission of Sins. Let the Elders pray
over the sick person (says St. James); and the Prayer Jam. 5. 15.
of faith shall save the sick, and if he have committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him: therefore, says Simon Magus to Simon Peter, here in the next
Chapter, Pray to Act. 8. 24.
the Lord for me; meaning, as appears by the context, that his Sins might be
forgiven him. And, Pray not thou Jer. 7. 16.
for this people, says God to the Prophet; implying that the Prophet's praying
for 'um, was the ordinary means to move God to give 'um a pardon, and not to
lay their sins to their charge. That Austin ever was St. Austin, he might
partly thank his Mother Monica, for her Prayers and Tears. Fieri non potest ut
filius istarum lacrymarum Aug. Cons. 1. 3. c. 12.
pereat. So powerful and prevalent are the Prayers and Tears of holy Men and
Women, of Saints and Martyrs, to obtain repentance and salvation for others;
the Prayers of Martyrs especially; for as Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, so
Oration justi clavis coeli. As the soil of the Church is manured and made fat by
the blood of dying Martyrs; so being blown and breathed upon by the soft gentle
gales of their Prayers, especially of those Prayers they make for their
enemies, it becomes more fruitful by a new addition of Converts and Proselytes;
who by observing both the constancy and charity of these holy men at their
deaths, by seeing their patience in constant suffering for the truth, and by
hearing, or rather God's hearing, their charity in such servent praying for
their persecutors, are effectually wrought upon, converted and brought home to
Christ. Thus in thesi; and thus it was no doubt in hypothesi, in St. Stephen's
case: for we may well believ, that by his patient suffering, and powerful
praying, some of that durum genus, of those hard stony-hearted Jews, with their
stones i'their hands, and their stone i'their hearts, were mollify'd to
conversion, and brought to repentance; and that as God was able, so he was
willing, of those stones to raise up children Matthew. 3. 9.
to Abraham; and so there was this good effect of our Martyr's Prayer for his
Persecutors, that the Lord did not charge this nor the rest o'their Sins upon
'um. That thus it was with some of 'um, is more than probable; but of one we
are certain, viz. St. Paul; who by virtue of the Proto-Martyr's Prayer was
given and gained to the Church, and of a persecuting Saul was made a preaching
Paul. According to that known saying of the Father, Si Stephanus non orasset,
Ecclesia Paulum non S. Aug. Sermon. 1 De Sanctis.
haberet; St. Paul's Conversion was the fruit and effect of St. Stephen's
Devotion. And not only Paul, but some others among 'um it is like were hereby
converted, and brought to repentance, and so their Sin, this Sin, this horrid,
bloody, crying Sin, forgiven and not laid to their charge. Thus prevalent was
our Martyr's Prayer here in the Text, this happy effect it had upon his
Persecutors and Murderers. And now shall we say that our Royal Martyr's Prayer
this day had the like effect upon his? we hope it had; at least upon some of
'um. 'Twas his charity to pray for 'um, and it must be our charity (and nothing
else) to hope the best of 'um, that the guilt of that innocent and Royal blood
(this day shed) was washed away from 'um by the blood of Christ, and the tears
of true repentance, and so this bloody Sin not laid to their charge. However
our Proto-Martyr here in the Text, and our Princely Martyr here of the day, have
both set us a Copy, and taught us our Duty, viz. by their example to pray for
our Persecutors:

Which is the fifth and last Particular, Officium Christiani, 5.
The duty of Christians under the Cross, by Stephen's example to pray for their
Persecutors. Thus we are taught by our Church to pray, first in her Litany,
That it wu'd please God to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers,
and to turn their hearts; and then in her Collect for our St. Stephen's day;
That we may learn to love and bless our Persecutors, by the example of the
first Martyr St. Stephen, who prayed for his Murderers. And thus we are taught
by our Savior to pray; first by his Precept, in his Sermon on the Mount, Love
your enemies, bless them that Matthew. 5. 44.
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you and persecute you: and then by his practice, at his suffering on the
Cross, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. Luke 23. 34.
Pater ignosce and Domine ne imputes, forgive, and discharge, come both to one,
both the same Prayer in effect; and Stephen herein followed our Savior's
example, nay, borrowed this Prayer from Christ's own mouth, say some; who
therefore affirm that he was present at our Savior's passion. It Is possible he
might be; but yet this is gratis dictum, and only conjectural; and however this
be, whether he heard it or no, yet he learnt it, to be sure, of our Savior,
thus to breath out his last with such a transcendent charity, and with such a
zealous and ardent affection thus to pray for his Persecutors; I say, with such
a zealous and ardent affection, for he cried with a loud voice, says the Text;
and when he had said this, he fell asleep: as if he had been unquiet as it were
in his mind, and in a kind of restless condition, till he had vented his
fervent charity, and performed this last duty of love to his Brethren, (for so
they were, though his enemies) till in lieu of their heaping stones on his
head, he had heapt coals of fire on theirs, by his ardent zeal and affection
for 'um; in a word, till with great earnestness and contention o'Spirit, he had
poured out this short, but pithy and pathetical Prayer for 'um; and when he had
once done this, then he was quiet, and found rest for his Soul; when he had
said this, then he fell asleep Here then is a pattern for our imitation, an
example for us to follow; and we know who followed it this day, even our late
Martyred Sovereign, who prayed for his Persecutors, as the Proto-Martyr did,
and was a follower of him, as he was of Christ; for he followed not the steps
of Stephen only, but of his blessed Master and Savior, and according to his
pattern prayed for his Murderers, says our Church in one of her Collects for
this day. Let his memory therefore be ever precious among us, that we may
follow the example of his patience and charity; as it follows there. You Will say,
this is a Doctrine and a Duty for Christians under the Cross, but (thanks be to
God) we are not so; we are not with Stephen under a shower of stones, nor with
our Royal Martyr in the hands of Murderers. Beloved in the Lord, it is well we
are not; yet we know not how soon we may be: for who of us knows what days we
may live to see, or what times God has reserved us for? If we look abroad, the
face of things has no such pleasing nor promising aspect. But I will not male
ominari; and now especially when I am upon a theme of charity, which thinks
no evil, loath I am to 1 Cor. 13. 6.
suspect the worst. Yet let things be at the best, while we are Pilgrims here
on earth, traveling through the wilderness of this world, we are but in a
suffering and conflicting condition: In the world we shall have tribulation
Joh. 16. 13.
(says our Savior), I, and enemies too; therefore we have need of patience to
endure the one, and of charity to pray for the other. But my Text is not a
Theme of patience, nor our Martyr's Prayer here a Prayer of patience, so much
as of charity; and therefore to this latter I shall confine my self, viz. to
Charity, which teaches us by their example to pray for our Enemies; and Enemies
we have, to be sure, and those not a few, the Lord forgive 'um: For what good
Christian can want Enemies now adays, when Atheism and Profaneness has so many
friends? what sober Christian can want Enemies, as long as Riot; and Luxury,
and Debauchery has so many Friends, that in some places it is almost counted a
Sin to be civil? once more, What peaceable Christian can want Enemies, as long
as Schism and Sedition has so many Friends, and there are so many Sectaries and
Malcontents in Church and State? And have we not need of charity, think ye, to
pray for these enemies; that God wu'd give 'um a sight of their Sins, and so
lay 'um home to their hearts, that they may never be laid to their charge?
You Will say, these are close and secret enemies; the Text speaks of open and
public ones, Persecutors and Murderers, and we hope, we have none such: I hope
so too. Blessed be God, we are not yet ad eculeum redacti, not brought to Racks
and Strapado's, Axes and Gibbets; nor are we in danger of wearing a stone coat,
(...), (as he calls it in Homer;) yet I must Hom. Il. 1.
tell you, and I think I may tell you without breach of that charity which I am
commending to you, That if some men had their wills, and were well armed, and
had stones i'cheir hands, and I, as Stephen stood i'their way, I wu'd not trust
'um. You easily ghess who I mean: they are those fratres in malo, those red-hot
fiery Zealots of both sides; your furious hair-brained Fanatic, and your
perfidious disloyal Loiolite: I join 'um together, Bithus cum Bachio, for I
know not which is the worse of the two; and I think they plough with one
another heifer. But as for the Persecutors and Murderers, those 'ithe Text,
and those of the day especially, they are the objects of our Martyr's charity,
and therefore of ours. I mean them that are capable of it; For as for those
Alastors, the prime men, and ringleaders of 'um, who signed the Writ, and had
an immediate hand in the Royal blood that was shed this day, some of those
blood-thirsty men did not live out half their days (at least not the days that
they might have lived), but were deservedly cut off by the Sword of Justice, and
made a Sacrifice to divine and humane Laws here on earth. If any of 'um
repented, and found mercy in heaven, before they died, well far^ our
Martyr-King with his Prayer and charity for 'um, while they were living: but
whether they repented or no, they have had their doom already; now they are
dead, and in another world, our charity will do 'um no good, it is in vain to
pray for 'um: The living, the living are they we must pray for, and they to
whom we must extend our charity. If then there be any of 'um yet alive, who had
either a head in plotting and contriving, or a hand in acting and executing the
hoc peccatum, the Sin of this day, our charity bids us pray (and we cannot do
less for 'um) that God wu'd give 'um a sight of their horrid Sin, and Grace to
repent earnestly and heartily of it, that so it may never be laid to their
charge; nay, further, our charity (that believes all things, and hops 1 Cor.
13.
all things) bids us believ and hope, that some of 'um at least, I wu'd
willingly say, many of 'um, have already repented, and are become real
Converts. And this (though we may wish to see more apparent signs of it, yet)
where we see no manifest signs to the contrary, this, I say, in charity we are
to hope and believ. And if we thus hope and believ, then let us forgive and
forget; forgive after the example of our Martyr King, and forget according to
the pattern of his Son, our now Gracious Sovereign, whom God long preserv; who
has professed, as I have heard, that he that touches his Royal Act of grace and
favor, I mean, that most gracious and merciful Act of Indemnity, touches the
apple of his eye. Let us then pass such an Act of Amnestie and Oblivion too in
our own breasts; I mean, an Act of Oblivion as to others, but not to our
selves; for we must never forget, but remember, that we our selves all of us,
more or less, have had a finger, if not a hand in this Sin of the day. I know,
this will startle some: How? will some say, I hope not so; God forbid; who, I a
hand in the King's death? I defy him that says it: I thank God, I am as innocent
herein as the child unborn; I am innocent of Matt 27. 24.
the blood of that good King, that just person. So said Pilat, but yet he was
not for all that: he wu'd ha* washed his hands of it, but cu'd not. No more (I
fear) can we; for some guilt of this blood must need stick upon us in some
degree or other, seeing our Sins were the meritorious cause of the shedding of
it. We curse the Jews that crucified Christ; we cry out of them that stoned
Stephen; and we exclaim of those that murdered the King, as a pack of most vile
Varlets and Miscreants: and as we cry out upon 'um, so it may be we cry out for
'um, I mean, cry earnestly and with a loud voice too, as St. Stephen did; with
as loud a voice, but not with so good a heart as he, nor wi' so much charity,
Lord, lay not this Sin to th(...) (...)arge. But now after all this, let us a
little, I pray, (...)ct upon our selves. This Prayer, I told you, was a Prayer
of charity, and charity begins at home: Let us then look homewards, and see
whether we our selves are altogether free from the guilt of this blood, or
whether we have not cause to read the Text with a little alteration, by
changing the person, Lord, lay not this sin to our charge. For did not God take
away our good King in his wrath? and were not the Sins of the Nation the fuel
that kindled and fed the fire of his wrath? and have not we contributed some
sparks at least, yea and some fuel too to this fire? God be merciful to us all;
for sure we must all cry guilty before him, and take shame to our selves: And
that indeed is the business of this day, not to make bitter invectives and
declamations against others, but in the bitterness of our Souls to lament and
bewail our own sad condition; to weep bitterly for our own Sins, whereby we have
made our selves accessory in some kind or other to the commission of so
execrable and horrid a Crime. I say, in some kind or other, remotely at least,
if not immediately; meritoriously if not executoriously; virtually if not
formally; by consequence if not directly; by a sinful connivance and compliance
it may be, though not by a downright plotting and contrivance. However
accessories we are, though not the Principals; our Sins being the procuring
meritorious cause of God's permitting this Sin, this bloody Sin, this Sin of
the day. 'Twas for our Sins, our national Sins, our personal Sins, that God
opened the floodgates, and suffered the banks to be broken down, and let loose
those torrents of Belial, those floods of ungodliness, that deluge and
inundation of wickedness, that overwhelmed and drowned both King and Kingdom.
We abhor the very name and memory of those cursed and cruel Rebels, and if we
should meet any of 'um, we are ready to cast dust and dirt, and throw stones at
'um: But if none but he that is without sin among us, should take up the first
stone to fling at 'um, truly the stones might lie still long enough for all us.
Therefore let us take off our eyes a while from beholding of them, and reflect,
and look a little upon our selves, and knock at our own doors, to see whether
all be well at home. Though I hope we had no direct immediate hand nor heart in
the Sin of this day; yet should we be called to account for it, who of us all
here present (if then alive, and of ripe years) cu'd now plead not guilty?
Doubtless they were the Sins of the Nation in general, and the Sins of every
one of us in particular that sharpened the Ax, and brought the King to his end.
It was for our many and great provocations that God did suffer his Anointed to
fall this day into the hands of violent and blood-thirsty men; as our Church in
her Collect for this day devoutly confesses; and again, We humbly confess, that
the Sins of this Nation have been the cause which has brought this heavy
judgment upon us. Many national Sins I might name, which were then rife and
common among us, and so they are still; which then provoked God's wrath against
us, and so they do still (for truly the world is not much mended since). But
because St. Stephen had so much to do with Libertines, and our Royal Martyr
with those that cried out so much for Liberty, I shall therefore only take
notice of that universal Libertinism, looseness, and licenciousness, that seems
to overspread the whole body of the Kingdom. Men every where taking Liberty
enough, whether it be given 'um or no. We have need of more Stephens to beat
down our Libertines; such a general Libertinism possesses the Nation: An
Atheistical looseness, licenciousness, and profaneness, in point of Morality,
as to life and practice: a Skeptical looseness, latitude, and indifferency in
Religion, as to matter of Opinion and Doctrine: an Anarchical looseness (what
shall I call it?) remisness and slackness of the reins of rule and government,
in point of Order and Discipline: Every one of which is of dangerous
consequence, and has a very sad aspect and malignant influence upon a Kingdom
and Nation, threatening the ruin and dissolution both of Church and State, if
not timely prevented; especially that I last mentioned, that general looseness
and slackness of the reins of government in point of Discipline, that universal
neglect and contempt of Authority; that Epidemical undutifulness, irreverence,
and disrespect to Superiors, a rust and restiveness contracted in the late
lawless irregular and rebellious times, and yet not rubbed off, nor worn away;
the dregs and relics of that old leaven not yet purged, nor wrought out of
the minds and spirits of men; the seeds of Rebellion and Treason still lurking
among us; for all undutifulness to Superiors is a kind of petite Treason; Lex
est copulativa; there is a concatenation of duties; and he that breaks one link
of the chain of Subordination and Subjection to lawful authority, endangers all:
and this is certain, He that is undutiful and disobedient and disrespective to
his Superior, will not stick upon occasion, to be disloyal to the Supreme; and
then, beware of hoc peccatum, the Sin of the day. Now as for personal Sins, I
must leav that to every man's Conscience in particular, to call himself to
account, and see how the case stands between God and his own Soul. Let us then
do so, I beseech you, every one of us, seriously and thoroughly search and examine
our selves in private (for that is the work of this day, and not only to pray,
and hear a Sermon in public), I say, let us search our own hearts, to find out
what Sins we are most guilty of, our bosom and beloved Sins; for they are the
Murderers and Malefactors that must be attach't, arraigned and condemned this
day at the bar of Conscience; they are the Regicides, that have had so deep a
hand in the Sin of this day; they are the Traitors and Rebels, that betrayed
and murdered the King. Let then every one of us put these and the like
interrogatories to our own Souls; Was it not by my high-mindedness and
self-conceit, pride and ambition, that God was provoked to let proud aspiring
Tyrants and Traitors climb so high? Was it not my uncleanness, my lusts which
war in my members, that contributed to the kindling of that unnatural war
between the Head and the members? Did not the heat and fire of my lusts (among
others) incense and provoke God to let fire come out of the bramble, and devour
the Cedar of Lebanon? Was it not by my envy, hatred, and malice, and
uncharitableness, and hardness of heart, that God was provoked to harden the
hearts of those cruel Regicides against their lawful King, and permit 'um to be
filled brim-full with hatred and malice against his Royal person? Was it not my
rash swearing and profaneness, my false-swearing and perfidiousness, my breach
of Oaths and Covenants, Promises and engagements made in my Baptism, that moved
God to give up those false perfidious Traitors to a reprobate mind, so as to
break all those Sacred bonds and obligations, and Oaths of Allegiance to their
Liege Lord and Sovereign, and in stead of them to enter into those two bonds of
iniquity, the Covenant and Engagement? Lastly, was it not my intemperance,
gluttony, and drunkeness, that provoked God to suffer such a crew of savage and
barbarous Rebels to glut themselves with the flesh of Nobles, and to be drunk
with Royal blood? Thus should we with sorrow of heart reflect upon our selves,
who were then in being, and at years, when this horrid Sin was committed. But
then what shall we say to our Postnati or Puines, those of the younger sort?
Indeed they cannot be said to be guilty of the Sin of this day, or any way
accessory to it, seeing they were not then in rerum natura; not so much as
entered upon the Stage of the world, when this sad Tragedy was acted; they were
not born, when the King was beheaded. Yet by way of prevention of future
calamities, let them take heed o'those Sins, which in those times were the
meritorious causes of this fearful judgment, and provoked God to suffer it. In
a word, let all of us, both old and young, fear to commit those Sins, which as
they were then, so they may be still, the meritorious procuring causes of as
heavy and dreadful a judgment upon the Land and Nation. Let us, I pray, take
heed of persisting in the perpetration of our old wickednesses and impieties,
and of acting over those Sins a fresh, by which God was provoked to permit
cruel men, Sons of Belial, this day to imbrew their hands in the blood of his
Anointed, and thereby to deprive us of so good and gracious a King. This then
is the proper work of the day; every one of us to say with Pharaoh's Butler, I
do remember my faults this day, and so to humble himself before the Lord, not
only in public, but in secret; to lay his hand upon his heart, and put his
mouth in the dust, and take the shame and guilt of his Sins to himself, and say,
God be merciful to me a sinner; and, deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God:
and, Lord lay not this sin to my charge. Thus we should do, and O that we cu'd
do it with that brokeness of heart, and contrition of spirit, with that true
godly sorrow, and remorse of Conscience, that God may hear in Heaven, and have
mercy, and forgive and pardon, that so no one drop of that Royal blood may ever
be upon the head of any one of us in this Congregation, and much less upon the
whole Kingdom and Nation! O gracious God, when thou make inquisition for
blood, lay not the guilt of this innocent blood (the shedding whereof, nothing
but the blood of thy Son can expiate) lay it not to the charge of the people of
this land, nor let it ever be required of us or our posterity. Be merciful, be
merciful unto thy people whom thou have redeemed, and be not angry with us for
ever; but pardon us for thy mercie's sake, through the merits of thy Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A SERMON Preached upon the Anniversary of the Birth and happy Return of King
CHARLES the Second.
1 S. Pet. 2. 17. Fear God. Honor the King.
FEw words, but full, and pregnant, and big with variety of matter. Two short
Sentences, but long and large in sense and signification. Two brief compendious
Precepts, but of a huge diffusive, and comprehensive reach. Two short Lessons,
but of so grand importance, and so vast a latitude, that it will take up a
man's whole life to learn them: the first of them especially, Fear God; which
the Royal Preacher in the close of his Sermon, makes the Totum hominis, the
whole duty of man. Eccles. 12. 13.
And if so, we need learn no more, but put a stop at Fear God, and go no
further. For if that be the whole duty of man, then Honor the King will fall
under it, as included and comprehended in it: and so he that has learned to
fear God, has learned also to honor the King. And though the latter of these
Duties be not so comprehensive as the former, as to the direct and immediate
import of it in regard of the object; yet take it in its full extent and
latitude, and in all the due qualifications of it as to the act prescribed and
enjoined, together with the grounds and reasons of it, and then it implys and
presupposes the other: And so he that has learned to honor the King, has
learned also to fear God. And this shall be my task at this time, to show the
(...), the mutual coherence and connection of these two Precepts, the reciprocal
clasping and concatenation of these two Duties together.

Well then, Fear God is a large Theme, and would afford matter for many
Sermons: and so would Honor the King too, if one should discourse of them
severally and apart, as simply and absolutely in themselves considered: but I
shall not do so, but twist them both together, and so handle them jointly, as
they have a mutual (...) and reference one to another, and a mutual dependence
each upon other. Juncta juvant. And so I shall speak to these two Aphorisms or
Propositions: 1. No man can truly honor the King, but he that fears God. 2. No
man can truly fear God, but he that honors the King. So that here in this Text
St. Peter reads two Lessons, or Lectures, one to the profane ranting Royalist,
the other to the fanatic hypocritical Rebel.

1. No man can truly honor the King, but he that fears God. Loyalty and
subjection to the Higher Powers, is a fruit and consequent of the fear of God:
where there is not this root in the heart, there can be none of that fruit in
the life. It Is nothing but Conscience and Religion, and the fear of God, that
can aw the spirits of men into a sense of their duty, and keep 'um within the
bounds of loyalty and allegiance. Let every soul be subject to the Higher
Powers, says St. Paul, Romans 13. but how can he be subject indeed to the Higher
Powers, in obeying their Laws, that is not first subject to the most High in
keeping his Commandments? Can I think that man religiously observes the fifth
Commandment, that makes no conscience of keeping the other nine, and so pays
God but the tithe of the obedience due unto him? He that would truly honor the
King, and give due obedience to him and his Laws, must do it for conscience
Romans 13. 5.
sake (says the Apostle), but without the fear of God where is conscience? if
it be any where, it is asleep to be sure, for the fear of God will rouz it up
and awaken it. There is no power but of God (says the same Apostle in Romans 13.
1.
the same place) the powers that be, are ordained of God; and so the Supreme
Power, Sovereignty, or Supremacy, is the Ordinance of God, and upon that
account it challenges our dutiful submission and subjection to it. Now how can
he that fears not God, truly submit to the Ordinance of God? and consequently,
how can he truly honor the King? Again, the King is God's Lieutenant (as I may
say) upon earth: his Vicegerent and Deputy: how then can he truly honor the
King, that dishonours God, whose Person the King represents? The Judge in the
Gospel neither feared God, nor regarded man, Luke 18. 2.
(and he was not ashamed to say so himself): Indeed if he feared not God, no
marvel he regarded not any man in the world, so as to give him any due honor,
respect, or reverence, though never so much his Superior. Abraham (to be sure)
was in the right, when he made the want of the fear of God, the root of all
evil, the Parent and Nurs of all Sin and Wickedness, Adultery, and Murder, and
the like. Genesis 20. 17, Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they
will slay me for my wives sake; either to kill him, or abuse his Wife, he
thought they would make no bones of either, as long as the fear of God was not
among them. And it is likely our Common Law borrows that phrase in her form of
Indictment, viz. of a Malefactor's not having the fear of God before his eyes,
either from that speech of Abraham, or else from that of the Psalmist, The
transgression Psalm. 36. 1.
of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his
eyes. And from thence he knew it was, viz. from the want of this fear, that all
his wickedness did proceed. For it is the fear of God, that keeps all in aw, and
in order; and where that is wanting, nothing is safe, nor secure, neither Money
in the Chest, nor Wife in the Chamber, nor Man in his House, nor King in his
Throne. It is that great wheel in the clock that sets all the other of going;
it makes a man move orderly and regularly in all his relations: if that fail,
the rest of the wheels will move slowly, or stand still; a man will drive
heavily, or not at all. First, Fear God, then Honor the King: without the
former no hope of the latter. If a man fear not God, never look he should
honor the King, honor his Natural, Civil, or Ecclesiastical Parents, or keep
the fifth Commandment, or any else. By this that has been said already, and
much more that might be said, it may plainly appear, that wicked and ungodly
men, men void of the fear of God, whatsoever they pretend, can never truly
honor the King, nor be faithful and loyal Subjects to their Prince and
Sovereign. Honor him they may from the teeth outward, and after a fashion, or
rather flatter him for their own by-ends, and sinister respects, for their
secular interest and worldly advantage; but they can never love and honor him,
serve and obey him, from their heart and soul: they can never give him the
honor due unto him, out of love or respect to his Person, out of duty to God,
or for Conscience sake. We use to say, and we say truly, A thorow-pac't
Jesuited Papist can never be a good Subject: if he would be so, he must quit
and forsake his Principles. So we may say, and say as truly, A lewd and
vicious, and debauched person cannot be a good Subject; if he would be so, he
must quit and forsake his practices. Take the wicked from before the King,
Prove. 25. 5.
says Solomon (a King, and the wisest of Kings), and his throne shall be
established in righteousness; and if so, then on the contrary it follows, that
while the wicked stand before the King, and yield him feigned obedience (and
they can yield him no better) his throne will not be established: such wicked,
and unrighteous, and ungodly Subjects and Servants, will undermine his Throne,
shake his Crown, and endanger his Person. And therefore our gracious Sovereign,
when presently after his happy Return, he set out that his most religious and
godly Declaration against Drunkeness, Debauchery, and Profaneness, he did not
only do an act of Christian Piety, but of State Policy: nor did he only consult
the honor and glory of God, but likewise his own honor, and interest, life,
and safety. For what greater honor, and safety to a King, than the godly lives
of his Subjects? on the contrary, what greater enemy to the being, and
well-being of the Prince, than the wicked lives of his People? What are the
loud thundering rattling Oaths, and horrid Curses and Imprecations of Subjects,
but as so many Cannons, or Pieces of Ordnance, not only with their mouths set
against heaven (as the Psalmist speaks), Psalm. 73. 9.
but even planted and levelled against the face of the King? What are the
fightings, and feuds, and quarrellings, and duels of Subjects, but as so many
Swords drawn, with their points set against their Sovereign? What are those
prodigious luxuries, and excesses, riotings and revellings, debaucheries, and
drunken meetings of Subjects, but as so many Conventicles, Juncto's and
Conspiracies, though not directly and formally, yet collaterally and by
consequence, against the Lord's Anointed? In a word, what are those torrents of
Belial, that inundation of Atheism and Profaneness, that at any time breaks in
upon a Kingdom or Nation, but a deluge that threatens to over whelm and drown
both Prince and People? The King is the Head of the People; I am sure, the name
of our King signifies so, (...): Now it is no strange thing, neither in the
Natural nor Political Body, for the Head to suffer, when the Members miscarry,
or any time disorder or distemper themselves. It is no news (for we our selves
have lived to see it) no news to see the best of Kings cut off for the Sins of
the people. So was Josiah King of Judah, and so was Edward the Sixth our English
Josiah, and so was King Charles the Martyr, our late Sovereign, of ever blessed
and glorious Memory, cut off, not only by the Sins and wickedness of a few
cursed miscreant Rebels and Traitors, but even for the Sins and wickedness of
the rest of his people, yea and of those too perhaps that counted themselves to
stick closest to him, and to be his best and most loyal Subjects.

But I shall not any longer, hoc ulcus tangere, rub or grate upon this sore. I
have no particular reflection upon any; only this I shall add in the general,
that sometimes the best cause may miscarry in bad hands, because the goodness of
the cause, makes men more confident, and so more secure and careless of their
lives: they presume so much of justitia causae, that it makes them neglect
justitia personae. Well, let none presume upon their fidelity to their
Sovereign, nor flatter themselves with professions and protestations of Loyalty
to the King, while they go on with their Sins and Impieties to provoke and
offend the King of Kings. They that rant and roar, swear and swagger, and drink
the King's health, but seldom or never pray for it, do such men think they
honor the King, or are His Majesty's good friends and faithful Subjects?
whatsoever these profane Atheistical people may profess or pretend, yea and
boast of their good affections to His Majesty; I dare boldly affirm, they are
so far from being true honourers of him, that they are no better than false
Traitors to him, and Enemies to his Royal Person, Crown and Dignity. Do such
men think they can honor the King by dishonouring God, or show themselves good
Subjects by being bad Christians? For my part, I am sorry such heathenish
people make such a profession of Loyalty; yea, I could almost wish that they
made no profession of Christianity neither: for by their loos and vicious
lives, they are a reproach and a scandal both to the one and the other, and so
bring an evil report upon the good Land, and make the enemies of God and the
King to blaspheme, saying, Lo, these are the men, and this their conversation,
and thus they are all. Though (by the way) as Christian Religion is not the
wors, for some wicked men's professing of it, no more is Loyalty neither: rather
on the contrary, it shows there is some extraordinary beauty and excellency in
them both, because hypocrites and ungodly men use them for a cloak and a cover,
sheltring and shrouding themselves and their Sins under the color and
profession of them. To draw toward a conclusion of this point: The way to
honor the King, is to honor God first: the way to fear and reverence and obey
the King, is first to fear the Lord. Therefore Solomon puts them both together,
My Son, fear thou the Lord and the Prove. 24. 21.
King. In a word, the way to be the King's good Subjects and Servants, is to
serve the Lord. I find several godly and religious Courtiers, and Kings Servants
in Scripture, as Joseph, and Mordecai, and Nehemiah, and Daniel, and others.
But I take notice of two especially above the rest; some it may be do not take
so much notice of them; but I mention them the rather, because of their names,
and they are Obadiah and Ebedmelech. Obadiah was Steward of King Ahab's house:
and of him we read, that he feared the Lord from his youth, 1 Kings 18. 12.
Ebedmelech was a great Officer in the house of King Zedekiah, and of him it is
said, that he put his trust in the Jer. 39. 18.
Lord. But why do I mention these two? only to this purpose, by way of
allusion, to prove that none can be a good Subject and Servant to the King,
that is not the Servant of God: and for this there may be an argument drawn
from the Etymology of their names. Obadiah signifies the servant of the Lord,
and Ebedmelech is as much as to say, the servant of the King. He that would be
an Ebedmelech, a Servant of the King, must be an Obadiah, a Servant of the
Lord. Except you serve and fear, honor and obey God, you can never
conscientiously, nor truly serve nor fear, honor nor obey the King. And so I
have finished St. Peter's first Lesson or Lecture, which was a Lecture to the
profane ranting Royalist, in the first Aphorism or Proposition, No man can
truly honor the King, but he that fears God.

I come now to his second Lecture or Lesson, which is to the fanatic
hypocritical Rebel in the second Aphorism, which is this:

2. No man can truly fear God, but he that honors the King. Hitherto we have
rendered to God the things that are Gods, and fear to whom fear is due. Now let
us render to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and honor to whom honor;
for this due is proper and peculiar, Romans 13. 7.
especially, Personae Principis, says one upon the place (and he no great
Royalist neither) though indeed Pareus in locum:
in rendering to Caesar his due, we shall render to God his due still; and in
honoring the King, we shall honor God too. For do we not honor God, when we
keep his Commandments? and is not the fifth Commandment concerning honoring
our Parents, part of the Decalogue? And is not the King Pater Patriae, the
Father of his Country, and our Political Parent? And is it not God that speaks
to us here by the mouth of his Apostle St. Peter, and bids us honor the King?
And it is well we have it here in such express terms, that our Antimonarchical
rebellious Corahs, may have no subterfuge, nor evasion. And here the Chapter of
Loyalty, the 13th to the Romans, comes in again: from whence I shall fetch but
this one argument. A godly man is afraid to resist the ordinance of God; The
higher Powers, and so the Regal, is the ordinance of God: and consequently, he
that truly fears God, will honor the King; and if he honor him, he will not
resist, but obey him. To obey Magistrates, to honor the King, and to be in
subjection to our Parents, and to the Higher Powers, is not only an imperat,
but an elicit, act of Religion. Not that we think religious worship is due to
Magistrates, (for we do not Idolize nor adore our Princes, as the Persians did
of old, and as some do the Pope at this day,) but because the Higher Powers are
certain Models and Emblems, Images and Representatives of the most High; and so
the honor we give unto them, does more immediately reflect upon God, and more
directly redound to his honor and glory. And therefore some Divines have made
the fifth Commandment a branch of the first Table, which concerns our duty to
God; at least an appendix to it, viz. because our Parents, whether Natural,
Civil, or Ecclesiastical, are loco Dei, in the place and stead of God, and
represent his Person. However, if it be not part of the first Table, it is the
next to it; wherefore it is observed by Divines, that in Humane Authors, as
well as in the Holy Scriptures (as 1 Timothy 5. 4.) honoring and obeying and
requiting our Parents, is called Religion and Piety: Let them consider this
that are undutiful, disobedient, and disrespectful to Parents: there can be no
true piety, no godliness nor religion in 'um, that is certain; and the same is
to be said of those that are undutiful and disobedient to Princes. And if
Scripture be the rule of our Religion, as sure it is, then it must needs
follow, that, as long as the Scripture commands us to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, Tit. 3. 1. and to submit
our selves to every Ordinance of man (or to every humane creature, (...), that
is in Place and Authority, Omnibus filiis hominum, as the Syriac renders it, to
all the Sons of men, viz. that are set in Authority over us) for the Lord's
sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by him, 13 and 14 verse. of this Chapter: I say, if this be
Scripture, and the Scripture the rule of our Religion, then it must needs
follow that those Men are the most godly and religious, who most honor the
King, and are most dutiful and obedient to their Natural, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical Parents. True Religion is both the causa procreans and
conservans, both the Mother and Nurs, of our subjection to Magistrates: and the
fear of God, the direct, proper, and immediate cause of honoring the King: now
Posita causa proxima, ponitur effectus, and contra; and so the argument will
hold reciprocally, by a mutual demonstration from the cause to the effect, and
from the effect to the cause: Such a man fears God, therefore he honors the
King; and again, such a man honors the King, therefore he fears God. And thus
I think, as to the general, the point is clear. And if so, if there be such an
inseparable union and connection between these two, then is it not strange, that
any should neglect the one that pretends to the other? that a man should think
he fears God, when he does not honor the King? yea, and that for fear of
offending and displeasing God, he should venture to displeas and dishonor the
Supreme Magistrate by disobeying his lawful commands, who is the Ordinance of
God; yea, who is in the place of God, and represents his person? Is it not
strange, that when the Apostle bids us be subject to the Higher Powers, and
obey lawful Authority for conscience sake, any should pretend conscience for
their disobedience? I do not love to give hard words instead of strong reasons,
nor to pin odious unnecessary consequences upon any men's Practices or Opinions:
for I desire to deal with others, as I would be dealt with my self, that is,
fairly and heartily, in a way of love, and in the spirit of meekness. But is it
not so indeed as I have said? Are there not those among us, that scruple and
boggle at the lawful commands of the Supreme Magistrate, yea and refuse to obey
him, even in those things which they themselves confess to be lawful because
indifferent, and yet will not have them imposed nor commanded, because
indifferent? And is not this said to proceed from tenderness of conscience, and
fear of doing something against the will of God revealed in his Word? Thus men
must be disobedient to lawful Authority, and so resist the Ordinance of God,
even for conscience sake. And though sure they do not much honor the King, who
disobey him by transgressing his Laws; yet such men think they fear God as
much, yea more than any; and that they are the most, if not the only, religious
and conscientious men, and all others but formalists, and time-servers, and
mere moral men in comparison; (...). But now because there is such a nois of
conscience, I would earnestly entreat and beseech such men for the love of our
Lord Jesus Christ, diligently to search and examine their own hearts (for the
heart is deceitful Jer. 17. 9.
above all things), and see whether instead of that they call conscience, and
make it a plea for their disobedience, there may not be something else lying at
the bottom, that looks like conscience, when indeed it is nothing less, but
rather humor, or passion, or fancy, or faction, or prejudice, or interest, or
singularity, or hypocrisy, or spiritual pride. If our heart condemn us (says
1 John 3. 20.
St. John), God is greater then our heart, and knows all things. I am very well
aware of what follows in the next verse, from whence some would infer, that they
may boldly and lawfully do whatever their conscience bids them; If our heart
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. But sure that must be
understood 1 John 3. 21.
of a heart and conscience truly enlightened, and rightly informed; otherwise we
have no cause to be confident; for our heart may deceiv us; and conscience, if
misguided, is a dangerous thing, and will soon mar all, and make foul work,
and set the whole world on a flame. Did not Paul persecute the Church out of
Zeal to Religion? and did not they that killed the Disciples and Saints of
Christ, think they did God good service? Thus conscience if misled, and not
well guided, taught, and Joh. 16. 2.
instructed, may do a world of mischief where it is: But then again, is it not
easy to pretend it, where it is not? for have not we known the most horrid and
devilish designs, carried on under a show and pretense of conscience, and the
Cause of God, and Religion? The truth is, Conscience is made a sadle for every
horse, a bush or sign to hang at every door: And as long as the heart is so
deceitful, as long as there is so much hypocrisy in the world, we have little
reason to trust every such show and pretense of conscience, either in our
selves, or others: Especially when we have a more clear light to guide and
direct us, and a more sure rule to walk by, viz. the Word of God. Conscience is
a dark, close, secret, intricate thing, it has many crooked windings and
turnings: but the Word of God (at least in things necessary to Salvation, such
as is obedience to lawful Authority) is plain and easy, clear and evident, and
there are no such Maeanders or ambages in it. Conscience may err, and lead us
into error, like an Ignis fatuus, it is fallible and uncertain, it may deceiv,
and be deceived; but the Word of God is an unerring guide, a certain and
infallible rule. Conscience then is no sure rule to trust to; we have a more
sure rule, even the sure Word of God, whereunto we shall do well to take heed,
as to a light 2 Pet. 1. 19.
that shines in a dark place, as our Apostle St. Peter speaks. In brief, the
Word of God is the rule of our lives, and of our consciences both; and truly
conscience will play mad pranks, if not regulated and guided by this rule; and
for men to pretend conscience against the express Word and Commandment of God,
what is it else but to turn Antiscripturists, and so Atheists, under pretense
of Religion? Does not Solomon counsel us to Eccles. 8. 2.
keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God? where we
see, he expressly makes Religion toward God, the ground and foundation of our
obedience to the King; so that he that keeps the King's commandment, keeps the
commandment of God. And is not this the clear and express commandment of God
here in the Text, Honor the King? And shall any then plead conscience for not
Honoring him? Can any man in conscience truly fear God, and not honor the
King? for can a man fear God, and not keep his commandments? And is not the
fifth commandment one of the ten? or, can any one honor the King, and yet
slight his Authority, or refuse to obey his Laws? And are not the Ecclesiastical
Laws (by the way) the King's Laws? And have not they the impress of Regal
Sanction, and the stamp of Royal authority set upon them, as well as the Civil?
What plea then or excuse can men have for not keeping and observing of them,
especially when they pretend to be so good Christians, to fear God, and keep
his commandments? If men's consciences be misled and mistaken (which is the best
can be imagined), yet God and the King must not loos their right. An erroneous
conscience cannot cancel the bond of obedience, nor excuse any from doing his
duty: Indeed it may so ensnare and entangle him, that, durante illa
conscientia, he cannot proceed one way or other without Sin: but still datur
exitus, for Nemo angustiatur ad peccandum (says the School), still there is a
way left to get out, and to extricate himself, and that is deponere errorem
conscientiae, to rectify his conscience, to quit and forsake his error, which
he may do, by giving all moral diligence, and using all good means for his
better information: And if he would do that, let him not lean too much to his
own understanding, but rather distrust his own judgment, Prove. 3. 5.
than the judgments of so many wise, grave learned, and godly men, his
Superiors in Church and State; the King, and those that are in authority under
him. And then let him in the fear of God, duly and impartially weigh and examine
the grounds and reasons of his dissent and disobedience; not thinking it
sufficient, that he has met with some little umbrages, and shadows of offense
in general, taken at the King's Ecclesiastical Laws, the Orders and Ceremonies,
and Liturgy of the Church; but let him come to particulars, and then seriously
consider and ask his own heart, whether indeed he be able to prove by Scripture
or reason, any one thing enjoined, to be unlawful, and repugnant to the Word of
God; (for till that be done, it is in vain for any to plead or pretend
tenderness of conscience for their contempt and disobedience). And then let him
ask himself but one question more, viz. how far he thinks some few needless
niceties, doubts, and scruples, about things indifferent, will bear him out and
excuse him another day, for his neglect of so necessary and fundamental a duty,
as honoring the King, and yiedling obedience to his Laws. That submission to
lawful Authority, and Obedience either active, or passive, is a most necessary
duty, no Christian can or will deny. I say, Obedience either active or passive,
active in things lawful, passive in others. Now if men bring themselves into
danger, or lie under any hardship, for disobeying the King, and not performing
his lawful commands, what joy of heart their passive obedience can be to them,
or what great content, or comfort, they can find in their sufferings, I cannot
conceiv, but shall leaves it to all prudent and unprejudiced and impartial men
to judge.

And here I shall only add this as to the matter of Nonconforming to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws; and so draw to a conclusion. Let men diligently take heed
and beware, lest in stead of conscientious Non-conformists (for some such I
believ there are, though it is pity there should be, men of of such weak and
tender consciences, that for want of due instruction and right information,
they are really and truly dissatisfied), I say, let men take heed lest in stead
of being such, they prove (as too many I fear there are) pervers and stubborn
and obstinate Schismatics, or (which is all one) fanatic hypocritical Rebels.
And if so, then as I said before to the profane ranting Royalists, That by
their vicious and ungodly lives, they bring a scandal and reproach upon
Loyalty: So I must say to these men, That by their spurning at lawful Authority,
and their undutifulness to the Higher Powers, they bring a scandal and reproach
upon Christianity; while they make Religion a cloak for Rebellion, and pretend
conscience for their disobedience. I have been the longer upon this, because
indeed it is Morbus Epidemicus, the diseas of the times: and I would fain, if
possible, help to beat men out of this hold, viz. of making the fear of God a
plea for not honoring the King: a pretense so directly contrary to the
Doctrine of St. Peter here in the Text; where he joins these two duties
together in a bond of inseparable union; I say, these two Duties, which I have
hitherto proved to be like Hippocrates's twins, that live and die together; Fear
God; Honor the King; so that no man can do the one, and omit the other: and as
he that is a profane, wicked, and ungodly man, cannot be a true, faithful, and
loyal subject: so on the other side, he that is a falls, disloyal, undutiful
subject (pretend what he will) cannot be a holy, good, and godly Christian.
(...), which is the thing I have been proving all this while, viz. that No man
can truly fear God, but he that honors the King. Now there are several ways of
honoring, or giving honor to any, several sorts of honor; I mean of honor
strictly taken, as here in the Text: for otherwise honor is taken in a more
large acception, as opposed to contempt, scorn, or hatred; and so in the
beginning of the verse, Honor all men, that is, have a due respect to all; do
not hate, nor scorn, despise, nor contemn any. But honor strictly and properly
taken is only due to Superiors; and so in this sens there are several sorts of
honor, these three especially: The honor of Obedience, the honor of
Reverence, and the honor of Maintenance; and all these comprehended, and
included in the word honor, both in the fifth commandment, where we are bid to
honor our Parents; and also here in the Text (which is a branch of that
commandment) where we are bid to honor the King. Of the first of these I have
been speaking all this while, viz. of the honor of Obedience; and for the two
latter, the honor of Reverence, and the honor of Maintenance, as I have now
no time, so no need (I hope) to say much of them. For that both these sorts of
honor are due to the King or Supreme Magistrate, as well as that of Obedience,
is out of all question; it being so consonant to the principles both of
Religion and Reason, and so agreeable to the rules both of Divinity and Policy:
So that most men yield their assent to the truth of it, as to the Theory,
though in the Practice sometimes they fail and fall short. So then, besides
that of Obedience, there are these two other sorts of honor more, both
confessedly due to Kings and Princes, viz. the honor of Reverence, and the
honor of Maintenance; the one for the safeguard and defenc of their Royal
Persons; the other for the support of their Regal Estate, Crown, and Dignity.
For first, if their Persons be once slighted, undervalu'd, and disesteem'd,
their lives will soon be in danger: and then again, if their jura Regalia,
their Regalities, or Revenues of the Crown, be clipped and cut short, the
Reverence of their Persons will not long continue. Therefore we find Honor in
Scripture, sometimes put for supply or maintenance, or payment of rights and
dues, as of Tithe or Tribute, and Offerings, and the like. Honor the Lord with
thy substance, and so the King too: Honor widows, that is maintain them, by
Prove. 3. 9. 1 Timothy 5. 3.
supplying their wants and necessities; and to this purpose St. Paul in that
13th to the Romans v. 7, Render therefore to all, and so to Kings and Princes,
their dues, tribute to whom tribute, etc. where we have tribute, and custom,
and honor, put together; tribute and custom, being a great part of the honor
due to Kings. Therefore our Savior commends and commands it both by his
precept and practice; by his precept, in his Reddite Caesari; by his practice,
when he paid tribute himself; Matthew. 22. 21.
yea, and rather than not pay it, he would work a miracle, and fetch it out of
a fishes mouth; and he made St. Peter to do it, which St. Peter's Successor the
Fisherman of Rome (I fear) is not so forward to do, to pay tribute, I mean, to
Kings and Emperors, but rather make them pay homage and tribute to him; which
if they refuse to do, and so prove Heretics, Rebels to the Apostolic See, the
Chair of Rome, and the Triple Crown, presently ipso facto they forfeit their
own Crowns, I, and their Lives too; away with 'um, depose and kill 'um. This is
the Jesuits Doctrine; but they learnt it not of Jesus, nor Peter, nor Paul, nor
Tertullian, nor of any of the ancient Fathers. What Christ, and Peter, and Paul
have said, we have already heard: Let us hear now, if you will, what Tertullian
says for himself, and the rest of the Primitive Christians of his time,
Colimus Imperatorem, tanquam hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem. We
honor, and worship, and reverence the Emperor next to God. And St.
Chrysostom (to name no more) upon that famous place to the Romans, Omnis
anima, Let every soul be subject. (...), though he be an Apostle, or
Evangelist, or Bishop, or whatever he be, if he come within the compass of
Omnis anima, and have a Soul to save, he must be subject to the Higher Powers;
honor the King or Kaisar, obey him, and reverence him, and pay him due homage,
custom, and tribute. What shall we say then? that our Jesuits never read the
precept of Jesus Reddite Caesari, nor our Romanists the 13th to the Romans, no^
our pretended Catholics, this Catholic Epistle of St. Peter? Sure if they read
it, they do not regard it. For were they to honor the King, to be subject to
the Higher Powers then, and are not we now? Consider but what Caesar's, Kings,
and Emperors, they were in those days, in the time of our Savior, and of his
Apostles, and afterward in the time of Tertullian, and the rest of the
Primitive Fathers, for 300 years after Christ; Tiberius, and Caligula, Nero,
and Domitian, cruel and bloody Tyrants, the very worst of the Roman Emperors,
yea the worst of men, the very monsters of mankind; these and the like in the
time of Christ and his Apostles. And then in the Primitive times, Trajan,
Marcus Antoninus, and others, though the best of Heathen Emperors, yet Heathen
Emperors, utter enemies to the Gospel and Church of Christ, and cruel
Persecutors of Christian Religion. Give Caesar his due, says Christ, though
that Caesar was no other than Tiberius, Lutum Sanguine maceratum, a lump of
clay molded and tempered Theodorus e^m sub^de appellavit, (...) Sueton. Tiber.
with blood, as his Schoolmaster called him, in regard of his dull, and yet
cruel, disposition. Honor the King, says St. Peter, though that King or
Emperor was no better than Claudius, (for it was in his reign that he wrote
his Epistle; Pontus, Galatia, and the rest that he wrote to, being then
Provinces of the Roman Empire). I say, Claudius, a Heathen and wicked Emperor;
who banished the Christians out of Rome, Impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantes,
as Suetonius has it, mistaking the word, (the name Chresto for Christo) but
much more the Sueton. Claud.
thing, as if Christ had been a Ringleader of Sedition: and likewise the time,
as if he had lived in the days of Claudius, whereas he suffered some years
before in the reign of Tiberius. And yet these were the Emperors, whom the
Primitive Christians were to honor. How much more then does this duty concern
us? How much more should we honor the King? the King, whom this day God
blessed us with, by bringing him into the world, and also this day, by a
miracle of mercy restored unto us, by bringing him back to his Kingdom, even
our Gracious King Charles the Second, whom God long preserv; not a Heathen
Emperor, but a Christian King; not an Enemy to Christ, and the Gospel, nor a
Persecutor of the Church, and Christian Religion, but a nursing Father of the
Church, a zealous Mainteiner of the Christian Religion, of the true Orthodox
Reformed Religion, a Defender of the Faith, of the true ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Faith; not a Nero or Dioclesian, but a Constantine, a Theodosius; not
a cruel and bloody Tyrant, but the very picture and mirror of Mildness and
Clemency; not a Wolf or Butcher of the flock, but (...), a Shepherd, and
Father of his people: Under whose auspicious and gracious Protection, we enjoy
our Lives and Liberties (and which are dearer to us) our Church, Faith, and
Religion, the pure and Reformed Religion, the true and sincere Worship and
Service of God: whereas before his happy Restoration, you know how it was with
us, and in what sad and horrid confusions we were wrapped and involved, both in
Church and State. For which ever-glorious and wonderful Revolution, as with
joyful, and thankful hearts, we look up unto God this day, as the principal
Author, so we cannot but with loyal and humble hearts, reflect upon our
Gracious Sovereign, as the chief Instrument under God of all our happiness.
Therefore as we bless God, so let us honor the King; honor him with our
substance, by paying him due homage, custom, and tribute; honor him by our
Obedience, in a cheerful submitting to his Laws and Constitutions; honor him
by a dutiful Reverence and respect to his Sacred Person: honor him with our
hearts, by entertaining high and honorable thoughts and apprehensions of him,
loving and loyal affections toward him: honor him with our hands, by fighting
(if need be) or writing in defense of his Royal Person, Crown and Dignity:
honor him with our mouths, by speaking highly and honorably of him, and not
in the least kind, slandering or aspersing, disparaging or defaming Him or his
Government. Take we heed and beware of the blasphemous rudeness of those
railing Rabshakehs, and filthy dreamers, who despise dominions and speak evil
of dignities, Jud. 8. or, as our Apostle St. Peter has it, they despise
government, 2 Pet. 2. 10.
and are not afraid to speak evil of dignities; (...), they tremble not to
blaspheme Dignities. Blasphemy is properly against God; now is a kind of
Divinity in Dignities, and Higher Powers; so that to speak evil of them is a
kind of blasphemy. Naboth did blaspheme God and the King; a capital crime, had
it been true: but you see blaspheming God and the King go together; He that
blasphemes or speaks evil of the King, blasphemes and speaks evil of God, whose
Image and Vicegerent he is. Wherefore to conclude, Honor we the King ore and
opere, both by word and deed, I and cord too, with our hearts and souls. Let
us show that we fear God by our honoring the King. Let us declare our-selves
to be good Christians, by being good Subjects; and so join these two together
in our life and practice, which St. Peter does here in the words of the Text,
Fear God, Honor the King.

A SERMON Preached upon the Anniversary of the Gunpowder Treason.
Psalm 124. v. 7. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the
fowlers, the snare is broken, and we are delivered.
THIS Psalm, as ye may perceiv by the tenor of it all along, is a Gratulatory
or Eucharistical Hymn, or Psalm of Prais and thanksgiving to God for delivering
Israel, both King and People (for it was in King David's time, the Author of
the Psalm), the Church and people of God out of the hands of their merciless
and cruel enemies, the Philistines, most like, or the Ammonites. However some
extraordinary preservation, some remarkable signal deliverance belike it was;
and 'twas the Dominus nobiscum that did the deed, for If the Lord himself had
not been on our side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up
quick, etc. but Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us over as a prey to
their teeth. Our soul is esaped, etc. In the words we may observe these three
Particulars: 1. The Danger that the Church was in, or the Plot laid for her,
i. e. The snare of the fowlers. 2. The Prevention of the Danger, or the
Defeating and Disappointing of the Plot, The snare is broken. 3. The Church's
Deliverance and safety ensuing thereupon, Our soul is escaped as a bird, and we
are delivered.


1. Then, The Church was in Danger; and that is no news, the Church is in a
conflicting condition, militant here on earth, a lily among thorns, in the
midst of her enemies; among the pikes, and many a push made at her, many a
snare laid for her. And thus Israel, the Church and people of God in King
David's time, was in great danger it seems, and that by reason of a snare; and
that snare the snare of the fowlers, whether Philistines, or Ammonites, or
others. And was not our Israel, the Church of England, the Church and people of
God with us, in as great danger too, as upon this day 64 years ago? and that by
reason of a snare too, the snare of the fowlers, those Popish Philistines; such
a snare as the like was never laid by any fowlers that ever were, such a Plot
as the like was never contrived by all the wit and malice of Devils and Men;
the Gunpowder Treason: which having once named, I have named the very
quintessence and elixir of all villainy and barbarity, mischief, and cruelty; a
Plot that none but the Devil or a Jesuit, or a Jesuited Papist could ever
invent; and a snare it was to purpose. Wicked and ungodly men, especially
Tyrants and Persecutors, the enemies of God, and his Church, are often in
Scripture compared to Hunters and Fowlers; and their mischeivous machinations,
malicious plots, and contrivances, to traps, ginns, and snares; as in the book
of Psalms, and elsewhere. And very fitly so compared, and that in these three
respects especially: 1. Because they are Mala dolosa and occulta, cunning and
close mischiefs. 2. Repentina and improvisa, sudden and unexpected. 3.
Perniciosa and mortifera, dangerous and deadly. And was not this days treason a
snare in all these respects?


1. In regard of the closeness and cunningness of it. A ginn or a snare is laid
very closely and cunningly, that the bird shall not see nor perceiv it; for in
vain the Prove. 1. 17.
net is spread in the sight of any bird, says Solomon. And such was the
mischievous design of this day; the snare was laid very closely, and cunningly,
hid in a dark vault, in a deep mine; These Popish Pioneers and Powder. Traitors
dig'd so deep to hide and conceal, and cover their Plot and Powder, as if they
would have dig'd as deep as Hell; Flectere si nequeo superos, as if when God
and men failed them, they would have moved and called in the Devils to help
them; indeed such a black and horrid treason could not be hatched and hammered
but in the Devil's forge, in the deepest and darkest cell, and caverns of hell;
A dark vault or coalhous they hired to this purpose under the Parliament house,
where in they hid their Wood and Powder: and truly such a dark vault was a fit
place for such a work of darkness; and a coal-hous a fit shop for such Romish
Incendiaries with their fides Carbonaria, their Collier's faith: Now besides
this close and secret conveyance, the better to cover and conceal their cursed
conspiracy, they bound themselves by an Oath of Secrecy; yea, under the Seal of
the holy Sacrament, not to discover nor reveal it to any without common
consent. Thus closely and cunningly was the mischief contrived, and the snare
laid; for a company of cunning Fowlers they were. The cunning Fowler when he
cannot get his quarrie, nor kill the birds with his gun and shooting, then he
spreads his net, then he falls to his snare, then he lays his ginns and snares
privily for them. These Romish Fowlers or Hunters (if you will) yea, and
Fishers too (for sure the Fisherman of Rome sub Annulo Piscatoris, St. Peter's
pretended successor, had a main hand in the business) I say, these Popish
Fowlers had often shot at us before; and fought against us as in 88, and at
other times, Many a time had they fought against us, etc. Psalm. 129. but they
did not prevail against us. Yea Catesby and Faux with some other of their
accomplices, had been very lately tampering with the Spanish Guns, dealing with
the King of Spain about an Invasion: but when that failed, and those Guns wu'd
not go off, nor take fire, then they fall to the snare; (yet there was
gunpowder good store in the snare too), when they could not prevail against us
by open force and violence, then they make use of their craft and subtilty,
then they seek to entrap and entangle us with their ginns and snares, their
close secret Plots and Conspiracies; for they had learned Lysander's (...),
when the lion's skin would not reach, they peic't and eek't it out with the
foxe's; when neither the wild beasts of the field, nor the roaring Bulls of
Rome, of themselves could do us any harm, then those crafty subtle foxes the
Jesuits seek to circumvent and supplant us, to undermine and blow us up: for
'twas the Jesuits powder that was able to cure an ague, and all other
diseases; 'twas Father Garnet and Greenwell, and others of that cunning crew,
the spawn of Ignatius (with ignis, fire, in his name), 'twas they that animated
and encouraged Catesby and Peircy and the rest of the Conspirators, to
undermine both Church and State, to work in the mine, and blow up King and
Parliament, Lords and Commons, and all at a blast, all of a sudden; which leads
me to the second Consideration, the second Circumstance, in respect whereof
this horrible Plot and Conspiracy is fitly termed a snare, and that is,

2. In regard of the suddenness and unexpectedness of it: The bird is taken in
the snare of a sudden, ex improviso, and surpised at unawares, Eccl. 9. 12, As
the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an
evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them; and Luke 21. 35, As a snare
shall it come, etc. viz. the last day, that is to say, suddenly, unexpectedly,
and unawares. Such was the mischief of this day, Malum repentinum and
improvisum, sudden and unexpected, in a time of general peace and tranquillity,
in the days of Great Brittain's Solomon, wise and peaceable King James of happy
Memory; no foreign foes from abroad, no domestic enemies suspected at home (he
having obliged his Roman Catholic Subjects, as he thought, by many signal
favors); when all things were thus calm and serene, no clouds gathering at all
in appearance, then this storm was to break out of a sudden, and fall upon King
and Kingdom; and like a Hurricane, sweep all away in a moment; Sudden it was in
regard of the time and season, when 'twas contrived, viz. when all was quiet,
and no such desperate or fatal blow was in the least feared, or suspected (as
the bird is surpised, and caught in a snare when she little suspects it): thus
it was Malum improvisum. And sudden it was too, in regard of the quick dispatch
and havoc it would have made, had it succeeded and taken (as the bird is
caught in the snare of a sudden, in a trice, in a moment). And thus it was
Malum repentinum: and both these, both the unexpectedness of the danger, and
the sudden dispatch, mystically and covertly implied in the Letter to the L.
Mountegle, by which the business was discovered; the former in these words,
Though there be no appearance of any stir, yet they shall receiv a terrible
blow, this Parliament, yet they shall not see who hurt them: The latter in
these, The Danger is past so soon as you have burnt the Letter. That is as that
sagacious Oedipus, wise and learned King James rightly expounded the Riddle)
The blow shall be suddenly given by a blast of Powder, which is as soon over as
the blaze of a Letter burnt in the fire. And so you see, this mischievous Plot
laid this day for this Church, the Church and People of God here in England,
may very well be compared to a snare in regard of the suddenness and
unexpectedness of it, both in respect of its sudden coming, and likewise of the
sudden dispatch it should have made when it came.

3. And lastly, As it was sudden, and unexpected, so 'twas dangerous and
deadly. The snare of the Fowler is a fatal engine, an instrument of death; the
bird that is caught in a snare, seldom escapes with her life; such was the
mischief designed and intended this day, a fatal and deadly blow it had been
indeed, if it had taken; The snares of death encompass dus (as David speaks),
and so Psalm. 18. 5.
our Church expresses her self in her Collect, O Lord who did this day
discover the snares of death that were laid for us. Indeed a deadly snare it
had been, if it had not been broken; King and Parliament, Prince and People,
Peers and Prelates, Lords and Commons, all blown up at a blast: a whole
Kingdom, Church and State, swallowed up and destroyed by a (...). A dangerous,
dreadful and deadly design it was, to cut off, or rather blow up, the King and
the whole Representative Body of the Kingdom, head and tail, branch and rush,
in one day, nay, in a moment, at one blast; and yet thus they had done if the
snare had held; this they intended, and had it in voto, nay in parato:
Caligula's wish, O! that the people of Rome, nay, O! that the people of
England, because they were not the people of Rome, O! that the Church of England
had but unam cervicem, one neck, that they might cut it off; and why, think ye?
even because it had not that unum caput, that one Head which they would have set
on. Cursed be their anger, for it Genesis 49. v. 7. v. 5. v. 6.
was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel: Instruments of cruelty were in
their habitation, and in their self-will they dug through a wall. They
heaped up wood and faggots to burn up us Heretics: Indeed these Romish
Beautefeu's and Incendiaries had been at their fireworks before; they had been
trading and tampering long with fire and faggot by retail, in the Marian times;
and now they thought to do it by wholesale, by making a Bonfire of the
Parliament House, burning and blowing up the whole Body of the Realm, Head and
Members, the King with all the three Estates of the Kingdom assembled and met
together. But blessed be the Lord who has not given us as a prey to their
teeth. Our soul is escaped, etc. The snare is broken, the danger prevented, the
design blasted, the Plot defeated: that is the second particular we observed in
the words, viz. the Prevention of the Danger, or Disappointment of the design.

The mischievous machinations and devices of wicked and ungodly men against the
Church and people of God, though never so closely and cunningly contrived and
carried, are often frustrate and broken, defeated and disappointed. (...), Such
wicked works do not always succeed and prosper, they often prove abortive and
come not to the birth; The reason is, there is a (...), an all-piercing eye
that sees and discovers them, a (...), a God above that blasts and disappoints
them and brings them to naught. And so it was this day, the snare was broken;
and how was it broken? just as it is here in the Psalm, by a Dominus nobiscum,
in the first verse, The Lord was on our side; and by an Adjutorium nostrum in
nomine Domini, in the last; Our help was in the name of the Lord. How was this
Treason discovered, and the danger prevented? just as God says to Zerubbabel,
Zech, 4. 6, Not by might, nor by power (I may add, not by wisdom, nor by
policy) but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts. The snare is broken, and we
are escaped as a bird, tanquam Avicula: it is not by her own strength or cunning
that the poor bird makes her escape: Alas she is weak and simple, only there
comes some strong hand and breaks the snare, Nodos and Virg. Aen. 5.
vincula linea rupit, in the Poet, and then away flys the bird; so it was here,
a strong hand from heaven broke this snare, This was the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous Psalm. 118. 23.
in our eyes, 'twas by the spirit of the Lord, and 'twas the Lord's doing that
the Treason was discovered, and the snare broken: Yet our Zerubbabel, our pious
and prudent Prince King James under God had a hand in it too, in the breaking
and disappointing of it, for sure he was guided by the Spirit of the Lord, and
more than ordinarily inspired and directed in opening the secret, and unfolding
the mystery and Riddle of the Letter; and according to that of the wisest of
Kings, There was a Divine Sentence Prove. 16. 10.
in the lips of the King (Great Brittain's Solomon) so that his mouth
transgressed not in judgment, when upon his reading of that dark aenigmatical
writing, he past his sentence, whereby the whole business was happily
discovered and brought to light, and so the snare was broken, and we were
delivered; that is the third and last Particular, the Churches safety and
deliverance following upon the snare being broken; we are delivered.

And this indeed is a necessary consequent of the former, for when the snare is
once broken, the bird will soon fly away and escape. We are delivered, so we
were this day indeed, delivered from death and destruction, delivered from fire
and faggot, delivered from the mouth of the lion, and from the paw of the bear,
and from the horns of the bull, the Pope's Bull, I mean, and from the tail of
the Dragon; delivered from the savage cruelty of Catesby and Faux, Et ab ipsis
faucibus Orci; from the very jaws of Hell: delivered from passing through the
fire to the Moloch of Rome, from being made a holocaust, a whole burnt-offering
to that Idol, by those Priests of Baal, Father Garnet, and the rest of those
Gun-powder-Saints and Martyrs. Thus we were and are delivered; I, and which is
more, our soul is escaped: I know, by soul here (according to the usual Idiom
of the Hebrew tongue), is meant nothing else but life or person, as much as to
say, our persons are escaped, or we are escaped with our lives; her life,
that is all the bird looks after. Yet I hope I may without forcing the Text,
take occasion from hence, by way of accommodation, to put some greater stress
or emphasis upon the word soul, and to observe from hence, that the Deliverance
wrought tnis day was a Soul-Deliverance, not only a Corporal but a Spiritual
Deliverance; not only a Deliverance of the body, but of the soul too, we
escaped not only with our lives, but with our Religion; Our soul is escaped,
escaped out of the snares of Popish Idolatry and Superstition, laid in our way
by those Romish Fowlers; snares, I say, laid in our way; for what is their
(...), for instance, or worshipping the Host, but an Idolatrous snare? what are
their numerous, superfluous, superstitious rites and ceremonies, but tot Laquei
animarum, so many snares, upon the Souls and Consciences of men, especially as
used and imposed by them of the Church of Rome, who place holiness and religion
in them, and make them matters of necessity, and parts of Divine worship:
things (by the way) which our Church in her few, her very few, ceremonies, has
ever expressly disclaimed; enough in the judgment of any moderate or sober men,
to clear her from any suspicious or superstitious symbolizing or syncretizing
with the Church of Rome. Well, these were the snares; but by the blasting and
defeating this Powder Treason, these snares were broken, and our soul escaped,
and we were delivered. Again, their Auricular confession, consisting in an
anxious punctual enumeration of all particular sins to the Priest in private
once a year: Mistake me not; I am not against private Confession to a Priest, I
would it were more practiced amongst us; but that Auricular Sacramental
Confession, as they call it, and as it is practiced in the Church of Rome;
besides, that it is a kind of a pick-pocket, as it is used, and a picklock of
the cabinets and counsels of Princes: what a Carnificina and Laqueus
Conscientiae is it? what an intolerable snare upon the soul and conscience? I
instance in this the rather, because under this pretended cover of Confession
(though indeed it was no formal Confession, the business being revealed to
Garnet and others, as he himself confessed at last, not in way of Confession,
but of discourse and consultation only) but under this cloak and cover of
Confession, the treason was hid and concealed sub sigillo, a Seal so sacred and
inviolable, that it is not to be broken in any case whatsoever, says
Bellarmine; no, not to avoid the greatest evil that may possibly happen,
Catholica Doctrina non permittit ad ullum malum vitandum secretum Confessionis
detegi; and he speaks Bellarm. sub nomine Matthew. Torti. page 94.
it in defense of this days treason. Not to be broken, no, not to save the
lives of all the Kings in Christendom; so said F. Binet the French Jesuit to
Casaubon upon this very occasion, as that learned man tells us in his excellent
Epistle to Fronto Ducaeus; Praestaret Reges omnes perire, quam si vel semel
sigillum Confessionis violaretur: But by the disappointment of this horrid
design, both this pretended seal, and this snare was broken, and our soul
escaped, and we were delivered. Once more; Their Pope's Pardons, Bulls, and
Breves, their Papal Indulgences and Dispensations (which gave Luther the first
occasion of plucking his foot out of the Romish snare) what are they else but
pitiful snares to catch Dotrels, poor silly souls, that will pay so dear for a
new-Nothing? But by defeating this Devilish plot, this snare was broken, our
soul is escaped, and we are delivered. What should I speak of their
Transubstantiation, and Purgatory, worshipping of Images, and Invocation of
Saints, and the Rest of Pope Pius the fourth's new Articles of the Tridentine
faith, equal in number, and equal in authority, to those of the Apostles Creed;
snares laid for our souls by the fowlers of Rome, especially those subtle
Emissaries and cunning fowlers the Jesuits, who as they did then, so have they
done since, and still (no doubt) do go a birding among us, though some are so
blind and simple they will not see it. Had they caught us in that (...), that
capacious Catholic snare, set this day for King and Kingdom, Church and State,
those other snares would have followed of course; for that was on purpose laid,
to bring these upon us. But Benedictum sit Nomen Domini; hitherto our soul is
escaped out of these snares, the snares of their dangerous and pernicious
doctrines and principles, and the snares of their wicked and cruel designs and
practices; especially out of the great snare of this day, Our soul is escaped,
and we are delivered. And now may not this justly provoke and stir us up to a
detestation and hatred of that Church and Religion, which brings forth such
cursed and bitter fruits; whose principles are productive of so sad and direful
effects? I will not say, (though it has been said) the Romanists Faith is
Faction, and their Religion Rebellion; but this I must say, that they teach and
broach such Doctrines as are very scandalous to Christian Religion, and very
dangerous and destructive to Kingdoms and States; as having a direct and
natural tendency to sedition, rebellion, and treason: And herein I dare boldly
impeach and implead the Church of Rome, as the mother and nurs of this hideous
monster, (though, blessed be God, it proved but an embryo) this monstrous
Gunpowder-treason. And that herein I do her no wrong, I shall make it appear;
For though our Romanists may wipe their mouths, and disclaim the business, by
laying the blame upon a few rash hotheaded discontented Catholic Gentlemen;
yet if we examine it well (and it has been examined pretty well already) we
shall find it to have been the genuine issue and product of their Popish
Principles, the natural result and consequence of some doctrines and opinions
commonly and openly held and maintained in the Church of Rome. I shall instance
in one especially, which is instar omnium, and the (...), the ground and
foundation of all the rest, and that which gave the first birth and breeding to
this barbarous and bloody design, and that is that beldame doctrine of the
Pope's Infallibility, or (which is all one) of his Supremacy (for if he be
Infallible, he must needs be Supreme) or, if you will, his universal temporal
Monarchy, his Lordship Paramount, his absolute Sovereignty and Dominion, his
unlimited Power and Authority, over Kings and Kingdoms, his power to depose
Kings and to dispose of their Kingdoms. That the Pope has power to depose
Kings (if they be Tyrants or Heretics (and so they must be, if he once say the
word, and pleas to call them so) is Communis Doctorum, the common received
opinion of their chief Doctors and Casuists; especially the Jesuits and their
Adherents, who bear the great sway in the Church and Court of Rome. This I
could show at large by producing the concurrent testimonies of Becanus and
Bellarmine, Suarez and Lessius, Mariana and Santarell, Bonarscius or Scribanius
(which ye will), and Emanuel Sa, and diverse others. I shall only quote the
sayings of one or two for all. Kings have no wrong done them (says Bellarmine)
if they are deprived of their Kingdoms, when they prove Heretics; Nec ulla eis
injuria fiet, si deponantur. And again, Hereticum Bellarm. sub nomine Sculken,
contra Widdrington.
est (says he) it is a point of Heresy, to say that the Pope, as Pope, has not
power Jure Divino, by Divine right, to depose Kings; but indeed you must
understand him right; it is only in ordine ad spiritualia, viz. Cum id bonum
spirituale sive ingens Ecclesiae necessitas requirit, when the cause of God and
the Church, when the Catholic cause, or, if you will, when the Good Cause shall
require it: And a little after, Pontificem habere potestatem deponendi
Principes est de fide, the Pope's power of deposing Kings is a matter of faith;
and therefore to hold the contrary, must needs be a point of heresy. No marvel
we are counted Heretics for denying this article of the Romish Creed: and no
marvel (says Lessius) that it is De fide, and we are bound to believ it as an
article of faith, seeing it has been determined and given as an Oracle out of
the Infallible Chair: for Gregory the 7th, alias Hildebrand, has decided it
long ago in express terms in a Council held at Rome 600 years since, Quod Papae
Less. Apolog. pro Potest: S. Pontif. Part 2. Sect. 3. Santarel* de Haeresi and
Schism.
liceat Imperatores deponere: and, says Santarel, (whose Book being Printed at
Rome was burnt at Paris, Ringente Papa, and multum frendentibus Jesuitis)
Potest Papa Reges movere, and mortis poena punire, depose Kings, and put 'um to
death; and that sine Concil^o; Papa sine Concilio deponit Imperatorem, si sit
Haereticus: How does he prove it? Quoniam Papae and Christi unum est tribunal.
And again, Qui Religionem Catholicam Romanam deserit, regnandi jus omne
amittit: that is downright; so Creswel. Philopat. Number. 156.
says our Countryman F. Creswell in his Philopater. I shall name but one more,
and that is Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms, Verbo Clericus: Clerici rebellio in
Regem non est crimen laesae Majestatis, quia Principi non est subditus.
Excellent Jesuitical Doctrine, enough to make Kings and Princes in love with
Jesuits as long as they live! A Churchman cannot be guilty of treason,
because he is none of the Prince's Subjects: and no marvel, as long as he is
one of the Pope's Vassals. But this wu'd not serve F. Garnet's turn; who was
convicted and found notoriously guilty of this day's treason by his own
confession, and suffered accordingly. It Is true, this Aphorism of Em. Sa's,
either for shame, or rather for fear, is left out of the Paris Edition, this
Doctrine being not so current in France as at Rome: but it is still extant in
the first Colen Impression, and in that of Antwerp. Well, it seems this is the
new Heresy of the Jesuits, as a late Author, even a Papist, calls it; and these
Doctrines they commonly vent and publish in their Books Printed Con Licenza at
Rome and elsewhere: nor did they ever retract or recant them, as far as I could
hear. I know what is commonly pleaded and pretended of late by our Romanists;
viz. that these dangerous, destructive, King-killing Doctrines are but the
private Tenets and Opinions of some particular Doctors, and were never owned
and received as the public Doctrines of the Romish Church, nor ever decreed nor
confirmed by the Church of Rome in a Council. And this is the last and latest
(...), the newest shift and refuge they have found out for themselves. But let
me ask 'um, 1. Is not the voice of their Pope Boniface the 8th, claiming a
right to the Temporal Sword by virtue of Ecce duo gladii, and Repone gladium in
Vaginam, and the like; and when he told King Philip of France, Scire te
volumus, We wu'd have you to know, that you are Subject to us both in
Spirituals and Temporals: I say, is not this Vox Ecclesiae, the public voice of
the Church of Rome? Let me ask 'um, 2. Has not that of their Pope Gregory the
7th, alias Hildebrand, Nos, nos Imperia, Regna, Principatus, and quicquid
habere mortales possunt, auferre and dare posse, as Platina has it in his life;
It Is in our power to give and take away Empires and Kingdoms at our pleasure; I
say, has not this fine Hildebrandine Doctrine been the public acknowledged
Doctrine of their Popes, and of their Church, at least of the Court, of Rome,
ever since? 3. Was the 4th Lateran Council under Innocent the 3d, a General
Council, or no? If not, as sure it was not, (nothing being fully and openly
determined in it, says Platina, Nec decerni quicquam aperte potuit) how then
comes their Transubstantiation to be made an Article of Faith by virtue of a
Decree of that Council? If it was a lawful Ecumenical Council, as they will
needs have it, then that the Pope has power to absolv Subjects from their Oath
of Allegiance and fealty to their Princes, is a received authentic Doctrine of
their Church; for that, they confess, was decreed in a Canon of that Lateran
Council under Pope Innocent. 4. Suppose these King-killing Doctrines are not
publicly owned and declared to be the Doctrines of their Church, nor decreed in
their Councils, either of Lateran, Florence, or Trent, are they a whit the less
dangerous and pernicious for that, seeing they are the current Opinions of
their most learned Casuists, Doctors, and Confessors, commonly received and
embraced, I and openly published and printed, by their greatest Clarks among
'um, and that without any check or control, yea with great Approbation,
License, and liking? But now, 5 and lastly, If in good earnest the Church of
Rome disallows and renounces these dangerous Doctrines and Opinions so
destructive to Kings and Kingdoms, then, I pray, let his Holiness seat himself
in his Chair, and condemn these Doctrines, as he did, (or wu'd have seemed to
do) those of the Jansenists lately; let him limit his Ordo ad Spiritualia, and
disclaim and quit his Temporal Monarchy; let him disown all power, so much as
indirect, over Princes Temporals; let him confine himself within his own
Precincts and Territories, and renounce his Catholic Supremacy, and his
Universal Jurisdiction over all the Kingdoms and Churches of Christendom: Let
the Church of Rome publicly declare to the world in Print, that she disowns and
disclaims these treasonable, disloyal, Loiolitical Principles, these pestilent
pernicious Antimonarchical Tenets of the Canonists and Jesuits; and then we may
hope that our Romanists may be good Subjects. But till this be done, and while
the Doctrine of Deposing Kings, allowed by so many Decrees, I and Practices
too, of Popes, and maintained by so many of their chief Authors, stands yet
uncondemn'd; they must still give as leav (because they will give us cause) to
doubt of their loyalty. I do not, I will not, say, All our Romanists are
inclined to Rebellion: I doubt not but there are many faithful and loyal
Subjects among 'um: but this I must say, As long as they own a foreign
Jurisdiction, either Spiritual, or Temporal, which they must do, if they are
thorow-pac't; and as long as the Pope usurps the power to depose and dispose,
to depose Kings, and dispose of their Kingdoms, and to absolv Subjects from
their Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; so long the Romish Religion must needs
have a natural tendency to disloyalty: And therefore if Papists be good
Subjects, no thanks to their Popery; and I fear, 'twill be hard for 'um to be
good Catholics at Rome, and good Subjects at home: for if they be so, it must
be only durante bene-placito, as long as the Pope is well-pleased: but if once
he be angry with Kings and call 'um Heretics, then have at 'um Fowlers, let 'um
look to themselves. And indeed how our Jesuited Papists, if they be true to
their Principles, can be true to their Princes, and take the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, without mental Reservation, or Jesuitical Equivocation, or
Papal Dispensation, first to take it, and then to break it upon occasion, which
is to play fast and loos, to play with Oaths, as boys do with Cherry-stones; I
say, how they can otherwise do it, for my part I confess, it passes my
understanding. And therefore the Case was well stated and determined long ago
by our Reverend and Learned Bishop Davenant, Jesuitici Pontificii non possunt
esse Davenant. Determ. Qu. 17.
boni subditi. Ye have hitherto seen what the Jesuits Doctrine is; now see what
an influence it had upon this day's Treason; For I shall not say any thing of
the Assassines of the two Henrys of France, Clement and Ravailliac, one of
which was a Novice in the Jesuits College at Clermont, but both acted by a
Jesuitical spirit, and animated and spurred on to the perpetration of those
horrid Villainies by reading such Books as Mariana's, and others. Nor shall I
recount those many attempts made upon the life of our Renowned Queen Elizabeth
of blessed Memory; those many snares laid for her by those fowlers of Rome,
especially after that famous or rather infamous Bull of Pius Quintus was
published against her, declaring her Excommunicate as a Heretic, and so
deprived of her Crown and Dignity, and absolving her Subjects from their duty
and allegiance. What sad effects that Bull produced, what treasons and
conspiracies, raised against her by her own Subjects by the advice and
instigation of Holt and Walpole and other Jesuits, commending it as a
meritorious act to kill an Heretic Excommunicated and deprived by the Pope, is
a thing notoriously known to the Christian world. In the head or title of that
Bull, I find these words, Deinceps obedientes anathemate illaqueantur: where I
take notice of the word, illaqueantur; all that would presume to be her
obedient Subjects hereafter, were entangled in the same snare of the Pope's
Anathema. However (God be thanked) those snares were broken, and she was
delivered. But we need not look so far back: This days treason will speak
enough for all, Crimine ab uno Disce omnes, we need fetch in no more,
Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. And first, it is as clear as the Sun
at noonday, that the Jesuits, Garnet, Hall, Greenwell, Gerard, and others,
were deeply engaged in the Plot, and had a main hand in it, as being the
Principal Authors if not Actors, in this horrid Tragedy. 2. That the rest of
the Conspirators were influenced and infected with the traitorous Doctrines and
Principles of the Jesuits, their Ghostly Fathers, and Confessors; and also
animated, abetted, and encouraged, by their Counsels and instigations, this
likewise is plain and evident by the Authentic Records of the Proceedings
against them. 3. And lastly, it is no less evident, that it was the Pope's Bull
that engendered this hideous Monster, that gave the first rise and growth to
this unparalled Powder Treason; the Pope's Bulls being Tauri ignivomi, like
those in the Poet, Vulcanum naribus efflant, they breath gunpowder, fire, and
brimstone. About the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, Clement the 8th (by the
procurement no doubt of some here at home) sent two Bulls or Breves into
England by the aforesaid Garnet, the Jesuit, and Superior of that Order here,
wherein he straightly charged all Roman Catholics not to receiv or admit any to
be King (how near soever in blood) that was not well affected to the Catholic
Religion: thereby prejudging and precluding (what in him lay) King James's
Right here to the Crown; But these were but Bruta fulmina; they could not stop
nor hinder the King, his way and Title were both so clear and open. And now his
good Catholic Subjects are at a loss; and what should they do? they could not
keep him out, and therefore (...), they will blow him out, or rather, blow him
up; and for that they had sufficient warrant and encouragement from the
forenamed Clementines: for proof whereof when Father Garnet told Catesby,
'Twere not amiss, if the Pope were sent to, and made acquainted with the
business, to know his mind, and how well he approved it; Catesby replied, That
needed not, for he knew the Pope's mind well enough, he having already declared
himself for the King's non-admittance; and who knows not, (says he) that Qui
admitti nolit, expelli velit? So you see upon what Grounds he went, and what it
was that prompted and moved him, and his Accomplices, to this cursed Conspiracy;
yea, I dare boldly affirm, that those two Bulls, the one of Pius the fifth
against Queen Elizabeth, the other of Clement the eighth against King James
(Pius and Clement indeed with a witness) together with the Jesuitical
suggestions, doctrines and devices, as so many Glosses and Comments upon those
Texts, have given ground and occasion not only to this, but even to all the
treasons and conspiracies practiced ever since, against this Church and State,
King and Kingdom; not excepting the late grand rebellion and treason, which we
in this age have lived to see. For do you think our Roman Catholics, at least
the Jesuits, were idle spectators all the while, and had not a hand in the 30th
of January, as well as in the 5th of November? Is it not well known that the
train to entangle us in that horrible snare, and intrigue of the late
confusions, was laid by a great Cardinal Minister of State, and perhaps the
whole Conclave? are we not yet convinced, that the design was hammerd at the
Romish forge, and fire fetched from thence to kindle our combustions? Is it not
yet apparent, that the Popish Emissaries and Incendiaries were sent hither on
purpose under the name of Anabaptists, Seekers, and Quakers, and I know not
what, to blow the coals, and foment the flames of our late dissentions? And are
we not yet sensible, how some factious and seditious Separatists have been, and
still are, acted and carried on by Jesuitical principles in their rebellious
practices; and so brought to be the Pope's drudges; and to do his work for him,
though the leaders of them are so blinded with partiality and prejudice, and
others so led with blind obedience to their Teachers (a point of Popery too)
that they will not see nor perceiv it? I will name but two or three Doctrines
of Bellarmine and his fellows; and you shall judge how well they have been
followed by some of late, who yet would be thought to be the only Antipodes
almost and enemies to Rome. A Prince, says Lessius, that is a Tyrant, cannot
be put to death by any private men, while he continues a Prince, but must first
be deposed; but by whom? why, A Republica, vel Comitiis Regni, by the Less. de
Just. and Jur. l. 2. c. 9.
Commonwealth, or by the Parliament, vel alio habente authoritatem, (i. e.) the
Pope. And to the same purpose Suarez, Post sententiam latam omnino privatur
Regno; and then ye may do what you pleas with him, A quocunque privato poterit
interfici, any fowler may fetch him in. Potestas immediate est tanquam in
subjecto in tota Membris Eccles. Bellarm. de Membris Eccles. lib. 3. qui est
deLaicis.
multitudine, says Bellarmine, The sovereign Power is in the People; Et si
causa legitima adsit, etc. and if there be a lawful cause (and who shall judge of
that but the Pope or the People?) the People may turn a Kingdom into an
Aristocracy or Democracy. And this he stands to in his Recognitions, stoutly
maintaining Potestatem Politicam Bellarm. in Recog. lib. supra dict.
non esse immediate in Regibus; That the Civil power is not immediately in the
Prince, nor immediate a Deo, sed mediante consilio and consensu hominum. And
again elsewhere, Potestas Regis est a populo, quia populus Bellarm. de Council.
l. 2.
facit Regem; whence it follows, says he, that if the King prove a Tyrant,
Licet sit caput Regni, tamen a populo posse deponi, and eligi alium. And what
could some among us have said more? Sure I am they did no less. I shall add but
one piece more, or rather a masterpiece, of Bellarmine's Politics. In his Book
against Barclay, he brings in the Pope discoursing with a Prince's subject to
cajole and debauch his Loyalty and Allegiance; When I absolv you (says he)
from your Oath and bond of Allegiance, be not mistaken, I do not give you leav
to disobey or resist your King, Non permitto ut Regi non pareas; Bellarm. de
Potest. S. Pontif. adv. G. Barcl. cap. 31.
no, by no means, take heed of that; that were contrajus divinum, against the
law of God. Very good. I, but how then? Sed facio ut qui tibi Rex erat, non sit
deinceps tibi Rex; but I make, appoint, and ordain, that he who was your King,
is not now your King any more: No King any longer, if the Pope says the word;
and then take him Fowlers, and do what ye pleas with him; he lies open either
to your gun, or your snare. And now tell me, were not some among us of late
very prompt Scholars of Bellarmine, think ye, they had so perfectly learnt this
distinction? they did not oppose nor resist the King, but you know whom; no gun
had they to hit him, no snare to take him in his Political capacity, but only
in his Personal. Ye see how thoroughly these Jesuitical lessons were learnt and
got by heart by our Regicides and Rebels of late; and shall any make me believ
that they are Protestants, and of the true Reformed Religion, that are so apt
Disciples of Bellarmine? Just such Protestants as this days Traitors. Sir
Edward Cook, then the Kings Attorney General, in his Speech upon the
Gun-powder-Treason, has several Observations, of which this is the last, That
there was never any Protestant Minister found guilty of any conspiracy or
treason against the King. And no marvel; for certainly Rebels and Traitors can
never be true Protestants, what ere they pretend. Disloyalty, Rebellion, and
Treason, are so against the grain and strain of our Protestant Profession, so
directly contrary to the genius and temper and spirit of the Gospel, and of the
true Reformed Religion. Let us then, I beseech you, stick close to the
Principles of our Religion, which are Principles of obedience and loyalty; Let
us hold fast the profession of our faith, and Religion, without warping or Heb.
10. 23.
wavering, i. e. of the true ancient and Catholic Faith, and the true Orthodox
Reformed Religion, professed and maintained in the Church of England. And as we
bid defiance to the Pope's Bulls, so let us take heed of plowing with the
Romish Heifer; I mean, of being acted and led by Popish and Jesuitical
principles, which have born so great sway, and had so strong an influence upon
some men's practices of late in this Nation, who yet pretended so much zeal for
the Reformed Religion.

But I shall no longer hanc Camerinam movere, nor harp any more upon this
unpleasant string; this is not the day nor the time for it: Only let not the
Church of Rome, nor such as Philanax Anglicus, or the Author of Jerusalem and
Babel, think to choke us with our Rebels and Regicides, the Authors of the late
horrid Rebellion, as a blot scandal and reproach to our Religion: For we own
them not, nor do we look upon them as ours, I mean Protestants, and true Sons
of the Church of England; seeing they were wholly acted and swayed by
Jesuitical and Popish principles: Our Protestant Religion teaches us another
lesson; yea, and this I must be bold to say further, As for those that have any
seeds of this Rebellion still lurking and remaining in them (if there be any
such, as I hope there are none here) that look asquint at the Government, Civil
or Ecclesiastical, and are disaffected to the present settlement of Church and
State, as it stands now by Law established, I cannot see how such men can
cordially join with us in keeping this Fifth of November. The horrible plot of
this day was intended (says our Church in her Collect) for the subversion of
the Government and Religion established among us: Now how can they be truly
thankful to God for this days deliverance, that will not own nor allow the
Subject Matter of it, viz. the Government and Religion established among us?
This is a day of Thanksgiving to God for the preservation and continuance of
our Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical, the preservation both of the Church
and State; the Church, I say, both in her Doctrine and Discipline; her Doctrine
in the true ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith; her Discipline, in her true,
ancient, Catholic and Apostolic, Episcopal Government. The Church of England
had both these then established by the Laws of the Land, and so both these
struck at this day; and are any still hewing and hacking at 'um? Both these
should have been blown up this day; and are any still lifting and heaving at
'um? If so, who are they? or what can we count them, but the sons of father
Garnet, or the spawn of Catesby and Faux? And certainly our factious, fanatic,
turbulent, and schismatical spirits, are but the Jesuits Journeymen, though
they are so blind they cannot, nor will not perceiv it. And I would heartily
beseech and entreat our dissenting Brethren, who make such a fearful pudder,
rupture, and rent in this poor Church, I say, (if there were any here) I would
earnestly beseech and entreat them in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ,
seriously to consider what a scandal they bring upon the Reformed Religion, and
what hopes and advantages they give to the adversary. They have been hammering
(say they) a Reformation all this while, and yet now they cannot tell what they
would have, or where they would be. O! how Rome triumphs in our Divisions! how
the Pope warms himself at the fire of our feuds and animosities, schisms and
dissentions! the best fire I believe that ever he had next to that of
Purgatory. They that wu'd break down the fence of our Ecclesiastical Government
by undermining and weakening the power and authority of the Church of England in
her Laws and Canons, and Constitutions, what a gap wu'd they open to the Foxes
of Rome, the little Foxes, to enter in and spoil our vines? They that would
unhinge the frame, discompose and ruffle the Government of so well-ordered and
settled a Church, by shaking and loosning the pinns and joints of it, especially
when established by the Civil Power, and Royal Authority, what do they else in
effect endeavor to do, but what this day was intended, viz. to bring us into a
woeful labyrinth, and into a snare of horrid confusions? And then let our Popish
Fowlers alone, they desire no more, (...), Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno
mercentur Jesuitae, who hope that a Church thus divided against it self cannot
stand. Doubtless if things go on in the same pass they have done of late, and
schism and faction still get ground, and grow and increas upon us, the Pope in
time will have a fair pull for it; we shall need no Fauxes with dark Lanthorns,
nor gunpowder-men to blow us up and our Religion together; we shall do it our
selves. Do we not think our Romish Fowlers are at work still among us, very
busy in laying their snares for us? and shall we be quarrelling among our
selves, till God give us up for a prey to their teeth? Quarrelling about I know
not what; (I dare say the quarrelsome part know not what they wu'd have.) Give
me leav to repeat a saying which I heard many years ago, as long ago almost as
I can remember; Si unquam Papismus remeaverit in Angliam, Puritanismus erit in
causa; if ever Popery return into England, and we be brought into that snare
again, and fall into the hands of those Fowlers of Rome (which God forbid) we
may thank our Schismatics and Sectaries for it. God be thanked, hitherto this
snare has been broken; and this day it was broken, and I may say it was broken
too not many years since by a miracle of mercy, this snare, or a wors; well,
the snare is broken and we are delivered; and we still enjoy our Laws and
Liberties, Lives and Religion, under a most Gracious Prince (who may far better
be called Pius and Clemens, then either of the two men of Rome we spoke of
before) I say under a most Gracious King, whom God long preserv; in a Church
most pure, and Orthodox, and Apostolical, and best reformed of any Church this
day in the Christian world. O fortunatos nimium! if we would but know it. Happy
is that people that is in such a case, under such a King, and Psalm. 144. 15.
in such a Church; a happiness which nothing can deprive us of, but our
monstrous and wretched unthankfulness for such a great mercy. As ever then we
hope or desire to have this happiness prolonged and continued to us and our
posterity, and still to escape these snares, snares of superstition, and
snares of confusion; snares of the head, and snares of the hand; snares of
corrupt and pernicious principles, and snares of cursed and cruel practices; in
a word, as ever we look to enjoy the fruit and benefit of this days
deliverance, let us be really and truly thankful to God for it; let us escape
as a bird; the bird when she is escaped out of the snare, flys aloft toward
Heaven, as it were in token of thankfulness, Volans in nubila fugit, with her
in Virgil: so let us; let us be really thankful, let us express our
thankfulness by flying aloft toward Heaven, I mean, by our
Heavenly-mindedness, by the purity and holiness of our lives, by an humble and
cheerful submission and conformity to the Laws of God and the King; in a word,
by our lowly and loyal, peaceable and godly Conversation. And now let me ask
but this one Question, Is our soul escaped? I say not, since this days
Deliverance, it is so long past, but of late since the snare was last broken,
eight or nine years ago? Is our soul the better for it? it may be our body is,
our bodily and temporal estate perhaps is better, but are we grown better as to
our Souls and spiritual estate? are we more reformed in our lives since that
late wonderful Revolution? are we since that grown more holy and religious,
more sober and temperate, more meek and peaceable, more humble and charitable?
If so, then our soul is escaped. But if on the contrary we are nothing amended
by it, nor more reformed in our Lives; if we are not the better, nor walk any
whit the closer with God after such an extraordinary signal deliverance from
such a dangerous snare as this, our body is escaped it may be, but our soul is
in the snare still, though not in the snare of Popish superstition, yet in as
bad or a wors snare, the snare of Atheism and profaneness; and so our soul is
not escaped. Yea, and as to our outward and bodily estate, however it be with
us at present, yet for the future we are never the safer, but in as bad a case,
in as much danger as ever, yea and in more, for if we sin more and more, a wors
thing will come unto us; God will bring us into the same or a Joh. 5. 14.
worse snare; for assure we our selves this, if we still go on to provoke the
Lord by our sins, notwithstanding these his miraculous mercies toward us, a
wors thing will come unto us, a worse snare will befall us, and we know not how
soon; it may be here in this world, but be sure hereafter in the world to come.
(...) Fear and the pit and the snare shall be upon us; it is an Jer. 48. 432.
elegant Paronomasy that in the Prophet, but a sad one, horror of Conscience,
the snares of death, and the pit of hell. So then, is our soul still hamperd
and entangled in the snares of our sins, and can we say, our soul is escaped?
Sin it self is a snare, and all snares come by sin. The wicked is snared in the
work of his own hands, says David the Father; and, In the transgression of an
evil Psalm. 9. 16.
man there is a snare, says Solomon the Son. If then we Prove. 29. 6.
would escape the snares of evil men, such as was that of this day, take we
heed of the snares of the Devil, which St. Paul speaks of in his Epistles to
Timothy, those two 1 Timothy 3. 7.
especially, which he there makes, one of them at least, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
the root of all evil, Pride and Covetousness; these are indeed 1 Timothy 6. 10.
the cause of all other snares both in Church and State; Ambition and Avarice,
for the most part, the fountains and inlets of all Heresy and Schism,
Rebellion and Treason; yea of all sin and wickedness, mischief and misery
whatsoever: these are they that set our Romish Fowlers a work this day, though
zeal for Religion and the Catholic cause was pretended. Wherefore to conclude,
Flee youthful lusts, (says the Apostle) Let us 2 Timothy 2. 22.
flee sinful lusts (to be sure) especially these two leading grand cardinal
lusts, Pride and Covetousness, and then we shall the sooner and easier flee
schism and faction, atheism and profaneness; which if we do not, we have no part
nor portion in this days solemnity, nor can we cordially close with the Church
in the celebration of it: but let us to the purity of our Reformed Religion,
add the purity and reformedness of our lives; let us walk in the ways of peace
and holiness, humility and charity; and then we may with joyful, and cheerful,
and thankful hearts, acknowledge and commemorate the great deliverance of this
day, and say with the Psalmist in the words of the Text, Our soul is escaped as
a bird out of the snare of the fowlers, the snare is broken, and we are
delivered.

FINIS.

