A VINDICATION OF Saint Ignatius, (Founder of the Society of JESUS) FROM
Phanaticism;

And of the JESUITS, FROM THE Calumnies Laid to their Charge in a late Book,
Entitled, The Enthusiasm of the Church of ROME.

By William Darrel, Priest, of the Society of JESUS.

LONDON, Printed for Anthony Boudet, over against the May Pole in the Strand,
Bookseller. 1688.

THE PREFACE.
THE Disease of Gospelling first broke out in Germany; and from Thence the
Contagion crept into other States of Europe. Martin Luther was the First this
new Plague seized on; and from Him his Pot-Companions took it: He wrapped his
foul Design under fair Appearances; He aimed at Abuses, to strike at the
Church, and cried out Reformation of Manners, to let-in Deformation. His maskt
Hypocrisy drew Shoals of Admirers; and then the charming Promises of True
Christian Liberty, soon flung them into an Hellish Slavery; for from Admirers
of his Doctrine, they past to be Proselytes, and Canonized his Gross Dreams for
Divine Revelations. But, as yet, his Progress was scarce discernable: He found
Priests and Religious, as Vigilant to defend the Church, as Himself to attack
it: And therefore he set Two Gins, the One to allure Them, the Other to fright
Them, and their Inferiors too, from their Duty. He felt, by Experience, that a
Capuche, and an Hair-Shift, were troublesome Companions; That Fasting and
Praying were Melancholy Entertainments; and, That to give a Breviary for a Fair
Lady, could be no Bad Exchange. And therefore, by his Omnipotent Power, be
dispensed with all Religious Vows; and gave Mankind so vast a Liberty, as to do
any thing but those Obligations CHRIST had laid upon them: Sense applauded this
New Prophet's Gospel, and German-Reason soon approved it: So that many Priests,
and Religious, accepted of the Dispensation; and made a Divorce with the
Church, and CHRIST Himself, to Espouse the World, and its Fopperies. But Those,
who refused these Proffers, to accept of GOD's; who placed the Good of their
Souls, above the Criminal Ease of their Bodies; and valued Fidelity to their
Maker at an higher Rate, than a Criminal Obedience to his Mortal Enemy; Those,
I say, were oppugn'd with different Engines: Every Reformer begat some
Scandalous Pamphlet, and so contributed to the Peopling of the World with the
Children of his Brain, as well as with the spurious Offspring of his Body. Some
struck at Priests, Others at Religious; But all Conspired (as if Associations
were even then in Fashion) to decipher the Leaders of the Church, as Persons
rather to be Detested, than Obeyed. By which Piece of unchristian Policy, they
intended to raise a Disesteem of Superiors in the Hearts of Inferiors; which
once affected, Disobedience (the constant Sequel of Contempt) would follow. And
indeed, this Method proved so favorable to the Sinistrous Designs of the first
New Gospellers, that their Successors have pitched on the same Expedient for
the Preservation of that Religion, which, like a Young Minerva, jumpt out of
their Fore-Father's Brain. Invectives against Priests and Jesuits, are the
common Cries in the Streets, and the never-failing Topic of all
Pulpit-Rhetorick. But, I confess, the Latter bears the greatest part of the
Satyrs. A Jesuit and Behemoth are nigh akin; for, as this Beast was a
Compound of all Animals; so He is a Mixture of all Abominations. Is there any
Black Design contrived? The Jesuit is of the Counsel. Any Abominable Treason
put in Execution? He is the Actor. The Parliament of 41. was a College of
Jesuits: Hugh Peter's a Professed Father; nay, Fairfax, Waller, and Cromwell
too, had been adopted Children of the same Society, but that They wanted the
necessary qualifications. Disloyalty, Rapine, Murders, and the Tribe of
Jesuitical Virtues. In 66. the Jesuits laid London in Ashes. Like fiery
Dragons, they spit Flames into Cellars, and Oyl-Shops; and probably then
experienced, first, the Omnipotent Power of Teukesbury Mustard-Balls. Nay, I
have it from Credible Hands, their Malice went so far, as to undermine the
Thames; and had infallibly blew it up in the Air, but Providence put a Stop to
their Hellish Enterprise, and so blew up their Design. From Fire and Water they
run to the Sword; and no Blood would lay the Devil of Revenge, but His Sacred
Majesty's. Omnipotent Oliva, sent down Commissions from Rome, Father de la
Chayse Ships of Money; and, in Conclusion, They carried the Treason so
secretly, that They knew not of it Themselves: Nor did any Body else, but those
Villains who accused them; and who thought to build their Fortune on the Ruin
of Church and State. In fine, A Jesuit is, by Trade, a Butcher; but with this
Difference, That He stabs Kings merely to be doing, and the honest Butcher
Beasts, only to gain a Livelihood. His Religion is to profess All or None, as
Time and Emergencies require. From Mass he runs to the Quakers; From These to
the Presbyterians: Then he is dubbed Jew, and sometimes Turk, whenever the
Alcoran suits better with his Occasions, than the Gospel. Thus Jesuits make
sale of Things, even the most Holy and Revered in Christianity; acknowledging
no other God, but Interest; no other Religion, but Faction, and (the greatest
of Crimes) Treason. But, Gentlemen, if all these Accusations are true, Why is
not the Evidence in proving them, equal to the Boldness in Asserting them? Why?
Our Adversaries make the World believe, That we are gifted with Proteus's
Faculty; That we can turn and wind our selves into all Shapes and Figures; That
Gyges bequeathed us his Mysterious Ring: And, What Wonder then, if we play such
Prancks, without being caught, when we cannot be seen.

But, sober Reader, Let us cast away Prejudice, and argue a little like Men, by
the Rules of Reason, and not of Passion: First, Were Jesuits such Mortal
Enemies to Princes, Is it credible, that the Greatest Monarchs in Christendom
would commit their Consciences to the Directions of Men, whose only Aim is the
Destruction of their Bodies, and ruin of their Monarchies? No, certainly,
unless we can imagine they are all of the same Party with the Jesuits, and
conspire against Themselves; as some Gentlemen assured the World, that Charles
the Second, of blessed Memory, did against his own Royal Person. Secondly, Were
their Principles of Morality so bad and Antichristian, as some Malevalent
Persons have described them, Can any Man, of an unbiased Judgment, ever be
persuaded, that all the World would run Mad together, and send their Children
for Virtue and Learning, to their Schools, where no Lessons are read, but of
Debauchery and Faction? I will rather believe, some Pamphleteers have been
mistaken, than that the greatest Part of Europe is deceived; and that They
deserve rather to be Pillor'd for Calumniators, than the Jesuits to be
Condemned for Criminals. Some Ministers in Germany confessed, That in the Rules
of our Society, there was nothing reprehensible, but the Roman Religion: And
for my part, I am of Opinion, That our English Ministers can find no other
Fault with our Actions, but that They tend more than they desire, to the
Increase of That Faith. But, if Zeal for our Church be a Crime, our Adversaries
must have Patience; for there is no Hope of Repentance; We glory in the Sin,
because we esteem it a Virtue: And, if any can disabuse us with Reason and
Arguments, we will thank them for the Favor: But, if they will needs endeavor
to beat down our Zeal, by accusing it, to stop our Mouths with Morsels of
Printed Paper, upon my Word, their Labor will prove extremely unsuccessful. I
hope, by the Grace of GOD, we shall feel so great a Love for Christianity, as
to Forgive them; so much Courage, as to bear their most foul Aspersions,
without any other Concern, than for our Adversaries Impiety, We will never so
far condescend to an Enemy, as to revenge Wrongs done us, upon our own Souls;
nor to be really Wicked, because our back-Friends would have us be so.
Innocence, I am sure, stands for us; and therefore, we need not fear a Weak
Defense, unless it be our Misfortune to fall into the Hauds of Perjured
Witnesses, and of Old Ignoramus Juries; for with such Persons, Crimes pass
current for Virtues, and Innocence it self is a sufficient Ground to be brought
in Guilty.

In fine, I desire all, not to be too forward to pass their Verdict against a
Jesuit, on the Authority of every Pamphlet, which drops from the Print; nay,
though you read in the Front, Guli. Needham, with an Imprimatur. We have seen His
now Gracious Majesty declared Traitor, in as great Formality; and Titus Oats,
with the whole Inventory of Godly Narratives, were usher'd-in with an Equal
Solemnity: Which being, by the Public Justice of the Nation, nulled, we ought
to suspect Those, which, for the future, shall be framed on the same Model. To
be seduced once, may be a pardonable Weakness; but to be drawn-in by every
Malicious Sheet, is a convincing Argument, we are not unwilling to be Deceived:
and whosoever is disposed to give Assent to every Lie, without further Examen,
adopts them; and so espouses the Sin, as well as the Pain; which will be
Eternal in the Next World, unless he resolves to Repent in This.

A VINDICATION OF St. IGNATIUS From the CHARGE of Phanaticism, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.
AMong other Artifices, wherewith the Gentlemen of the Church of England
recommend their Religion to ignorant and deluded Persons, none has been more
frequently made use of, than the charging both our Church, and its Members,
with such Crimes, which derive their Being, as well as Enormity, from the
inventive Brains of our Accusers. The Badness of their Cause, permits them not
to descend into a Scrupulous Examination of the Merirs of it. Every single
Controversy has been so often handled, and so demonstratively determined
against Them, that it would be rash and disadvantagious to reassume the Debate
of those particular Questions. Wherefore they have wisely judged it most secure
for their Reputation, to lay aside Reason and Authority, and to take up no
other Arms to defend their gasping Cause, than Forgery and Railery, the last
Refuge of Desperado's. To make my Charge good, I will send my Reader to Two
Pamphlets lately come out, viz. The Art of Missionaries, and The Enthusiasm of
the Church of Rome: In the First, Forgery; in the Second, Impiety (to call it
no worse) appear barefaced, in spite of Christianity. For though, indeed, the
Author of the Missionaries cites his Authorities; yet many of them are of so
profligate a Reputation, that no Man, who did not intend to put an Universal
Cheat on Mankind, would ever produce them, but to condemn them. A main Support
of his Slanders, is Dr. Burnet, a Person long since out-lawed by his Country,
and has not as yet learnt Repentance: Nay, he adds fresh Crimes to those of an
older Date, by flinging Dirt on his Sovereign, and lending his Mercenary Pen to
the Broachers of New Rebellions. And shall he, who flies in the very Face of
his Prince, be admitted as an Evidence against Catholic Subjects, whom he
professes to abhor? A great part of his other Authorities are of the same
Stamp and Reputation; only with this difference, That Some, at least, have been
burnt by the public Hangman; and the Doctor's, with a great part of the Herd,
as yet, only deserves the same Punishment. In a word, The Gentleman should have
taken into his List the Salamanca-Doctor's Narrative, to make it complete, and
to press his Accusation homer. Now, had this Pamphleteer first proved, by
credible Witnesses, the Veracity of his Authors, and withal been more sparing
of his Billingsgate-Rhetorick, his Accusation might have gained some Degree of
Probability even in the Opinions of well-meaning Men, till Catholics had
confuted it. But first to Empanel a biased Jury, and then to Condemn a
Congregation of Men on its corrupt Verdict, is so foul a Proceeding, as not to
be paralleled but in the Transactions of Titus's Reign.

As for the other Gentleman; Indeed, he has taken a far more expedient way, to
bring our Religion into an Odium: The Name of a Phanatick, sounds harsh to an
English-Man's Ear; and therefore, he doubted not, but the very Imputation of
Enthusiasm, would raise the Hotheaded Mobile against us; and turn the good
Esteem of many Church-Protestants, into an utter Execration of our Folly. The
Reverend Dean of St. Paul's gave him the Platform of his Design; and, indeed,
all England could not afford him a more expert Master in the Science of
Phanaticism: For, let People talk what they please, Practice is the best
Mistress; and the Doctor wants not this Advantage. When Phanaticism turned
Trump, it was the Doctor's darling Religion; and, if we may guess at his Mind
by the Fruit of his Brain (his Writings,) Two fat Benefices are the chief
Motives of Credibility, which keep him in the Prelatick Communion. Nay, our
Gentleman follows, through his whole Pamphlet, this Guide so close, that he
often treads on his Heels. So that, without any Injustice, I may change the
Tittle Page, and christen the whole Book, The Second Edition of Dr.
Stillingfleet 's Folly. But, to do him Justice, I must inform my Reader, That
he has heightened the Doctor's Railery, as well as Impiety; and, as much as I
can guess, has spent so much Time in turning over Don Quixot, as to have left
none for the Scripture: For, had he the least insight into that Sacred Book, or
the least Tincture of Christianity, he never durst have exercised his
ridiculing Vein on the Sacred Counsels contained in that Holy Volume; nor
placed those Pious Men, who followed them, on the same Level with Phanaticks.
But, what will not Men do, when Passion blinds Reason? When the pleasant Charms
of Revenge cast Conscience into a Lethargy? when they have Light enough to see
their Errors, and no Resolution to correct them.

Would the Gentleman peruse his own Lines in cold Blood, I am persuaded, he
would blush at the Sallies of his Passion, and confess he deserved those
reviling Epithets, he has so liberally flung on the Catholic Church, for
promoting imaginary Enthusiasms, and on St. Ignatius for practicing them.
However, though perchance his Buffooning Disease may be past cure; yet for the
disabusing those, who possibly may be so far imposed on, as to take a mere
Romance for a real Story, I shall make a short Reply to a long Fable: Though I
am convinced, indeed, that Many may be pleased with the Slander; yet Few will
approve it, and Fewer the Author. The most Favorable, perchance, may rank him
among the Merry Andrews: But, I am sure, the more Judicious will place him
among Those, who profess little Religion, and exercise less Virtue.

I do not intend, in my Reply, to follow this Gentleman so close by the Heels,
as he has done Dr. Stillingfleet; for I find the greatest Part of his Calumnies
long since wip'd-of, in the Second Letter to A. B. But I will only touch those
Accusations, which either slipped by the Doctor's Memory, or were so notoriously
false, as he thought fit to conceal them.

SECT. I.
Whether St. Ignatius had the Qualities, which the Author requires to make up a
Phanatick?
AFter an Invective of Twenty Pages against Phanaticism, and an Hundred
Compliments to the Saints of the Catholic Church, of which Mad, Frenzical,
Brainsick, etc. are the most endearing Epithetes; as if the Gentleman had lost
his Breath, he stops of a sudden, and thus very gravely reads the Indictment
against St. Ignatius:

In forming this Inquiry, I shall begin with the Qualities necessarily requisite
to complete an affected Enthusiast; among which an ardent Desire of Glory, and
immoderate Ambition, obtain the first place; for none could prostitute the
Dignity of his Nature to the Follies and Impertinencies of Enthusiasm, deny to
himself the common Benefits of Life, and undergo Poverty, Nakedness, Hunger*
and a thousand other Inconveniences incident to that Profession, if he were not
transported with a violent Ambition.

I confess ingenuously, that Pride is a necessary Ingredient to make a
Phanatick; but that such a Self-denial as you mention, is incident to Men of
that Profession, is, in my Opinion, a most groundless Assertion. No Man in
England, I believe, is such a Recluse, as not to be acquainted with some of
that Persuasion; and yet I dare affirm, That no Body can point me out any
considerable number of those Proselytes of Phanaticism, who ever esteemed
Voluntary Poverty, Nakedness, Hunger, and a Thousand other Inconveniences, to
be necessary Compliments of their Religion. Indeed, the Church of England seems
to be convinced, that a Renunciation of those Common Benefits of Life, is an
essential part of their Obligation; and therefore, moved with a Pious
Indignation to see so Christian Duties laid aside, thought fit (some Years
past) to call straying Phanaticks to a severe Account, for the Contempt of so
laudable a Tenet. She tormented their Bodies with loathsome Prisons, for the
good of their Souls, drained their Purses with Weekly and Monthly Fines; and,
in fine, forced them to undergo Poverty, Nakedness, Hunger, and a Thousand
other Inconveniences incident to that Persuasion. Nay, the no less Provident,
than Pious Mother Church, went further: She knew full well, that Human Nature
is frail, and that Men are far more prone to Fall, than to Rise; and for this
Reason, She judges it most convenient to keep the Rod (viz. the Penal Laws) in
her Hand, that now and then, with a gentle Lash, She may admonish them of their
Duties, Poverty, Nakedness, etc: And it is for this end too, that She stickles
for the Test, lest poor Phanaticks, by intruding themselves into gainful
Offices, should cut a new Channel for their Ambition to run in, and pride
rather in Opulence, than in the wan^ of the Common Benefits of Nature.

It being then no Principle of our English Phanaticks, to feed their Ambition
with such an Aversion from the Creature, as rather to expose their naked Backs
to public View, their Stomachs to the inward Knawings of a biting Hunger,
rather than enjoy it: Without doubt, your piercing Genius has found out a new
Sect, which Modesty commands you to conceal. But to satisfy the Reader's
Curiosity, and to contribute as much as I am able to the Increase of your
Reputation, and the Credit of that pure Church, of which you are a spotless
Member, I shall communicate your Discovery; that the World may be Witness as
well of your Piety, as of your Railery: And that I may explain your Meaning
without all Debate, let the Reader take notice of your Words: For none would
prostitute the Dignity of his Nature, etc. deny to himself the common Benefits
of Life, and undergo Poverty, etc. if he were not transported with a violent
Ambition. So that, if we do but form one Syllogism, this new Discovery will lie
at the Tail of it: Those who deny themselves the common Benefits of Life, who
undergo Poverty, etc. have the first Quality to complete an Enthusiast. But,
The Apostles, the Primitive Christians, and to be short, Christ himself did
deny themselves the common Benefits of Life. Ergo. Christ, and his Apostles,
etc. had the first Quality to complete an Enthusiast.

This is a Discovery worthy indeed of a Julian, or Porphyrius; but, for my
Life, I cannot find one Fig-leaf to cover your Impiety. If it be a piece of
Phanaticism, to leave All for Christ's sake, to obey our Great Master's
Counsel, we acknowledge the Accusation, and plead Guilty: But if it be a Crime
of the first Magnitude, to turn Christ's Life, and his Doctrine into ^aileries;
Sir, let me tell you, You stand heavily guilty at God's Tribunal, and will
infallibly bear the smart of your Blasphemy in the next World, unless you learn
to repent in This.

But, perchance, you will tell me, That to quit all Worldly Pretensions, to
deny ones self the Common Benefits of Life merely for Christ's sake, is
Praiseworthy: But that St. Ignatius's Poverty sprung from a Principle as far
different, as Ambition is remote from Humility. So it is not precisely the
Exterior Train of Self-Denial, which qualifies him for a Phanatick, but
Interior Ambition. Prove then, Sir, That Ambition was the fist Motive of all
St. Ignatius's Austerities. He is about it: where he ushers in his Proof with a
Division of Ambition, to show he loves to take things from the bottom.

Ignatius (says he) was in a most particular manner indu'd with this Heroic
Quality, and that both Natural and Acquired. I suppose, Sir, the Natural Temper
of a Man's Body is no more a Crime, than the Natural Features of his Face;
because neither the One, nor the Other falls under a Free Election; which is a
necessary Requisite to frame a Sin. So that the First Part of your Proof being
null, we must fall to the Examen of the Second: This Natural Ambition of St.
Ignatius was fomented and increased by his extraordinary Addiction to read
Romances, and the Lives of Saints, p. 21. But it was the Reading of the Legends
of Saints, which finally completed the Disease, and rendered it incurable:
This excited in him a passionate Desire of obtaining an equal Reputation in the
Church, p. 22. If the Lecture of Romances inflamed his Ambition, whilst he was
yet a Soldier, and breathed the Air of the World, we accuse the Lecture as well
as the Effect of it: But then, too, I cannot but wonder, that such an
Accusation should fall from your Mouth, who are, without doubt, guilty of the
same Folly; for, if his Passion carried him to Amadis, yours tie you to Don
Quixot; otherwise you could never have followed so close your Parallel: But
that the Life of Christ, and Actions of the Saints, should work the same
Effect, I understand not, unless he had your Faculty to draw Bad from Good, and
Vice from the greatest Virtues.

I will grant you willingly, that the Zeal of St. Dominick, and Humility of St.
Francis, first opened his Eyes, and gave him a Prospect of the Folly of all
Worldly Pretensions; as well as of the Happiness of Those, who leave all this
for his sake who made them. Where is the Crime? Where Is Ambition, but in your
Fancy, who spy Faults in others, where there are none; and will not turn an Eye
homeward, where, I am sure, you would find a Subject more than ordinary of
Confusion and Detestation? Does not St. Austin, in his Confessions, recount the
Conversion of Two Noble Romans, by an accidental Reading of St. Anthony's Life?
And does he load these Converts with the Accusation of Ambition? No, no: This
Trade is new, and takes its Date from the Blessed Epoche of Reformation. 'Twas
then Christ's Counsels began to be laughed at, when his very Commands were
declared Noxious to Christian Liberty: When Purity of Faith sounded the Trumpet
of Rebellion; and any thing passed for Lawful, but Obedience to the Church:
When Cobblers left their Stalls, to mount the Pulpits; and passed from the
mending of Soals, to the Direction of Consciences: When Religion grew in Vogue,
like Almanacks; and the Freshness of its Date, was a sufficient Argument to
recommend it. I say, 'Twas Then Men established a New Language, when they picked
up a New Faith; and first termed Humility, Pride; Voluntary Poverty, Nakedness,
etc. the most palpable Sequels of an Enthusiastic Ambition. Yet this Gentleman
having once bolted this wild Proposition, [Ignatius, in his Conversion, was
acted with Principles of Ambition] is resolved to stand to it, though his
Conscience flies in his Face for it: Nay, and to demonstrate, that his Face is
died as deep with Brass, as his Pen is dipped in Gaul, he tells us; It Is so
undeniable, that even the Writers of his Life cannot dissemble it. This appears
from the Account given by them of the Motions excited in his Imaginations, by
reading Romances, and the Lives of Saints, at his first Conversion, which was
before mentioned; and may be further demonstrated from what Bouhours adds, That
in exercising all his Religious Austerities, he had at first no other Aim, than
to imitate those Holy Penitents, whose Lives he had read, and to expiate his
Sins, p. 30. Sir, The Meaning is, That at the beginning of his Conversion, he
had no Thoughts of Instituting an Order, for the saving his Neighbor's Soul;
but his Design was wholly confined to the Salvation of his own: So that, in
short, here is your Argument; St. Ignatius, at first, employed all his
Endeavors, by reading of the Saints Lives, and asking God Pardon for his Sins,
to save his own Soul, without extending his Care to the Salvation of his
Neighbor's; therefore his Conversion flowed from the Principle of Ambition. Is
not This a most concluding Enthymema? Does not the Author deserve to Commence
Master of Arts, for this cunning Illation? Without doubt. And, I hope, the
University will be pleased to take it into its serious Consideration, whither
such an ingenious Philosopher is not worthy of some Promotion? But because he
wisely foresaw the last Clause [And to expiate his Sins] would break the Neck
of the Argument, he thought fit to prevent it, by a pretty Slight of Hand,
usual to Persons of his Quality; This last Clause (says he) was annexed, only
to save the Credit of the Saint. And, let me tell you, Sir, It Is only rejected
by you, to save the Credit of a Pamphleteer.

But the Gentleman has Two Strings to his Bow. If Bouhour's Recount of his
Conversion will not brand St. Ignatius with Ambition, the Publisher of his Life
by Mutius Vitelleschius's Order, shall. Pray observe: His First Resolutions
were to exercise great Austerities, and perform extraordinary Penance; (No harm
yet, not one Grain of Ambition is hitherto visible) Not so much to expiate his
Sins, which then presented themselves to his View; as because he imagined, that
in these Rigours the utmost Perfection of Christianity consisted, having no
higher Idea of it; and desiring with Passion to acquire that Perfection. Now,
let any Man turn this Quotation into all Shapes, let him make what Combination
he pleases, he will never frame, I am sure, an Argument able to convince any
Person of St. Ignatius's Ambition: For the natural Sense which the Words
import, is, That the Saint aimed at the highest Perfection of Christianity, and
placed it in the Exercise of great Austerities; which, without doubt, was a
Mistake: For the Perfection of Christianity, consists in a most perfect Love of
our Creator; other exterior Austerities, are only Means to arrive to it. Say
then the Saint was mistaken in his Idea of Perfection, and I will put my Hand
to your Accusation: But, on my Word, Sir, if you lay Ambition at his Door,
without better Proofs, than you have already produced, you must maintain your
Charge alone.

Well then, rather than fall short of his Intent, he singles out another
Circumstance very material; viz. The Ambition of Founding a new Order in the
Cburch, had strangely possessed his Imagination, and was the grand Motive of
all his Austerities, p. 32. That from his Conversion he had conceived such a
Design, Orlandin and Bouhours agree; and I subscribe: But that Ambition put
this Resolution on foot, and as Mr. Bays very well says, And all that; Where Is
your Proof? Why, I Gad, he will not tell us: And yet we must swear such a blind
Obedience to his Worship, as to believe him without any further Inquiry. For my
part, I do not intend to give him a Deference he denies to the Church; nor to
accuse the Saint, by freeing him from Calumny. St. Ignatius framed a Design to
Institute a new Order: Ergo, Ambition was the Mover of this Great Work. I
cannot infer such an Impious Consequence from so Pious an Antecedent; nor any
Body else, without betraying at once a want of Wit, and an abundance of
Impiety. I find, that St. Basil and St. Austin had the same Design, nay, and
put it in Execution; and yet I dare not, for my Life, draw this Conclusion,
Ergo, They were Ambitious. Will you therefore know St. Ignatius's Motive? It
was a Zeal for his Redeemer's Honor, and for his Neighbor's Salvation, which
prompted him to the Enterprise. He saw the greatest Part of the World sleep in
Ignorance and Impiety; and that as they lived without Knowledge of GOD, so they
died without Fear of Hell, and without Hope of Heaven. He thought it then an
Act both of Gratitude to GOD, and of Charity to his Neighbor, to be Founder of
an Order of Men, whose only Employment should be, first to procure their Own,
then the Salvation of their Neighbor's: And so it is. Besides, he saw the
Church of GOD attacked in Europe; That the Contagion of Brainsick Gospellers
had infected the greatest Part of the North; That Reformation was the Fair
Hellen, which enchanted Christendom; and, That the Name of Liberty, had plunged
whole Nations into Slavery: Wherefore, to Heal these Wounds already made, and
to prevent future Damages, he framed in his Head the Idea of the Society;
which he after Established by the Pope's Authority: And how GOD favored his
Designs, the Event has demonstrated beyond a Possibility of doubting. The
Fairest and most Populous Nations, both of the East and West Indies, have
received Christianity from his Descendants; who flung up all Right to the
Common Benefits of Life, in their Native Countries, exposed their Lives to as
many Dangers as there be Winds in the Compass, to draw their Fellow Creatures
to the Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST; and to persuade them to Live like Men, that
they might not Die like Beasts. In these Apostolical Functions, above Three
Hundred lost their Lives, and sealed with their own Blood that Gospel they
Preached to Others. I challenge all the Ministers in England, to show the World
so visible Marks of Piety in their Order, or so manifest an Evidence of Divine
Approbation: No, they have found so many commodious Livings, made to their
Hands by the Piety of their Catholic Ancestors within the Compass of the Four
Seas, that they rest contented with their Portion; and think it a piece of the
highest Folly, to be so enamored with the Conversion of Heathenish Souls, as
to expose Christian Bodies to the least Inconvenience for their sakes. Besides,
a pack of little Children is an expensive Burden, and the Tears of a Loving
Wife a strong Retentif: So that a well-meaning Minister's Zeal is choked by
Two Impossibilities; that is, He cannot go without a Transportation of his
Family, and in this Case his Purse is too little; or without an absolute
Renunciation of Wife and Children: and as for That, without any Ceremony, he
tells the Heathens, Vxorem duxi and ideo non possum venire.

Well, but though we are advanced to the 32th. Page, I can find no End of the
First Accusation: My Author follows his Point close, and will not part with his
beloved Topic, Ambition; which makes me think, he is no such Enemy to it: For
People talk of That most, which they love the best; and often dispraise those
very Things, they most passionately dote on. What then has he yet to say? He
Revealed one Day to Polancus several Favors GOD had bestowed on him; and
prayed earnestly, That Eguia might not outlive him, lest he should discover to
the World, what he knew of the Sanctity of St. Ignatius: This is, as I
conceive, your Meaning, though not your Words. To take a view as near as we can
of the Stress of your Argument, let us stand on the Right Side: St. Ignatius
revealed privately one Day to Polancus, That GOD had bestowed many Favors on
him; Item, That he did not relate the Thousandth Part; Item, He prayed
earnestly, that his Confessor might die before him: Therefore, he was
Ambitious. Here the Reader sees the whole Objection, not through false Optics,
but in it natural Bulk and Proportions. But whether it skulks in the First or
Second Instance, for my Heart I dare not presume to determine: Yet methinks,
the Gentleman might have drawn, from the Second Instance, a Conclusion of his
Modesty; because his Desire of out-living Eguia, aimed at this, That many Gifts
of GOD, known to him, as being his Confessor, should lie forever buried in
Oblivion. But I have to deal with a Man, who is equally offended with Silence
and Speaking, and makes the One as Criminal as the Other. But, St. Ignatius
made Polancus Partaker of his Heavenly Visits? and I find, that Solomon
wisper'd that Famous Apparition of GOD, in the Ear of a Confident: Yet the
Scripture, which is not over-shy in taking notice of this Great King's Faults,
never ranks that Action among his Crimes. Again; St. Paul recounts us his
Rapture to the Third Heaven; yet among all the Reflections of Commentators on
that Passage, I find not One which attributes the Rehearsal of so signal a
Favor, to Pride: Nay, King David protests, He will always sing the Mercies of
the LORD; And why should You and I be so Satirical, as to question the
Lawfulness of his Resolution? If therefore such a Confidence be not the
necessary Result of a Phanatick Pride, find some other Argument to back your
Assertion, or confess you are mistaken in your Charge. In fine, Sir, When you
feel Ecstatical Transports of Divine Love, when you work Miracles, and bring me
sufficient Witnesses to render them Credible; although you proclaim your Gifts
at Paul's Cross, I will not lay down my good Opinion of your Humility, but
rather increase it.

The Second Quality requisite to make a complete Enthusiast, says our Author, is
Ignorance, and Weakness of Understanding: This he fastens on St. Ignatius, and
very civilly gives all the Founders of Orders the same Complement. The Great
Founders of Monastic Orders are observed to have been Ignorant and Stupid to a
Prodigy; and Ignatius, far from being ambitious to surpass them in Learning,
thought it Meritorions to be more Ignorant than them all. May I be so bold,
Sir, as to learn of you those Observers? I fear, they took their Observations
ill. For my part, I have observed, and Others with me, That many Great Founders
have always been, and are still esteemed the Learned Men, in all respects,
that ever the World produced, since the Rise of Christianity. What think you,
Sir, of St. Basil? What of St. Austin? Do these pass with you for Ignorant
Persons, and Stupid to a Prodigy? If They do, I shall not much rely on your
Judgment. Indeed, some have not Commenced Doctors; but I never read of any
Stupid to a Prodigy. If you have discovered this so material a Point of
Antiquity, do us the Favor to impart it; and the Gentleman of Amsterdam shall
reward you with a Place in the Journal Des Scavans. But has our Author let fall
no peculiar Encomium on St. Ignatius? Yes: He Thought it Meritorious to be more
Ignorant than them all. Did any one but read your following Page, he would
scarce believe you to be now in earnest: For there you tell us, That He put
himself to School, and bestowed many Years in learning Philosophy, and the
Latin Tongue; That, He betook himself to the University of Paris. Now, I cannot
persuade my self, you are in earnest, when you make us believe, he judged
Ignorance so Meritorious after all these Efforts, to lose it. Methinks, you
might have alleged stronger Arguments, to evince his high Esteem of this
great Virtue, rather than to represent him with Children in the School, turning
over his Accidents, and sweating about the First Conjugation, Anno. I suspect
your continual hammering on the Notions of Cracked disturbed Brains, etc. has
something misplaced yours; and that you have so long hectored St. Ignatius out
of his Wits, till you have lost your Own. However you have received the Wound
in the Church of England's Service; and you may, in Recompense, hope for a
Fellowship in Moor-field College. But laying aside all your Demonstrations of
his Stupidity, the University of Sorbon assures us, That he took his Degree:
Which makes me conclude, (whatever you are pleased to the contrary) he was not
such an Enemy to Learning, nor such a Friend to Ignorance, as you describe him:
But it is no matter. You will have him, after his Death, to be the professed
Enemy to Learning: Back your Assertion with a good Reason, and I Will not oppose
you. Why, Ten Years after his Death, appearing to James Terry, a Young Scotch-
Man of his Society, (who with Diligence and Fervor, had applied himself to the
Study of True Learning) he sharply reprehended him; recommending to him less
Knowledge, and more Virtue. Here Is his Proof; now attend to his Illation: St.
Ignatius recommended to him a greater Study of Virtue, than of Knowledge. Ergo,
He was the professed Enemy of Learning. I wonder the Gentleman has spared so
long to cast some by-reflection on our Savior; for I do not remember, He ever
exhorted his Disciples to the Study of Human Learning; but, every Page, is full
of Exhortations to Virtue. Nay, St. Paul seems rather to dissuade Christians
from too curious a Search into Litterature; and he gives a Reason too, Because
it is the Mother of Pride; Scientia instat: And, without Flattery, I am of
Opinion, the Flatuous Vapors of an imaginary Learning, now and then fly up to
our Scribler's Brains, and disturbs his Intellect: For, How can a Man, in his
Wits, commit so foul a Crime, as to write Bantering for Truth, and downright
Impiety for solid Reason? Yet this is his Case, without an Hyperbole. He has
charged on St. Ignatius Two Essential Constitutives of an Enthusiast, viz.
Ambition and Ignorance, with such an hectoring Accent, that one would have
expected as many Demonstrations as Prepositions. But, in the end, you see, the
Gentleman forgot his Message; and instead of pressing his Accusation, has thus
blindly flung it on CHRIST, and his Apostles. Come, Sir, let me exhort you, as
St. Ignatius did his Proselyte, Less Knowledge, more Virtue. Study more how to
serve GOD, and less how to defame your Neighbor. Now, if you will be so cruel,
as, for my Charity, to enrol me among the Enemies of Learning, I shall only
say, Amen, So be it.

SECT. II.
Whether St. Ignatius was actually guilty of Phanaticism?
HAving kept Pace with my Gentleman Forty-Three Pages, in which lie couched as
many Impertinencies as Lines, but all the Product of his Brain; although my
Patience be almost out of Breath, I will venture to keep up with him. I do not
doubt, but what Follows is of the same Piece with That which went Before; and
that the End will agree perfectly with the Beginning: And if my Conjecture be
true, I shall recommend the whole Work, as the most Ingenious Piece of Nonsense
and Confidence, which our Age has produced.

Having manifested, that the Two chief Parts of an Enthusiast fit St. Ignatius
to an Hair, he enquires, Whether he really were not guilty of Enthusiasm? p.
44. To make this Inquiry methodically, he gives us this Definition of
Enthusiasm; viz. This consists in pretending to Divine Visions, and
extrordinary Illuminations, after Christianity is fully settled; and all
Christians left to learn their Religion by natural and ordinary Means, from the
Rule of Faith, whether Scripture or Tradition; In boasting of infused
Knowledge, and inward Lights; In pretending to have received all the Articles
of Faith by particular Inspiration, to do all things by the private Impulse of
the Spirit. I must interrupt the Gentleman's Definition, with an etc. for I
have lost almost my Breath, and shall, I fear, quite, if I proceed. I take it
for a Definition fresh jumpt out of Mr. Hobbs's Mint; and indeed, the whole
Book is so full of Atheistical Dashes, that I am persuaded, the Author has
served his Apprentiship under that great Master of Atheism. I must take the
Whole into Pieces; for, I confess, I dare not encounter with such a Crowd of
Nonsense together. Enthusiasm (says he) consists in pretending to Divine
Visions, and extraordinary Illuminations, after Christianity is fully settled.
Hold there, Dear Sir, as you tender your Credit, and the Honor of the English
Protestancy: If you give so large Notions of Phanaticism, you exclude from the
Pale of your Church the most Famous Saints, and Doctors of Christianity; and if
once these Supports be thrown away, your Church must fall. Saint Martin was a
Pretender to Extraordinary Illuminations; and Saint Austin tells us of a
certain Voice, which bid him, Toll and Lege, Take up and Read; and a Thousand
others. Now, Sir, If I put my Hand to this Part of your Definition, I cannot
refuse it handsomely to this Consequence; Ergo, St. Martin, St. Austin, etc.
were Enthusiasts. My Reason is, Because you assert, That all those who pretend
to Divine Visions, and extraordinary Illuminations, after Christianity is fully
settled, are Enthusiasts. But, All those forementioned Saints did pretend to
Divine Visions, etc. after Christian Religion was once fully settled; Ergo,
Those Saints were Phanaticks. Excuse me then from Subscribing to the First of
your Definitions, unless you think good to explain your Mind better. I will
take up the Context; In beasting of infused Knowledge, and inward Light. I
admit this, on condition you do not intend to make an humble Recount of those
Favors, merely for others Instruction, pass current for boasting. My Precaution
is necessary, lest unwarily we find St. Paul's Name in the Catalogue of
Phanaticks, before we dream of it. What follows next, is full of Equivocation:
And therefore I must declare on what terms I admit it, and on what I reject it.
In pretending to have received all the Articles of Faith by particular
Inspiration. This Proposition, as it lies, is not Orthodox: For after the
complete Settlement of the Jewish Church, the Prophets did pretend to have
received the Articles of their Faith by particular Inspiration; and yet I dare
not pronounce them Phanaticks. Now indeed, if you stoop so low, as to regulate
your Charge by my Notion of Phanaticism, we will proceed to the Trial. I
conceive it then, with Submission, that only those deserve the Title of
Phanaticks, who pretend, That the natural and ordinary Means instituted by
Divine Providence to find out all Articles of Faith, is an Inward Light, and an
Immediate Revelation. This I understand by Phanaticism: And if you can prove
St. Ignatius guilty of this Folly, I will fling up the Cause; if you cannot,
Justice obliges you to a speedy Repentance; First, For having so abused the
World with loud Clamours of strange Discoveries, concerning the Church of Rome
's Superstitious Practices, and Enthusiastic Extravagancies: Secondly, For
having betrayed your own Conscience in the Sight of GOD, whilst blind
Temerity, and intoxicating Fury, guided your Pen to wound the Reputation of the
Saints in the Judgment of Men.

You therefore affirm St. Ignatius to have been a Phanatick, because he
pretended to Divine Visions and Illuminations; and then you draw up an
Inventory of some Apparitions and Ecstacies recounted in his Life, which takes
up a considerable Part of your Pamphlet: All which you are pleased to attribute
to the Effects of a strong Imagination, and of a weak and disturbed Brain. But
shall any ones Judgment be so biased, as to take this for a Confutation? Would
any Man take bare Assertions for solid Reasons, or false Aspersions for real
Crimes, your Discourse is, I grant, most persuasive: But who-ever takes the
pains to sift it, will be able to find nothing but Scum above, and Malice
below. Sir, For my part, I know no Catholic of so easy a Belief, as presently
to swallow down every fictitious Story for a real Miracle. They measure their
Assent by the Rules of Prudence. Where the Authority is weak, their Belief is
suitable; where strong and evident, their Assent is without Hesitation. In
fine, They always are of Opinion, That to Believe All, and to Deny All, are
Extremes equally reprehensible.

Now produce some Arguments, which prove credibly, That the Illuminations and
Visions ascribed to St. Ignatius, were but the Effect of a discomposed Brain,
of a strong Imagination, and disorderly Fancy; and if I cannot oppose more
weighty Reasons to the contrary, I Will fling up my Cards. The only Ground of
your Scruple, as far as I can learn, is this, If indeed Ignatius received a
perfect Knowledge of the Christian Religion, etc. How came it to pass, that for
many Years after, he was still esteemed a Fool, and an Idiot? You have put a
pretty Sophism in the Mouth of a Jew, or a Turk. If JESUS CHRIST was GOD, How
came it to pass, that He was still esteemed for a Fool, and an Idiot? To make
us believe that such an Opinion was not a Popular Noise only, you tell us, Upon
a particular Examen by the Inquisitor of Alcala, and Archbishop of Toledo, he
was adjudg'd not to have been sufficiently instructed in Matters of Religion:
You might as well have quoted your darling Romance, Don Quixot, as Bouhours;
and found as much to your Purpose in the One, as in the Other: For Bouhours, in
the Book cited, mentions not one Word of St. Ignatius's appearing before the
Inquisitor; much less of a particular Examen: And therefore any puny Logician
may infer out of that Examen in Nubibus, That you are far more meanly
instructed in the Rules of Truth, than St. Ignatius in Matters of Religion.
Indeed, Bouhours tells us, That the Great Vicar cast him in Prison, upon the
Account of the Indiscreet Fervor of Two Ladies, abscrib'd by Dr. Cirol to the
Persuasions of St. Ignatius; and told him, That not being a Divine, he should
abstain from explicating to the People the Mysteries of Religion, till such
Time he had studied Four Years in Divinity: But here is no mention either of an
Inquisitor, or of a particular Examen. And as for Don Alphonso de Fonseca,
Archbishop of Toledo, he was so far from judging him not to have been
Sufficiently instructed in Matters of Religion, that he very much Exhorted him
to continue his Functions of Piety toward his Neighbor. So that here lie
chained, one to the Heels of the other, Two Forgeries, without Dispute, as well
as without Excuse. Had you been forced to Translate your Author out of Greek,
Charity might have obliged me rather to have fast'ned this Mistake on your
Ignorance, than to have imputed it to your Malice: But the Book being Englisht
to your Hands, the most favorable Construction I can put on your Crime, is,
That you have taken up that Principle so often laid at the Papists Door, viz.
All things are lawful, if profitable to the Church; and then working by this
Maxim, you concluded, That a Forgery was but a small Price to buy Heaven for
your self, and the Dis-esteem of the World for St. Ignatius, and those of his
Society. But, Sir, You have taken false Measures, and as disadvantagious a
Topic as you could have light upon. Vent your Burlesquing Vein till Doomsday,
you will never so far unman Rational Creatures, as to wheedle them into a
Belief, that the Jesuits, and their Founder, are Fools and Idiots. Had you
taken up your Quarters at Fox-Hall, and from that Enchanted Castle popt in the
Hawker's Mouths New Narratives of Popish Plots, and Jesuitical Contrivances; or
plied them with White-Horse Consultations, Armies of Jesuits in the Air, and
Thousands of Pilgrims in the Rear, your Labor might ('it is possible) have met
with some Success: But, on a sudden, to Metamorphize their Plotting into
Folly, their intrieguing Genius into Stupidity, is to raise a Scruple in the
Wisest Part of the Nation, Whether they did not want some Grains of Wit, when
they feared to be imposed on by Fools?

Yet indeed, to give the Gentleman his Due, he dropped a Word or two, Page 26.
which insinuate, That at first he intended rather to have charged the Jesuits
with Knavery, than Folly: for thus he tells us; It seems, the Propagation of
the Gospel, by Force of Arms, is connatural to the Order of Jesuits; only the
Wisdom of latter Years has changed these Spiritual, into Carnal Weapons. You
are in the right, Sir; The Wisdom of latter Years has changed these Spiritual
into Carnal Weapons: But the Misery is, the Wisdom of the little Lord
Shaftsbury, joined with the indefatigable Industry of Sir William Waller, was
not able to find them in Jesuitical, nor Popish Cabinets. The Gentlemen of
Rye-House engrossed them to themselves for a peculiar Use; and then the
Protestant Duke of the Church of England conveyed them to his Friends at
Taunton, for the Propagation of Liberty and Religion. But, Sir, You are too
wary; You might, without Scruple, extend the Wisdom of latter Years to latter
Ages; for I find Protestancy and Carnal Weapons of the same Date.

Look over to the Godly Churches of Germany, and you will see them making
Elbow-Room with Drawn Daggers in their Hands, and Christian Liberty in their
Mouths; Two pretty Protestancy-dilating Engines, and both the Product of Modern
Wisdom. What think you, Sir, of the Wisdom of a Neighboring Republic? Did it
not effect the Propagation of the Gospel by Force of Arms? Did it not break in
pieces the fretting Yoke of its Master the King of Spain, to put on its Neck
that of the LORD? Yes. And Dr. B. a Minister of the Church of England, extols
to the Skies the Wisdom of his New Lords, for a Crime, which, I fear, has pusht
the Contrivers into Hell. The Wisdom of latter Years has produced the same
Effects in every Kingdom, where Protestancy (the Religion of Latter Times) got
foot; and I dare say, That it seldom gained one Inch of Ground, but by the Help
of Carnal Weapons. So that, I am sure, (whatever Mines the Jesuits have laid
to propagate Popery) the Propagation of the Gospel by Force of Arms, is more
connatural to Protestancy.

After an Hundred and Two Pages spent in wild Notions, rambling Propositions,
and nonsensical Probations to back them, as if he had intended all the while to
give Scope only to a Whimsical Imagination, or to teach the World, That much
Confidence, and little Reason go far; he resolves to knock down St. Ignatius's
Sanctity, as well as the Church's, at one Blow. The Design is great, and
suitable to Don Quixot's Bravo; and the Method contrived to Admiration. Be
pleased therefore to attend: In the Bull of his Canonization, the Pope
affirms, That from the Time of his Conversion, nothing proceeded from him,
which can be accounted a Mortal Sin. But St. Ignatius committed the Sin of
Despair in the most aggravating Circumstances, sometime after his Conversion:
Ergo, The Pope was deceived, and St. Ignatius, instead of a Throne among the
Saints, deserves a Place among the Sinners. Here are Two Charges; but GOD send
they fall not on the Head of the Accuser. I deny then, Sir, the Minor, viz.
That St. Ignatius was guilty of Despair. But let me desire you, not to run to
Bouhours to make your Charge good; for, on my Word, you will betray your
Blindness, as well as the Cause you have in Hand.

The Gentleman, after so many unlucky Chances by Quotations, will try another
Hit for it: He tells us then out of Bouhours; That he (Ignatius) falls into a
dark Melancholy; and being one Day in his Cell, he had the thought of throwing
himself out of the Window, to end his Misery. Here is, indeed, a shrewd
Temptation; but yet no shadow of Sin. All the World knows well, that it is not
in the Power of any Man breathing, to bar out of his Imagination, Criminal
Suggestions: No, no; they lie within the reach of Satan, who can imprint in
them the Pictures of the most monstrous Crimes; and, oftentimes, the best Men
are assaulted with the worst Thoughts. A bare Suggestion is no Fault; it is a
voluntary embracing of it, derives all its Malice into the Action. Show me
then, out of Bouhours, that St. Ignatius deliberately yielded to the
Temptation, and I will cast aside all further Dispute. But Heaven (says he) by
Force restrained him, against his Will. Ay, here is Despair with a Vengeance,
indeed! Does Bouhours affirm this? Not one word of it, upon my Credit. Pray,
Reader, condescend so far to Curiosity, as to turn to Lib. 2. page 29. and you
will find Boubours of a quite contrary Opinion; But he was withheld from
yielding to this Motion of Despair, by the same Hand which struck him: Thus he.
Which Words, taken in the most natural Sense imaginable, import only this, That
St. Ignatius was assailed with the Temptation of Despair; but, by the Helping
Grace of GOD, he most happily triumphed over the Enemy. And now, Reader, Shall
such an Impudence go unpunished? No, no; if a Searing Iron has not past over
his Conscience, if every Spark of Christianity is not stifled; I am sure, he
has felt the Bitings of a knawing Conscience; and GOD send the Torment already
began Here, may not continue Hereafter; where it is like to he without Redress,
because without End. I will appeal to any sober Man, Whether this Gentleman
has not drawn up an undeniable Demonstration, both of his own Forgery, and
Despair? I say, Despair, and that in the most aggravating Circumstances;
because nothing beside the utmost Despair of making his Indictment good, could
ever throw a Man into such an Extremity, as to oblige him to run barefaced
into a Guilt of the highest Nature, to fasten a Crime on another. Yet the
Gentleman may, in some sort, be excused; it is the Epidemical Disease of the
Climate. His Church sprung from the Itch of Liberty, was first weaned with
Forgery, and stands yet on the same Crutches: And this is so black a Patch in
the Face of the Church of England, that the Guardians not being able to wash it
off, have thought fit to persuade the World, that the Papists are guilty of the
same Defect. But the Misery is, the Blur is so minute in us, that none can see
it, but the Ministerial Guides; so that Others, who believe it, must pin their
Faith on the Reverend Sleeves of their Divines Canonical Habit.

The Gentleman is now piping-hot against the Pope: The former Crime of Despair,
was mentioned to convince the World, that his Holiness took ill Informations of
St. Ignatius's Sanctity; Ex abundanti, he comes out with a Second: However, if
it be a Venial Sin for a Man to sacrifice his Life to his Folly; it is no less
than a Mortal One, deliberately to commit an Action, which he is persuaded in
his own Conscience to be unlawful. Ignatius, in his Voyage to Jerusalem,
thought it utterly unlawful, and contrary to Evangelical Poverty, to carry any
Provisions with him; yet being resolved by his Confessor to the contrary, he
boldly did that out of Obedience, which he durst not do of himself. By this
Passage he pretends to demonstrate St. Ignatius guilty of a Mortal Sin; but
after having sifted it from top to bottom, I protest I cannot find the very
Shadow of a Venial One. Let us put to the Test each Proposition: It is no less
than a Mortal Sin, deliberately to commit an Action, which he is persuaded in
his own Conscience to be unlawful. Certainly, Sir, your Closet turned round,
when you Penned this Proposition. I suppose, you are persuaded in your
Conscience, the least Untruth to be unlawful; and yet I should not be so
severe, as to judge every slight Untruth to amount to a Mortal Sin: To steal a
Penny is an unlawful Action; and yet I dare avouch, that whosoever taxes such a
petty Theft with a Mortal Sin, stands accountable to GOD of a Mortal One
himself: And when it shall please you to call for my Reason, you shall not fail
to have it. Let us go on: Ignatius, in his Voyage to Jerusalem, thought it
utterly unlawful, and contrary to Evangelical Poverty, to carry any Provisions
with him. Sir, You are so innur'd to false Quotations, that you cannot forbear.
It Is utterly false, that St. Ignatius thought it utterly unlawful to carry any
Provisions along with him: For Bouhours only tells us, He was afraid, he should
deviate from Evangelical Poverty, in carrying any thing along with him. So that
his Doubt was not of the Lawfulness of the Action; but, whether it were not a
greater Perfection, to embarque himself unprovided? But, suppose his own
Judgment told him, It was unlawful; yet his Confessor brought so weighty
Reasons against what he objected, that at last he concluded his Confessor was
in the Right, and Himself in the Wrong; and so accordingly he followed his
Advice. Where is the Sin in all this Proceeding? Where is the Renouncing the
Liberty of his Will, and Use of his Reason? Do Men fling up their Reason, I
beseech you, Sir, when they leave a weak Motive, to stick to a stronger? At
this rate we must conclude, That Fools run loose in the World, and that all the
Wise Men of the Nation are confined to Bedlam. Indeed, I am not so great an
Admirer of Blind Obedience, as to judge it a Virtue in all Circumstances. Men
may command Things contrary to the Law of GOD; and in this Case the Commander
and the Obeyer are equally guilty. Such a Case may be instanced in the
Transactions of the last Week: Thousands of well-meaning Men thought nothing so
reasonable, as to Read his Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in
the Churches: But then their Reverend Confessors were of another Opinion; and
so the poor Penitents yielded Blind Obedience to their Directors, although
Obedience to the best of Princes obliged them to a contrary Procedure. Here
was, I grant, a Renouncing of the Liberty of Free Will, and Use of Reason, to
the purpose; and therefore, according to your Logic, a Sin of the deepest dye
both against GOD, and the King. But prompt Obedience to a Faction, passes in
Protestant Casuists, for Virtue: Yet when a Popish Saint lays aside his private
Judgment upon good and rational Motives, to follow the Sentiment of his
Confessor, no less than a Capital Crime is presently clapped on his Shoulders.

The Gentleman's Gall is still boiling against the Pope, and nothing can quench
it, I see, but another Push for it against both the Pope, and St. Ignatius; for
you must know, he frets at the One for being a Saint, and at the Other for
Canonizing him. But what (cries he, in a pleasant Humor) if after all, Ignatius
should be found an Heretic? (Ay marry, Sir, This is a necking Blow.) He would
ill deserve the Dignity of a Saint. (Questionless, you are in the right.) And
at the next Reformation of the Calendar, might be perhaps expunged out of it.
p. 112. You might expunge your Perhaps, and assert it confidently. Nay, I
question not, but all Catholics would thank you for your Service, could you
unmask such a Cheat; for they are well-meaning Men, and are as loath to be
imposed on as their Neighbors. But because I know, (if a bare Assertion be
sufficient) nothing is so surprising, which you cannot prove ad evidentiam, I
beg a short Authentic Reason on Record; It will relish well: He Believed
Scripture to be the only Rule of Faith, Ibid. I deny it: But go on. He said,
That if the Articles of Faith had never been Recorded in the Scripture, (or, as
another Author expresses it) Although no Monuments or Testimonies of the
Christian Religion had remained, he should still have believed them, etc. Which
manifestly supposes him to have believed, that the Knowledge of the Christian
Religion must necessarily be received either from the Scripture, or from
Extraordinary Illumination; and that there is no Medium, which might serve the
Ends of a Rule of Faith. What? no Medium? Look back to the 105th. Page, and
there you will see your self of another Opinion; for, Do you not express your
self, in as intelligible Terms as possibly can be, That he so much doted on
Blind Obedience, that if he adhered to his own Principles, he must have
renounced Christianity, and even Natural Religion, if his Confessor had
commanded him: And, That he proposed this as a first Principle to all, That
true Christians ought to submit themselves to the Decision of the Church, with
the Simplicity of an Infant. Methinks, this is a Medium between Scripture
alone, and Extraordinary Illumination: Had I been to have drawn up this
Indictment of Heresy, my utmost Care should have been to have stifled this.
But you never Look before you Leap, and that makes you so often Fall. Your
Invective against Blind Obedience, jumped handsomely into Page 105. and in Page
112. you sell connaturally into Heresy; and so down they went, though you
knew, they would never be kept from Clashing on the same Paper. But let us wink
at this trifling Mistake; and grant what you affirm, That St. Ignatius did say,
That if the Articles of Faith had never been Recorded in Scripture, etc. he
would firmly have embraced them all; Does it follow, That he held Scripture
alone, or Illumination, to be the Rules of Faith? By no means. He was of
Opinion, it is true, That an Extraordinary Rule might be an Extraordinary
Illumination; and that the Ordinary One is Scripture interpreted by the Church:
So that the Sense of his Words, is this; Although all Scripture, and the Church
its Interpreter, had perished, GOD had given him, by an Extraordinary
Illumination, such a clear Knowledge of the Mysteries of our Religion, that he
would have believed them.

Here, you see, the Gentleman has not been sparing of Dirt; but he grossly
missed his Aim: for I am thoroughly convinced, a moderate Eye will easily
discover, that the greatest Part sticks closest to the Asperser: Yet Passion
will set his Pen afloat, in spite of Fate. Indeed, he is come to an End of his
Accusation, and to say something, runs in a Circle, by making a Recapitulation.
If it be proved, That in his Lifetime he was esteemed an Enthusiast, an
Impostor, and an Heretic, by many sober, indifferent, and learned Men of the
Church of Rome; it will be no small Confirmation of the Truth of whatsoever I
have hitherto observed. Yes, if their Surmizes were sounded on Reason;
otherwise by no means: For, in this Case, I am no greater a Friend to
Infallibility, than your Self. I grant you, Catholics, in their Estimates, may
be mistaken, as well as Protestants, and equally lie open to Prejudices. At
Alcala he was suspected by some of Sorcery. Why? The Gentleman begs your Pardon
there; he is not such a Fool, as to tell the Reason: No, that would wipe off
the Aspersion. The Truth of the Business is: St. Ignatius reclaimed, from his
sinful Courses, a Person of the first Rank; and presently the Wise Populace
concluded, nothing but the Power of the Devil could draw such a noted Debauchee
to GOD. A pretty Accusation, you see; and as well grounded, as that against our
Savior; In Beelzebub Principe Daemoniorum ejicis Demonia; You cast out Devils
in Virtue of Beelzebub the Chief of the Devils. By others of Heresy, and put
in the Inquisition for a Visionary. It Is true; but, How came he of? After an
Exact Enquiry into the Manners and Doctrine of Ignatius, not finding any thing
that might render him suspected, and judging it not expedient to make him
appear before Them; They were contented to refer the Matter to John Roderiguez
Grand Vicar of Alcala; who told Ignatius, That the Juridical Information which
had been made, was much in his Favor; and, That he might continue his
Functions, for the Service of his Neighbor. So Bouhours, without the least
mention of any such Clause, touching Extravagant Methods of Religion. Soon
after he is clapped into the Inquisition a Second Time, for instilling foolish
Principles into his Hearers. But, Was he not, by public Sentence, freed from
the Imputation? I thought, it was not a Crime to be Accused, but to be Guilty;
yet You confound both: Though, at this rate, our Savior's Reputation suffers,
who was Indicted of as heavy Crimes as ever Ignatius was.

When he was removed to Salamanca, both Him and his Disciples were put in
Chains by the Inquisition there, as Heretics and Seditious Persons; and not
Absolved, but upon condition of Preaching no more. Certainly, Sir, You imagine
your self in Lucian's Island of Dreams; or that all the World is asleep, beside
your self; or so enamored with your great Abilities and Integrity, as to
embrace every Falsity dropped from your Pen, as Eternal Verities. I grant, he was
clapped in Prison; and You, that he was Absolved: Hear the Sentence: After Two
and Twenty Days of Imprisonment, the Master and his Disciples were cited before
the Judges, to hear their Sentences read; by which they were declared to be
good Men, and their Doctrine to be sound. (What could Innocence desire more?)
They are further permitted to speak of Heavenly Things, and to instruct the
People as much as they please. With what Face, then, dare you averr, (and then
cite Bouhours to second your Imposture,) That he was Acquitted, upon Condition
of Preaching no more? A Man would imagine, you cited Authors only to corrupt
them, or to render your Forgeries more palpable.

Soon after his Arrival at Paris, he is accused to the Inquisitors, for
seducing young Scholars; but, by the Intercession of Friends, dismissed. Good
Sir, and was not the same laid at our Savior's Door? Were not the Apostles
hurried before Tribunals on the same Account? They were all styled Seducers,
for dissuading People from being seduced by the charming Flatterings of the
World: And the Crime of St. Ignatius was of the same Nature. This the
Inquisitor was convinced of; and therefore Acquitted the Accused, not by the
Intercession of Friends, as you were pleased to insinuate, but out of a Motive
of Justice.

So that, in Conclusion, all these Accusations, which you allege as
corroborating Proofs, do not add one Grain to the Weight of your Arguments:
Nay, they rather Extenuate them; though they add a notable Increase to your
Guilt, and demonstrate to the World, at one view, both the Excess of your
Folly, and the Hainousness of your Forgeries.

From this universal Contempt of Ignatius in his Lifetime, etc. it may be
farther evinced, That all the Reports of his Miracles are absolutely false. May
it so? Why, Sir? At this rate our Blessed LORD was the greatest Impostor, that
ever breathed: For, I am sure, neither St. Ignatius, nor any other Man since
the World stood, lay under a greater Contempt, than He. Nay, Jeremy, at this
wild rate of Arguing, was a petty Cheat; since, I am sure, He felt as heavy
Effects of his Country-Men's (I will not say, Contempt, but) Fury, as St.
Ignatius did of Christians.

But Sir, If your Antecedent be denied, What will become of your Consequence,
and all your Erroneous Deductions? Yet so it is. Venture once more on Bouhours,
and you will find, that the greatest Men living, had a Tenderness for his
Person, and stood in Admiration of his Prudence. And if he were condemned,
'twas only by Those who could not be sufficiently blamed themselves. Wherefore
this Argument not being able to concur the least to your Design, I will examine
your General Considerations.

First, To what purpose should GOD work so many Miracles in the midst of
Christian Countries, many Ages after the Faith had been fully settled in them?

Answ. Might not the refractory Jews have objected the same, against the
Mission of Jeremy? Might not the Gentleman, by the same Rule, stop St. Austin's
Mouth, when he recounts several Miracles, on his own Knowledge? The Christian
Religion was then fully settled. So that, if you will inform me, to what
purpose GOD did work Miracles in those Christian Countries, I will requite your
Civility, by returning you a Reason, why GOD did it in These.

Secondly, Were those Countries devoid of True Religion?

Answ. By no means. But, what then? show me any Reason, or Authority, why GOD's
Power is so chained up, that it cannot Act, but according to the Rules
prescribed by ordinary Providence, in a Christian Nation?

Thirdly, Was the Church of Rome, at that Time, grievously corrupted with
Errors and Superstitions? (No, Sir: What will you infer?) It remains therefore,
that GOD should perform all these Miracles, merely in Testimony of the
Extraordinary Sanctity of Ignatius, to manifest his Favor to him, and procure
to him Honor and Esteem among all Christians.

Answ. You are quite out of the way, and wholly mistaken in your Arithmetic:
GOD might have had many Motives, which you have passed by, All worthy of Him;
and not at all contrary to his Excellency, or the Imperfection of our Nature.
For you may remember, that although even Then the Roman Faith was as Pure, as
when it deserved so large an Encomium from the Mouth of the Apostle, who was
little versed in the Science of Flattery: Yet the New-inspir'd Prophets of
Germany, called it in Question. These Men, as Spiritual as the basest
Sensuality could render them, resolved to make room for their Lusts, by rending
themselves from her Jurisdiction, who opposed them; and so pretended to purify
her Faith, by the most enormous Crime, Rebellious Apostasy. Novelty and Liberty
were fair Baits for a Populace to swallow; and then fine Promises of a Paradise
Hereafter, and of a Mahometical Heaven Here, were too strong Temptations for a
sensual German to overcome. Our English Laity, you know, felt the Comfort of
Abbey-Lands, and the Clergy of fair Wives: So that the most Considerable Part
of the Northern Provinces, set up a Religion of their own Coining; or, to speak
more properly, every one preached his own Dreams for Divine Revelations. Now,
in such a distracted Posture of the Church, Was it a proceeding unworthy of
GOD, to point out his True Church by Miracles, and by the Sanctity of Those,
who were Members of it. This was the Method GOD took to Establish Christianity;
and to reduce the Rebellious Jews from their Apostasy. And if it was not then a
Proceeding unworthy of GOD to condescend so low, as to have Recourse to his
Omnipotence, for the reclaiming of Sinners; I do not conceive, why it should be
in Ignatius's Time, when the same Cause was too too visible. Again, Why could
not GOD work Miracles for the Comfort, as well as Encouragement, of the
Faithful? I see no Inconvience, unless it were, that such a Kindness would make
the Reformers Consciences fly too often in their Faces, for running from that
Church, whose Doctrine and Piety GOD so highly attested.

Now the Gentleman comes out with a shrewd Objection against all Miracles:
(Have at the Jesuits!) The Temptation of lying and feigning Miracles, for the
Reputation of an Order, is in that Church for more persuasive, than the
Evidence of Reason. This is a Compliment borrowed from the worthy Dean of St.
Paul's: But I challenge Him, and You, to produce one Jesuit, or Catholic
Divine, who ever taught it lawful to lie for the Honor of their Order, or on
any Account whatever. It Is a Doctrine peculiar to the Leaders of the Church of
England. A Catalogue of Lies, in a Protestant Pamphlet, is no less connatural,
than a List of wonderful Cures to a Mountebank. Look back on the Blessed Times
of Titus Oats; peruse those Satyrs vented from the Pulpits, as Divine Oracles;
and then tell me, Whether 'twas possible to crowd more Lies in a Romantic
Fable, than the furious Divines of the Zealous Church of England, marshalled in
their Sermons against the Papists. They blew the Fire to such an Extremity,
that it almost reached their own Vicariges; and the Desire to rout out the
Papists, by a Just Judgment of GOD, flung them within an Inch of their own
Ruin. The Justice of the Nation, deluded by Fabulous Narratives, and Malicious
Sermons, in Process of Time, found out its Error, and made a Satisfaction no
less Authentic, than the Fault. But the Pulpit-Oats's could not stoop so low,
as to acknowledge their Crime; which makes me think, they thought it none, to
Lie and Calumniate for the Honor of their Church, and the utter Disparagement
of Ours. And, Reader, to speak my Mind freely, I am of Opinion, That the
Consult of Divines in Dr. Tenison's Library, has pitched upon the Method of
Slandering, as the best Preservative against Popery; for had it not been a
Resolve of a whole Cabal, it is hard to determine, how all the Protestant
Scriblers should unanimously stumple on the same Expedient.

Out of the former Antecedent, my Author draws this Consequence: When therefore
Ignatius was to be promoted to the Dignity of a Saint, his Disciples set their
Inventions on the Rack, to raise a Fund of Miracles. What ever the Disciples of
Ignatius did, I am sure you have set your Brains on the Rack, and Conscience to
boot, to find some plausible Grounds for denying them: But all will not do your
Work. You tell us, indeed, They were Feigned without ground: This is a
groundless Assertion, and of no Force with me, till you propose some good
Authority, besides your Own. I grant indeed, that Miracles may be easily
obtruded upon the World, after a long distance of Time; and that nothing less
than a strict Examination, can defeat the Hopes of Impostors. But I also
contend, that all the Miracles contained in the Bull of his Canonization, have
undergone this Test to the utmost Rigor: And therefore I am obliged, in
reason, rather to conclude, That you are deceived, who Deny Them; than those
Judicious Persons, who Approved Them.

But here the Gentleman offers a very material Proof, to the falsity of the
Miracles ascribed to St. Ignatius: Ribadeneira, who was his familiar Companion,
in the Year 1572 first published his Life, and made along Apology in it, in
defense of Ignatius; maintaining. That it was no way derogatory to his
Sanctity, that he had performed no Miracles. Afterward, in the Year 1610.
publishing a Second Edition of his Life, he was so far enlightened in this
Matter, that he gives us a long Catalogue of the Miracles of Ignatius; but
withal confesses, That the Reason why he had not inserted them in the First
Edition, was, Because they were not sufficiently certain and uncontested.
Because I have not the First Edition by me, I will acquiesce to what the
Gentleman says: But, What then? Is it impossible, that Matters of Fact, which
for want of Examination, were doubtful in the Year 1572. upon an exact Trial
afterward, should be found true in 1610? According to this Rule, a great part
of your Canonical Scripture might be placed among the Apocrypha: For you must
grant me, that most, if not every Book of the New Testament was called in
question, immediately after the Decease of the Apostles, and some not received
till many Centuries after. Now, might not a Jew take up your Argument, and
oppose it to the Scripture, just as you oppose it to Miracles? It cannot be
imagined, how the genuine Writings of the Apostles, who died in the First
Century, should be unknown, or at least uncertain, when the Memory of them were
yet fresh; and, after above an Hundred Years, when the greatest Part of the
Witnesses must be supposed to have been dead, should be advanced to undoubted
Certainty. Wind your self out of this Labyrinth, and I shall easily dis-engage
my self from That you imagine to have cast me in.

I cannot pass on, without one small Reflection on our Author's way of Arguing:
First, He tells us, That Papists esteem it a Virtue, to lie for the Credit of
an Order. Secondly, He advances a Step forward, and tells us, He has just
Reason to suspect, that they have put that Principle in practice, by forging
the greatest Part of the Miracles (ascribed to St. Ignatius) after his Death.
This he proves, because Ribadeneira omitted to recount, for want of sufficient
Testimony, those Miracles in his First Edition, which he sets down in his
Second; Item, Because Masseius leaves out many other wonderful Actions, for
that they are not sufficiently certain. Now, for my part, I should draw a quite
contrary Conclusion, from the Cautiousness of these Two Writers, viz. That they
did not intend, for the Honor of their Founder, to impose on the Readers; nor
to augment their own Sins, by increasing St. Ignatius's Miracles. For, let me
tell you, People of so loose Principles, as the Jesuits pass for in your
Judgment, would never have minced the matter; especially when a thousand
Miracles would have much enhanc'd the Glory of their Saint, and not added one
Grain to their Labor.

Dear Sir, I should be glad, did you make use of the Cautiousness of the Two
forementioned Writers; and lay no Crimes on Papists and Jesuits, but those
which were sufficiently certain and uncontested. Your Auditors would leave
their Pews more calmly, and feel more Charity in their Breasts at the End of
the Sermon, and less Animosity against their Fellow Subjects. But a Calm and
Serene Season, is bad Weather for the Ministry to Fish in. They delight in
Storms and Tempests, merely out of Hopes, that both will fall heavy on the
Dissenters. These Holy Conjurers raise the Wind in the Pulpits, which soon
breaks out of the Church-Door, and spreads its self through the whole Town in a
Trice. All raise this Devil of Discord the same way: And, by good Fortune, no
Text is so remote, which does not patly suit with the Incantation. A good
Invective against Popery, larded with Two or Three pretty Stories, either
forged by the Doctor, or scrap'd-up on an Hearsay, are efficacious Engines to
work the Populace out of their Wits, and set them all a-gog against Popery. For
the Grave Divines require Belief to the greatest Crimes against Papists, on the
slightest Grounds; and yet forbid all Assent to Popish Miracles, though backed
with the greatest Authority.

As for Example: In the Art of Missionaries Discovered, the Author presents his
Reader with one Father Leech; who told Mr. Gee, That if any but hear Mass, and
after hearing be sprinkled with Holy Water, and kiss the Priest's Garment, he
could not commit that Day any Mortal Sin. Here is a pretty Story, you see,
affirmed by Mr. Gee; yet it must be believed, upon his Infallible Authority:
Although, in my Conscience, I think it ten times more improbable, That a
Catholic Priest, in his Wits, should vent a Doctrine so notoriously false,
than that the Saints of our Church should, by GOD's Assistance, work Miracles.

Again: The Jesuits give their General an Account of all Occurrences of State,
in those Provinces and Kingdoms, whereof they are the Respective Assistants: To
which End they have Correspondents in the Principal Cities of all Kingdoms; who
sending all their Informations to the General, they balance the Interests of
every Prince; and then resolve, That the Affairs of such a Prince shall be
promoted, the Design of Another opposed, etc. Now, that Jesuits should have
Kingdoms thus in a String, is no less incredible in it self, than that Ignatius
should work strange Cures; and yet That must be swallowed down by the greedy
Reader, and This rejected; although the Latter be attested by Credible
Witnesses, and the Former rely on the Authority of a Villain; who Composed a
Book against the Jesuits, of the same Stamp with the Salamanca-Narrative.

Thirdly, In the Preface after a late Challenge to Mr. Poulton, (as full of
Rhodomontado's, as the Sultan of Constantinople sent the Emperor; not doubting
but such blustering Language would strike Mr. Poulton dumb:) I do not, says the
Author, much expect an Answer to this Challenge; for those Men who could lie
near Twenty Years under such a Charge, as Dr. Du Moulin laid against Them; and
dared Them to call him to an Account for the Murder of King Charles the First,
without ever venturing to clear Themselves, may easily bear This. Here the
Mobile is desired to believe as firmly as any Part of the Bible, That the
Jesuits Murdered the King; That Cromwell was a rank Jesuit, and the Parliament
a Pack of the same Society. Now, I am of Opinion, That any Honest Man, before
he can swallow down this Article, must renounce all Sense, as much as any
Papist does, to believe Transubstantiation: Yet down it must, under Pain (at
least) of passing for a Papist in Masquerade. Read Bouhours from one End to the
other, and then tell me, Whether any Miracles related of St. Ignatius, be not
twenty Degrees more Credible? And therefore, if this Calumny must gain Credit,
Why They must deserve none? For my part, if we may guess at the Future by the
Past, Ten Years will turn the Convocation of Lambeth, into a
White-Horse-Consultation; and those Reverend Fathers of the Church of England,
who were so Zealous, as to tell His Majesty, They thought His Proceeding to be
Illegal, will be Metamorphos'd into Priests and Jesuits. Such a Change is
easily wrought: One Minister, with an Ounce of Brass on his Face, and a
well-hung Tongue in his Mouth, will carry the Metamorphose a great way; and
then, One I was told so, concludes the Business.

Fourthly, He tells his Readers, (p. 42.) That besides Universities and
Divines, who teach the Lawfulness of Calumnies, and false Reports, we find it,
among other Rules of the Jesuits, That they should be sure, to put this
Doctrine in Practice, even against those of their own Communion, the Ancient
Orders of the Roman Church: The Rule is, Let their Faults be diligently noted,
and they represented as dangerous to the Public Peace. This is told us by a
Gentleman, who challenges all the World to show, in his whole Book, one false
Quotation: Yet I have read the Jesuits Rules more than once, from one End to
the other; and protest before GOD and Man, there is not to be found one Tittle
of this. So that, let the Gentleman make Ten Thousand Protestations of his
Sincerity more than he has, I will rather believe St. Ignatius wrought
Miracles, than that This is true. Indeed, he cites Instructio Secret. etc. but
they are no more our Rules, than His. They were Composed by a Villain, who was
resolved to make Jesuits appear as black as Himself, and are espoused by a Man
of the same Temper. If they really were found in a College, as is pretended,
make it out, and that They are our Rules: If not, under favor, you are guilty
of those very Crimes you ascribe to the Jesuits: For it is, in my Opinion, no
less a Crime to fling a Slander, made by Another, on our Neighbor, than to
forge One.

Fifthly, To demonstrate the Slandering Vein of Papists, he brings (p. 61.) a
fresh and very material Instance; viz. No longer since than the Winter 1685. a
Report went current through all the Countries in England, where there are many
Romanists, That Dr. Burnet was at Rome become a Papist; and, That great
Preferments were bestowed upon him. It Is a Calumny, without doubt, not to be
born, that a Person so Famous for Loyalty, as that Reverend Divine, should be
snatched, against his Will, from that Church, which had taught him Obedience to
Higher Powers in so Superlative a manner, that they thought it convenient to
recompense it with Outlawry. Wherefore, Sir, if Catholics were so Credulous,
on the Receipt of Foreign Letters, as to believe it, I make an Apology for
their Mistake; although I am apter to believe, that when that Gentleman began
to kick against the Government, and to show some Ferguson-Tricks, the
ProtestantGentry of those Counties you mention, thought it convenient to heave
him out of Their Communion into Ours; to the end, that the next Age might
bind-up his Life among Those of the Popish Rebels. My Conjecture stands on
better ground than Yours, or than any of your Friends Exceptions against the
Miracles of St. Ignatius. Seeing now we are fallen on the Topic of
Tale-telling, I cannot omit to put my Story in among the rest, that the World
may see, how easily Protestants slip into the Vice of Credulity, as well as
Obstinacy, when the Fancy takes them: When the Happy News of Her Majesty's
being with Child was spread abroad, and all Loyal Subjects testified their
Interior Joy by outward Acclamations; some incredulous Persons, not convinced
by the Decree of the Privy Council for a Thanksgiving-Day, blazed abroad, That
it was a Sham: And yet this was so prevalent with some, that they would not
discredit it, till Her Majesty Lay-in. To these People it is a Madness to
obtrude Miracles; for, What Miracle of CHRIST can be better attested, than Her
Majesty's being with Child? Yet at the same time, as if they had made a Vow,
never to act like Men, they would scarce persuade themselves, the
Protestant-Duke was Dead. Which gave occasion for these Two Verses: In the
Whigg's Creed, Two Articles are read,
The Queen is not with Child, nor Monmouth Dead.


Nay, one Line from a Pulpit would have so far prevailed on them, as to have
obliged many to take Horse, to meet his Grace at Taunton.

Sixthly, He desires the Reader (p. 21.) to believe, that he has not imitated
the Scavenger, in stopping no where, but at a Dunghill: For I have (says he)
quoted none but allowed and approved Authors, etc. And as for what I have cited
out of Protestant Books, let them invalidate their Testimony, if they can: I
will engage for the Truth of my Quotations; and know of no Objections against
any Author I have cited, which are of any Force.

You are, Sir, either in some Ecstatick Transport, or else endowed with that
great Virtue, Ignorance, beyond Expression; which your Friend so highly
commends in St. Ignatius. Were not the Provincial Letters burnt by the public
Hangman in France? Did not La Pratique Morale run the same Fate in the Year
1669? And is not this as real and material an Objection against the Validity
and Sufficiency of those Libels, as Mr. Oats's yearly Pillory, against the
Authority of His, and his Brethrens Narratives.

When you propose in your Second Part, (as you promise) as convincing Reasons
against Miracles, as I have done against the Credit of these Two Authors, I
will come over to You.

Again: Your Arcana Societatis Jesu, Instructiones Secretae, are Chips of the
same Block; that is, Pieces forged with Impudence, and cited with a daring
Confidence: In a word, They are of as great Credit and Reputation, as Those who
live by the Basket, and receive Knighthood from the Pillory.

Sir, Had it been my Fortune to have been in London, some Years ago, I would
not have stood in your Way: I see, by the Authority you give Varlets in Print,
how you esteemed them in Westminster Hall and Old Bailey. Nay, I fear, that had
the Balance stood equal, you might have dropped in a single Oath, to raise a
Jesuite's Neck into an Halter.

Would Time permit me, I could give as good an Account of some others of your
Authorities, as I have of These, and by Consequence of your Book; in which I
find a Thousand more Impostures, than, I am sure, can be found in Saint
Ignatius's Life.

Is not this Proceeding the Effect of a Frenzy, past the Virtue of Heblebore?
Shall the professed Enemies of our Religion, and Order, by the Omnipotent Power
of a Defaming Faction, be turned into Vnbyass'd Persons, Substantial Witnesses,
etc! And shall their bare Words, without any Shadow of Proof, serve for
Evidence against Us, of all those Calumnies, which took their Being from Malice
and Prejudice; and have no Reality, but in the Imagination of Those, whom
confident Gown-Men maliciously impose on. But when we recount any thing, in
Confirmation of our Church, although backed with irrefragable Witnesses,
presently it must be slighted; as if all the Moral Honesty in the World was
confined to the narrow Compass of this Island; or, as if the Church of England
had engrossed all Truth to its self.

And, now, it is high time to leave my Author, and Reader too: Only, I must
desire the Latter to turn to E. W. Printed at Antwerp in the Year 1676. and to
the Second Letter by A. B. in the Year 1672. In the First you will find Dr.
Stillingfleet's Exceptions against Miracles; in the Second, against St.
Ignatius, and the Jesuits, fully Answered: For, I conceive, the Answer to the
Dean, is a full Reply to my Author; he having nothing material, but an
higher-flown Impudence, which is not borrowed from the Doctor.

And now, Dear Author, before we part, I admonish you friendly, to change your
Method, if you intend to advance your Church. A Burlesque is only to convince
Fools; Wise Men are led by Reason; of which you have been over-sparing in your
Book: So that, if you intend to make any Progress, increase This, and diminish
That. And if you be over-confident, that you have so much solid Reason, as to
convince any one of the Truth of your Religion, and the Corruption of Ours, be
pleased to bring your Reason to the Test. I promise you here, on the Word of a
Gentleman, That I will Meet you Where, and with Whom you please: But it shall
be upon this Condition, That you promise to treat me more civilly, than the
Divines of St. Martins, did some time ago, a Priest, who was called to a Sick
Person. I dare not venture to engage with Divines, who have for Seconds a
Populace; for, who knows, but They may strengthen the Doctor's Arguments with
Blows; and foul their Hands to bespatter Me, as their Leaders have the Press,
to Asperse my Religion. Bring then with You such a Company, as has heard of
such a Thing as Civility, and can distinguish solid Reason from loud Clamours,
concluding Syllogisms from patch'd-up Sophisms. On these Conditions, I pass my
Word for my Appearance. And that You may not miss of my Lodgings, your Letter
shall find Me at the Schools in the Savoy: Where I am,

SIR, YOURS, William Darrel.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. Line 11. for Merirs read Merits. p. 3. l. 16. for Tittle read Title.
p. 7. l. 32. for this read things. p. 22. l. 8. for Lib. 2. read Lib. 1. p. 31.
l. 25. for stumple read stumble. p. 39. l. 10. for by A. B. read so A. B.


