CHRISTIAN'S COMPASS: OR, The Mariner's COMPANION.

BEING A Brief COMPENDIUM of the Principles of Religion, in the things which
are necessary to be known and practiced by all who profess the Name of CHRIST.

Long since prepared, and now published by John Durant Preacher of the Gospel
(sometimes in the Navy, and now) at Christ's Church CANTERBVRY.

PSALM. 77.19. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known

London, Printed by T. L. for the Author. MDCLVIII.

To every Christian (especially every seaman) The Author wishes a good
Voyage, and as an help therein humbly presents them with this Card or Compass.
Dear souls,
THere are many years past since these meditations were first conceived; and
albeit I have once and again had thoughts of publishing them, yet still I have
been diverted from these thoughts until now. And now they come abroad almost in
the very same dress in which they were at first. The notions are the very same,
and the matter throughout is not any thing altered, only I have expunged and
blotted out some more pedantick phrases which some of the heads were expressed
in (according to my then juvenile fancy:) And I account the blo^ting out of
them no blot to the book: Nor the confession thereof any shame to my self.
Indeed the enticing words of man's wisdom would have been a great blemish to
the truths of Christ, which are ever most powerful and glorious, when most
plainly held forth.

The design was to spiritualize the observations of a Sea-voyage unto some
soul-advantage: and my thoughts were to have held forth the principal (if not
the whole) result of my meditations to the Seamen in that ship I was (in the
year 1642) as a farewell to them. But our suddame parting after we came to an
ancho^ in the Thames, prevented it. Hereupon I vesolved some time or other to
print it. For I confess I was loath to conceal the things which so well
pleased me then, and indeed do yet (if I may with humility say any thing of my
own pleases me) hoping they may please and profit some others as well as my
self.

And (Reader) whoever thou art, I persuade my self that thy pains in the
perusal of this will be profitable, in case thou observe those directions.

1. Read with a sober mind. Do not run from any head as soon as thou have read
it. The things are delivered briefly, yet comprehensively. A little meditation
and serious consideration, will make ever) page swell into, yea and exceed a-
sheet. All who know what belongs to handling Divinity-heads, know that this
small Manual might have made a large volume. But the truth is, I did
industriously shorten and contract it, that I might put thee (Reader) upon an
industrious and diligent enlargement by meditation and consideration.

2. Commit the whole (if, and as much as it may be) unto memory. That thou
mayost, if the matter be reduced in a Catechatical way to questions and
answers; as readily answer unto, and tell any head in this spiritual Compass,
as our Mariners can their Sea-compass. For instance, Suppose one asks you in
your heads of knowledge, What is your first point? Answer, It is God who stands
for North. And suppose it be asked in your heads of practice, What is the first
point of the Compass there? Answer, Never stir, or steer in any course but by
light from God. So of the rest. That is my second direction. Labor to be as
ready in saying this, as our cabin-boys are brought to be ready in their
compass.

3. Endeavor to improve this by imitations; especially in the last (...) of
meditations. Men at Sea make many observations (and so may men at land
likewise) which if they were but so wise and holy as to improve unto some
divine meditations, might be very useful for practical and pious application in
sundry spiritual cases.

These directions I commend to every one, into whose hand providence shall put
this book. But to such as are Mariners I have two other words to add, and let
me beseech them to mind and consider them.

1. The great God is arose from his place, and is now upon the waters, to do
great things by those whose cry is in the ships. Jehovah has mighty works to
be done upon the mighty waters; and seamen are to be his instruments for the
accomplishment of many glorious prophesies.

Therefore,

2. Now let every Mariner look out, and look about him. Happy are they whom God
will choose, and use at all. But more happy are they, who (as the ships of
Tarshish) shall come first, (as Isa. 60 9.) As there is glory in being in Christ
first, (unto which Paul alludes, Romans 16.7.) So there is a peculiar privilege
in being used by Christ first in any great service. Seamen therefore, now if
ever look after godliness. God has chosen the godly man for himself and
service. Wicked men whom God does use, may and shall have large rewards and
good wages, but yet they shall lose their Voyage. Even Nebuchadnezzar had his
wages for his service, (as it is Ezekiel. 29.18.) Yet alas! what became of him? O
ye gallant Mariners (who are to swim and serve in gallant ships upon a gallant
service) strive to be truly gracious, which will be your greatest gallantry and
glory now, and to eternity; without which you will either be fit for no service
(as to God) or for no reward from him (as to a spiritual account) what ever
your works or worth may be from, and as to men upon a civil score. O therefore
mind your souls, and their spiritual concernments in all your service! and
remember that certainly NOW it is high time to fly from those Sea Monsters of
Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. NOW its high time to purge your hearts
and hands, and to go from those abominations, that ye may be Vessels fitted
for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work.

But I Will speak no more unto you at present; yet I Will sight out the rest for
you in secret. Verily (ye Mariners) you have a great place in my heart. My
first public service in the Gospel of Christ, was on the Sea; I cannot choose
therefore but love and pray for Seamen. Let me beseech you therefore to accept
of this short hint in love. Now the blessed God (who glorifyes his power in
man's weakness) glorify himself by blessing this little book with the
furtherance of souls in their spiritual Sea-Voyage.

Reader, I am thine (in the service of thy soul) for Christ's sake and his
Gospels, John Durant.

The Spiritual Seaman: OR, A Manual for Mariners.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction to the Discourse, setting forth the state of a Christian in
this world, to be as of a Ship at Sea.
THE Allegory of a Ship, (as the emblem of our life) as its ancient for its
invention, so it is approved for its aptness, and generally apprehended for its
plainness: There are but few that are so slow of conceit, but can easily see,
that like as it is with a Ship (laden with some rich treasure) at Sea, in a
dark night, without Card or Compass, not knowing where the Haven lies unto
which it would go, nor how to shape or steer a course unto it; so is it with
Mankind since the fall: Our Body is our Ship, our Soul is our rich lading, (a
Pearl indeed of great price, worth more then all the merchandise of this world)
this world is the Sea, and as we come into it, naturally, we want both the
knowledge of our Haven unto which we ought to bend our course; and also the
knowledge of that by which we might be directed in it. Indeed Heaven is our
proper Haven, there where Christ now is, (even the presence of God) called
Heaven it self, Heb. 9.24. thither we ought to steer our course. And the Word
and Spirit (...) the only Rule by which we can (...) to that spiritual
knowledge where (...) we may be able to shape our course straightly and safely
thither. But alas! naturally we are blind as to both, and our being here is as
in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. All the time of our life being rather a night of
darkness than a day of light. As much therefore as it concerns the Merchant to
endeavor the safty of his Ship, so much does it concern us to endeavor the
safety of our soul; and the way of the one is a fit Emblem of the way of the
other, you know that Parable Mat. 13.35. where a Christian under the state, or
in the dispensation of the Gospel, is called or likened unto a Merchant-man;
seeking goodly (or precious) Pearl; and well he may; for in many particulars a
Christian and a Merchant are parallel; or, a man at sea, and a soul in the
world. As to illustrate this in a word.

First, Let this world be eyed as a sea, or a place of waters, indeed well it
may be, the waters being no more unstable then the world is: there are not more
changes in the Sea then are in the World, the affairs thereof rouling up and
down in as great a tossing as the waves of the sea do. Ebb and Flood are not
more certain in the Waters then they are in the World, by the flux and reflux
of all our worldly affairs; and the same brinish taste, the same salt gust is
in the things of the world, which is in the waters of the Sea. And indeed,
persons not used to the Sea are not more Sea-sick upon the water then Saints
are while in the world: Now are we mounted on high, (as to Heaven) anon we are
tumbled down (as to Hell.) Sometimes our way is smooth; at other times rough;
by which (as the passenger at Sea) we are continually distempered and have
constant cause to long to flee this Sea out of this world.

Secondly, our body may well pass for a ship, which is (in its passage upon the
waters of this world) passing away as a Ship, (so Job's phrase is:) A great
massy Hull. As liable to leaks and bruises as a ship is. And were it not for
traffique-sake for a time, a wise Christian would as little care for it, as a
Landman does for a Ship or bark.

Thirdly, therefore it is not it, viz our body, but our soul, which is our
treasure. Epietet us, and many of the more refined Heathens then saw this, (and
so spoke, when they said the Body was the Organ (or vessel) the Soul was the
man and Merchandise. The empty hull of the Ship without Merchandise, is of more
value then the body without the soul.

It Is our soul and its concernments that are our precious lading; and of these
it is alone that we are to fear shipwreck.

Fourthly, Souls have their Rocks, their Sands, their Scylla, their Carybdis,
their Syrenes, etc. endangering them in this world, as much as ships at sea;
sins, corruptions, temptations, profane companions, carnal pleasures,
earthly-mindednesse, etc. these cause many to drown themselves in perdition, as
it is 1 Timothy 6.9. Indeed it is the misery of the most, that they either are
ignorant of, or wholly negligent in the minding of these dangers: They let
their Ship run at an adventure, neither considering Sands, or Rocks, etc. But
it is their madness so to do; it ought to be our wisdom to mind our danger: And
all have reason to cry out often in this respect as David did, Save me O God
out of the waters; or as it is Isal. 69.1. For the waters come into my soul.
You see the similitude will run well upon these four feet, (and indeed many
more.) But let this suffice to hint it in the general, That all souls are
seamen; and that our way in the world is as the way of a Ship in the mighty
waters.

CHAP. II.
Spiritual Navigation pointed at, and divided according to the division of the
Body of Divinity.
SUrely since we are Seamen, it is our duty and wisdom to be skilled in the Art
of Navigation. How else shall we be able to ^^eer our course aright, to shape
our way so as to have a happy voyage.

Q. But, How shall we learn it? who shall teach it us?

A. Certainly flesh and blood cannot reveal this mystery unto us. Art may make
a Seaman, but it cannot make a Saint. One may be able to carry a Ship round
the world safely as a man, and yet not know how to steer a few Leagues in his
soul-voyage without miscarrying. Men may teach us artificial, but they cannot
as mere men acquaint us with the mystery of spiritual Navigation. Humane wisdom
may teach us to carry a Ship to the Indies, but it cannot teach us to steer our
course to the Haven of happiness. In this matter (as the wise Verulam said)
Transeundum est e navicula rationis, etc. i. e. we must leave, come out of,
yea, deny and depart from the Bark of Reason; we must lay aside (at least not
trust to) the compass of humane wisdom; And we must to the Sanctuary if ever we
will learn this myststerie. He that would steer aright to happiness, must have
Jacobs staff, Paul's compass, the spirits teaching, and that anointing which
is from above, otherwise he will sink into the deep of the bottomless pit, and
never arrive the fair haven in Emmanuels land. In a word; he must be an artist
in the mysteries of the Kingdom. He must be a Divine (for so all Saints are)
that can be Pilot to carry a ship, a soul to God. Divinity is the Art of
Soul-Navigation. That alone tells us which, and where our Haven is; that
acquaints us how to steer aright course thereunto. Now Divinity has been cut
out by the Penknife of the Schools into three parts, viz. Speculative,
Practical, (...) Affectionate. Thomas was for the first, Scotus for the second
Hales for the third. But a sound serious believer must join all together. We
must know, and do, and love. We must not divide unless we intend to be
destroyed. I shall therefore reduce my thoughts to these three heads, viz.
Knowledge, Practice, Affection, and give you short Rules (for so the Rules of
Art ought to be) in these things to make up the mystery of spiritual
soul-navigation.

CHAP. III.
Things necessary to be known by a spiritual Seaman, according to the points
of his compass.
THE first thing which God made was light. And the first piece of the new
Creation is knowledge. That therefore we may begin aright, weel begin with
this, and show what are the principal things necessary to be known by a
spiritual Seaman.

Now ere I proceed, I will premise this, That I shall make the Se^ compass as
it were the rule and pattern of my discourse (which indeed was the occasional
ground of these contemplations.) And answerable to the general points of the
compass, I shall hint such things as I conceive necessary to be known and done
by a Christian, in order to the steering rightly and safely to the blessed Port
or Haven of happiness.

Upon this account I shall lay down four heads of truth to be known, according
unto the principal points of the compass; and in allusion unto them, I shall
make God my North, Christ my East, Holiness my South, and Death my West points.
Now the reason of this my allusion is this; Jerusalem has been generally
conceived to be in the midst of the Earth, and therefore some have called it
the Navel of the World; for as the Navel is in the midst of the body, so say
they, is Jerusalem in the midst of the earth. And hence it was that (especially
in Scripture-notion and language) places have their denomination of situation
according as they lay about, or stood with reference unto Jerusalem. Eying
therefore Jerusalem as our center. I remember that on the North-side of it was
the City of the Great King; on the East the Mount of Olives, on which Christ
stood when he came at first to that City (and on which he shall stand when he
comes again, Zach. 14.4.) On the South Side was Mount Sion, called the Mountain
of holiness, Psalm. 87.1. And on the West Side was Mount Calvery, and the
valley of dead men's bones. Upon this account it is I shall make my allusion to
the North for God; to the East for Christ; to the South for holiness; and to
the West for death. Now there can be no exception against this Allegorical
speculation, as to the handling of the things alluded unto, save only the
first is not so clear, viz. that the North should be for God. It Is clear enough
to any eye, that as to the other three particulars there can be no ground to
question their parallelling. But why the North should be put (by way of
parallel) for God, may seem not so evident.

To clear that therefore, consider that of Psalm. 48 2. Beautiful for
situation; the joy of the whole Earth is Mount Sion; on the sides of the
North, the city of the great King. The meaning of which I cannot conceive as
some do, viz. that its spoke of Mount Sion, as if that were on the North-side
of Jerusalem. Our Maps and Geographers show the contrary, (Mount Sion being on
the South) but I take it thus, that on the North-side of Sion was the city of
the great King, i. e. Jerusalem, or that part which was called the City, lay
Northward of Sion, as Josephus and others attest; and so when it is said, The
joy of the whole earth is Mount Sion; on the sides of the North the city of the
great King, the meaning is clear, that the North side of Sion was the city of
the great King. Hence I conceive was that speech of the pride of Lucifer, who
when he would exalt his throne above the stars of God, adds, he would sit also
in the sides of the North ( Isa. 14.13.) i. e. on the side which was accounted
Gods; which if it should be understood of the Mount Moriah, as some do, it
still holds with our notion of the Norths being eyed as the place of God; for
Moriah was on the North-side of Sion, and why may not I harmlesly (at least)
collect that God stands for the North, from that in Psalm. 75.6. where promotion
is denied to come from the East, or South, or West; and without mention of the
North, it is said to come from God, as if it were a known motion. God put for
the North; I will therefore presume, that if I err in the exactness of my
allusion, that yet it is pardonable; and therefore I Will proceed hereupon as I
said, to put North for God, East for Christ, South for Holiness, and West for
Death.

A Jove principium. Let Us begin therefore as Mariners do, with our North-point,
i.e. with God, surely we shall not make a prosperous voyage without him, since
he is the first to be known And being well skilled in this point, we shall
presume, and may expect fair weather will come out of this North ( as the
phrase is, Job. 37.22.) to make us happy in our spiritual failing. Concerning
God therefore, I shall lay down these particulars as necessary to be known,
which I shall not expatiate upon, only clearly and distinctly mention.

1. We must know that God is, Heb. 11.6. we must beware of saying with the
fool, there is no God Creation, Providence, even rain and fruitful seasons are
his witnesses A^^. 14.17. not to mention those grand and undeniable testimonies
of scriptures and conscience. But this is the first; set it in your hearts that
there is a God; and however Heathens speak of many, yet to us Christians there
is but one God 1 Cor 8.5, 6

2. We must know that this God is the chiefest good. It Is only himself and the
light of his countenance which can make us happy, Psalm: 4.6, 7. Blessed are
they that see, i. e that enjoy him, Mat. 5.8. Mat. 18.10. Now this is a
principle necessary to be known, viz. That God is that supreme good in the
enjoyment of whom all true happiness lies. All our love and labor to, and for
God, depends upon this principle; and the knowledge and belief hereof is of
absolute necessity to make us happy.

3. (Life eternal lying in God, and he being incomprehensible and unconceivable
in essence, as being a spirit) We must know our best way to eye him is in his
attributes ( Exodus 34.5, 6, 7.) and works (as Romans 1.20.) Especially in his
Son, (as 2 Cor. 4.6.) Read these Scriptures, and rememember them. Gods Names
declare his Nature; his works intimate his being; but his Son is the brightness
of his glory, and the express image of his person.

4. We must know that as God is a spirit, so our only and chiefest way of
knowing, enjoying, serving and walking with him, is in the spirit likewise,
Joh. 4.24. As God is, so he ought to be known and served. And he being a
spirit, he is only in a saving way known by the light of his own spirit, and
served in the simplicity and strength of our spirits. These four things are the
least that we can know in order to happiness concerning God.

Concerning our next Cardinal point, viz. Christ (who is our star in the east)
I will name no more points in number concerning him neither, but four.

1. Christ is the first and clearest light, the true Sun which arises upon the
world, by which all are enlightened, Joh. 1.9. He is our Sun of Righteousness,
and till he arise, there is no healing for us, Mal. 3.2. He is that light which
alone makes day, as the Sun in the East does, Luke 1.78, 79. The whole world
lies in a Night of dismal, damnable darkness, until Christ as the Dayspring
from on high visit it, to give light to them that fit in darkness.

2. God alone is in him reconciling himself to the world, 2 Cor. 5.19. We can
never be reconciled, justified, adopted, etc. but in and by Jesus Christ; and
he is made all to us in these grand soul-saving matters, 1 Cor. 1:30. Christ is
the Way as well as the Truth; the way of God to us, as well as the light of God
upon us; no man comes to the Father but by him, as it is Joh. 14.6.

3. Jesus Christ is only made ours by the union and in-dwelling of himself in
us through the spirit. It Is the spirit alone who can anoint our eyes to see
and behold this Sun, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, etc. It Is the spirit who uniteth us to
Christ, 1 Cor. 6.17. It Is the spirit who does fit us for, and bring us to Jesus
Christ, Ioh. 16.8, 9, etc. Where God intends to bring any to himself in his
son, he there gives the Holy Ghost; none can call Jesus Lord but by the
spirit, 1 Cor. 12.3. How then can any come by him and be one in Christ's body,
but by the same spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.

4. The way of the spirit uniting us to Christ, is by an act of power on his
part; and by an act of faith on our part. The spirit uses no other grace either
to fasten Christ on us, or us to Christ, but Faith. Believing is the all, and
the only means of having Christ. Other things may predispose, but faith alone
takes hold of, and intitles us to Christ. Other graces will follow, but not as
things joining us to Christ, but as fruits of our being united unto Jesus
Christ, Ioh. 3 16. last. and 5.29. Ephesians. 3.17. Ioh. 1.12, 13. with others.

As Christ is the only foundation, so these things are fundamentally necessary
to be known of him.

Now concerning our next point, viz. holiness, which is our South, I would fain
possess my self and others with these four principles about it.

1. That whoever is in Christ, is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. which new
creature is renewed in holiness, Ephesians 4.24: Although Christ in free grace takes
sinners when sinners, yet he leaves them not so, but makes them Saints or
sanct^fied ones, 1 Cor. 6.11. This know, Though the unholiest soul may have
Christ, yet none but the holy soul can only say, I have Christ, though Christ
did not condemn or cast off that great sinner, Ioh. 8.3. yet he cautions her
against sin, ver. 11.

2: Holiness is the souls highest luster, its the Sun in the South, at the
highest: The holy soul is in the right and full aspect of God, as South is
toward the North: God is and surely we are when we are holy) glorious to
holiness, Exodus 15:11: When we come to perfection in holiness, then is our Sun
at the height in us; and in order unto this we are to improve the promises, 2
Cor: 7:1:

3: Holiness is Christ filling the soul: As the Sun which passes from East to
South is highest in the South; so Jesus Christ is at his highest in the heart
when the heart is most holy: A soul in the height of holiness, has Christ in
the height in him:

4. This holiness is that which is directly opposite to sin: as the clearest
light is to the greatest darkness, so is holiness to sin. Sin eclipses
holiness, and holiness scatters sin. Holy and undefiled are all one in
Scripture; they are all parallel expressions of one and the same thing, Heb. 7:
26: Phil. 2.15. 2 Pet. 3.11, 14 Our last principal point is the West; that is,
our night-point, our death-principle. And certainly it is necessary for us to
know something of death: Moses propounded the thought and sight of death to
Israel, as well as life: Now with reference to death take four principles.

1: Death is certain: There is none that lives and shall not see death: It Is
the certain wages of sin: men do but deceive themselves when they put off the
thoughts of death from themselves, for all must dye: The Sun of our life will
set in death: When our days come about to this Western-point, it will be
night, Heb 9: 27: Psalm. 49.7, 9:

2. If we dye in our sins out of Christ, we are undone for ever, Joh. 8: 24:
Miserable are the wisest, the richest, the greatest of men, who cannot dye with
Christ in their arms: As to dye in Christ is gain; so out of Christ it is loss,
yea the greatest loss, Phil. 1: 21:

3: Death is but the souls, or rather the bodies night: The setting-Sun will
rise again. It Is our benighting to dye; but it is not our annihilating: All,
even the worst shall rise again, and be brought to appear before Jesus Christ:
As the Sun which sets in the West, shall rise in the East, So they that go
hence by death, shall rise by Christ, 1 Cor: 15: Apoc. 20: 12:

4. After death comes judgment: Men that dye shall arise to be judged either
for life or death the second time. Good men shall arise to life, wicked men to
death. Heb: 9: 27: Matthew. 25: Do not slight this truth; for it is a principle in
Religion, Heb. 6: 2:

These are things all of them very necessary to be known: As necessary as the
four prints in the compass, so necessary are these four heads, and the
particulars under them to be known.

I shall not pass from this without an addition of some other things from the
connection of these points in our Christian Compass.

1: From the North-point we pass to the East. God passes forth to the world by
Christ. He comes only down to us by his Son. No man comes to God but by him;
Joh. 14: 6: And as soon as we have thought of God, it becomes us to pass on in
our thoughts to Christ: For God out of Christ is no lightsome nor chearing
thought: God out of Christ is a consuming fire.

2. From East we proceed to South: And indeed, as Christ comes into, and
advances upon the soul, so holiness appears, even as the Sun does as it rises
Southward: Christ's passage in the soul is in the Southern line of holiness.

3. From South we come to West: Even the most Southern sanctified Saints that
are, must pass on to death: Holiness fits for, but frees not from death. The
warmth of Southern heat ( i e holiness) will enable us to bear the cold of
death the better; but yet dye we must, our holiness will not keep us from it:
To the West we must; there the Grave and night of death waits for us all; there
our Sun must set, and our days end.

4. From the West we come to the North again; and indeed so it is: When we dye
we return to God; the spirit or every one returns to God, Eccles: 12.7. only
some go to him as a Judge, others as to a Father.

Having looked upon the points of our Compass in their ordinary connection,
consider it again in its opposition; and remembering still our North point is
God; our East Christ; our South holiness, and our West death then consider and
remember these things as worthy our noting and knowing.

1. God and holiness are things not to be severed. God looks not on any thing
in a direct line of approbation, but upon holiness. Holiness brings the soul
into a right light of aspect and communion with God.

2. Even Christ himself, as coming into the world for us, must dye: As the Sun
which rises in the East, must set in the West. And indeed, that Christ whose
rising star was first seen in the East of Jerusalem, Did set upon the West,
when he dyed upon the cross on Calvary, which was on the West of the holy City.

The 'first of these things noted and known, will teach us to labor and to
press after holiness; to perfect it in the fear and love of God; for without it
none shall see God.

The second of these remembered will sweeten death unto us; for why should we
fear to follow Christ? Since he has tasted of death before us, and for us, why
should we be so loath to dye?

To help your eye, and thereby to fix these things the better, look upon the
following Compass as an Epitome of this part of our discourse.

allegorical compass NORTH God He is The supreme good Must be known This by
the spirit

EAST Christ The light of God The reconciler to God Inioyed by the spirit and
by faith.

SOUTH Holiness Its the new creature The souls luster Christ at height in us
Is at enmity with sin

WEST Death In is self certain Out of Christ sad shall have a resurrection and
brings to judgment



CHAP. IV.
The things or duties necessary to be done by Christians, reduced to as many
practical Rules as there are points in the Compass.
LET us pass now from the speculative part of our Christian Compass (in which
we have seen the grand principles which are necessary to be known) unto the
practical part thereof, and see what are the duties, or the things which he
ought to do in order to the arrival to our happiness. And here I shall keep me
to my Compass, and mention as many points for practice as there are noted in
our Compass, which are thirty two; and for a help to memory, I shall begin each
point with the initial known Letters on the points of our Compass.

Our first point is North, which is thus cut out into its eight points, 1.
Never stir or steer any course but by light from God. N.
Let the Scriptures which are Gods word, be thy North-Star. This is the
original cause of all our misery and miscarriage, that we make not Gods
commandments our Compass: Thy word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
paths, (said David) Psalm. 119 105. To the Law, and to the Testimony, says
Christ by the Prophet Isa. 8.10. They are the Scriptures which can make us wise
unto salvation. I do no more wonder to see men split on the Rocks of error, or
sunk in the sands of sin, who cast off or neglect the Scriptures, then I do to
see a man make shipwreck who wants, or uses not his Compass. This is the great
device of Satan (who strives to shipwreck our souls) in these days, to make
poor creatures dispute, deny, and depart from the Scriptures. The North Star is
not so useful and necessary to the Mariner, as the written word of God unto a
Christian: And he who upon pretense of the Word within, does lay aside the word
without, is as a mad Pilot that throws away the c^mpass, that he may steer by
his conjecture. 2. Never enter upon any design but such as tends toward
Christ. N. and by E.
Let Christ be the rising- Sun which thy soul does always worship. While other
men run from West to East to gain riches, do thou lance forth in no bottom, or
business which will not further thee in thy knowledge and en oyment of Christ.
Christ is next to God, and the word of God principally and primarily points at
him; to him gave all the Prophets wit^^^, Act. 10.^3. He that labors for other
things, neglecting Christ, is like a Merchant that goes to the Indies to fetch
Pebbles, and in the mean time forgets the pearl of great price; or like one
that digs for dirt, and neglects Gold; since it is Christ alone who is a
precious pearl, and the tried Gold, which can enrich our souls. 3. Note nothing
enviously which thrives without God; N. N. E.
indeed nothing can thrive truly without God, though sometimes the wicked (who
want him) do seem to prosper. Indeed it is a great remora or hinderance to a
spiritual Seaman, to a poor afflicted Saint, to see the prosperity of the
wicked; especially while he is under adversity, that it should be so fair
weather with the ungodly, while it is so foul with the godly, has often
perplexed many. It made the Psalmist once think his Voyage Heavenward was in
vain, Psalm. 73.12, 13. but remember not to envy, because of the prosperity of
the wicked, Psalm. 37. They make a poor voyage that sail with never so fair a
wind, or never so smooth a sea, and yet traffic for nothing but sand or
pebles. He that trades with Jewels; need not envy such at all: Though he have
foul weather, and rough seas, yet his Traffic will make amends for all. Many
miscarry for not eying this point of the Compass; therefore mind it, Note
nothing enviously which thrives, or seems to prosper, without God. 4. Never
Enter upon Notwarrantable courses, N. E. and by N.
to procure any the most prized or conceited advantages. Many a soul is cast
away, and sunk into eternal perdition, by venturing upon unlawful and
not-warrantable designs, to advance or enrich it self, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. What got
Achan by his wedge of Gold? Josh. 7. What got Gehazi by the talent of silver,
and changes of raiments? 2 Kings 5. Nay, what shall it profit a man to get all
the world, and lose his soul? Any thing got in, or by a non-warranted way, may
and will undo the soul, though it may please or profit the body. 5. Now
Entertain the sacred commands of God, N. E.
if hereafter thou expect the sovereign consolations of God. Many are willing
to have comfort, who care not for command. My hands will I lift up to thy
commandment, which I have loved: And I will meditate in thy Statutes, Psalm.
119.48. Many a soul is ready to lift up his hand to take a comfort, which will not
stretch it forth, or lift it up to take a command. But in vain shall you cry
for, or expect Gods comforts in a storm, if you neglect his commands in a calm.
You who swear and drink, and drab ashore, or in a calm, how can you expect God
should hear you in a tempest? Meditate upon that place, Prove. 1.24 25, 26. He
that transgresses on Land the Lords commands, cannot expect at Sea either a
calm or comfort; ^onah's sin at Land, made a storm at Sea, Jonah 1.3, 12. 6.
Never esteem Aegypts treasures so much, N. E and by E.
as for love of them to forsake the people of God. It was the praise of Moses,
that he chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. And he esteemed the godly's reproaches
greater riches then Aegypts Treasures; as it is in that place, Heb. 11.26. In
this imitate Moses, rather to choose to suffer persecution, disgrace, etc. with
the godly, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin, or to live at ease with the
wicked. Better is it to go, though a very boistrous voyage, in a poor Vessel,
with men, then to lie upon the shore, though in a brave Country, with wild
Beasts. Better to go to Heaven through many Tempests, and with much hardship
and fear, then to swim to hell with full sails, and a fair gale of pleasures and
honors. 7. Err Not Especially in soul-affairs. E. N. E.
Jam. 1.16. Errors in corporal affairs are not so dangerous as in soul-affairs.
That soul which errs in faith; in love, in holiness, etc. makes the worst of
shipwracks; remember those floating marks (which are set as so many boys over
dangerous Sands) I mean Hymeneus, Alexander, and Philetus, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. and
2 Timothy 2.18 Erroneous persons are but bad Pilots; and he that errs in the
matters of his soul will make but a hard Voyage, though at last his Ship come
into the Haven sale, their salvation will be as through fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. 8.
Eschew Nothing but sin. E. and by N.
He that will ever do good upon a soul-voyage, must fear nothing but sin, I Pet
3.11. Job was a good steersman who eschewed nothing but what was evil, Job 1.7,
8 He did not fear a greas multitude, neither did the contem^t of familyes
terrify him, Job 31.34. Men that will be spiritual Sailors, must fear no wind
or weather, sin only, sin (and that because it provokes God) is to be feared
It Is not a whistling Maste, not a rattling Pum^; not a Lee-shore; not a sinking
or leaky ship, (which are the great evils deprecated and prayed against in the
Sea-mans verbal Letany) It Is not, I say, any, or all of this that can hurt or
hazard our eternal spiritual traffic; It is nothing but sin which alone can
hazard our soul. He that fears and flies from sin, shall never need fear to
sink or miscarry: He that is freed from sin, will save his Merchandise though
he should lose his Vessel: His soul will come safe to shore, though his body
should sink at Sea.


CHAP. V.
The second sort of duties, being the second quarter of the practical Compass.
WE have passed through the first quarter of our Compass, and all the Rules in
it are negative. When therefore you come upon the breaking of those rules or
cautions, or near to transgress any of them, think you heard Christ saying,
Beware, come not near. I shall now proceed unto our next quarter, our Eastern,
and therein also give forth eight points, beginning each with the cardinal
Letters.

1. Establish thy heart with grace, E.
Heb. 13.9. It Is grace which is our best ballast. Opinions, Notions.
Expressions, Gifts, etc. all these, none of these can establish us. This makes
many to be as boats tossed up and down with every wind of Doctrine, because
they are not established with grace. The heart which is serious and established
with Grace, is like a ship well balanced at Sea, it makes fair weather (as we
say) with any wind. How many tossing, tumbling, rolling, unsteady souls do we
see in this tempestuous age, moved with every wind, and almost over-set with
every wave, for want of being solidly and groundedly established with Grace?
Mind this therefore as a principal point of your Compass, viz. Establishment,
and that of the heart (not of the head) with grace. The most gracious souls are
the best Sailors

2. Eye Sanctity in every action. E. and by S.
Let this be thy great study, to be holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet.
1.15: While others talk of a saving Voyage, talk thou of a sacred: Let every
piece and part of the tackling which is about thy Ship be sacred. Why should
not our Ropes and Sails have on them as well holiness to the Lord, as the
Bridles or Bells of the Horses spoke of in Zach. 14 20 If you know whither you
are sailing, ( viz. for happiness) you cannot forget holiness. You are sailing
for the Holy Land; and what should you eye but holiness? The white clifts of
Sanctity and holiness, lie along the Coast of the Country where unto you are
sailing. Eye therefore that wh^te, and when you see the dark clifts of sin,
say, This is not the shore that I sail unto.

3. Ever Strive Earnestly to live under, E.S E.
and to improve the means of Grace. Where Paul does plant, and Apollo water;
where the word of God is preached in season, and out of season; where the
Scriptures of truth are clearly opened, and rightly divided, there love to live
and be. If thou can not be on shore where preaching is, labor to procure
preaching with thee at Sea. Verily in our Christian Ship, and for our spiritual
Sea-affairs, godly spiritual preachers are the best and most needful Pilots.

4. Suffer Every Evil of punishment or sorrow, S. E. and by E.
rather then leave the ways of Christ and Grace. As you should rather choose
sufferings then not to enter upon Christ's ways; so you must resolve to endure,
that is, to continue under any evil of punishment from men for owning, rather
then to finne against CHRIST in forsaking of him and his ways. Account no
storm or tempest too sore or troublesome to undergo, that thou may pass on
in thy Voyage to Christ. Seamen mu^^ not fear storms, nor shrink back for foul
weather. Nor must Christians fear persecutions. Sometimes troubles are like
strong gales of wind, which drive the ship of the soul the faster to its port,
and keep it steadier it its way and passage.

5. Sigh Earnestly for more enjoyments of Christ. S. E.
Rest not in a little, but pant after a great deal of Jesus Christ. Though a
little of Christ be very sweet, yet we should not count it sufficient. Out of
his fullness still strive for a supply, even till thou have grace for grace,
i.e. Every grace of Christ in thee, answerable to what it is in him. As little
of the creature, and as much of Christ as may be.

6. Seek Evermore for some evidences of Christ in you, S.E. and by S.
the hope of glory. Let it not content thee to make out after Christ; but
strive to be sure thou have attained unto him. Many never come to good and
grounded hope; few come to sure earnests of Christ's ir-being in them. But look
thou to see Christ dwelling in thy heart by faith; Christ evidencing his abode
in thy soul by the evidence of his spirit. Be not if it be p^^^ible, always at
a venture, or peradve^ for Christ, but go to the assuring-(...), to make sure
that Christ is in thee of a truth. Though to go to the Assurance-Office for a
Venture at Sea, is accounted by some an underly way of Merchandise, yet it is a
good way, and very noble in Christianity. Indeed they are the noblest spiritual
Merchants that are most and deepest in assurance. The clearer our assurance is
the more comfortable out voyage will be.

7. Still Set Eternity before you in regard of enjoying of Jesus Christ. S.S. E.
To be ever with the Lord, let that still sound in thy ears, and be in thy
eyes. Entreat Christ not to tarry with thee a few days, but covet to have him
with thee always, even all thy voyage on earth, and at thy Port at death. Let
Christ be in thy eye both in life and death; Or if thou can not be so happy
as to have his sensible presence all the voyage in the time of life; Be sure
thou make it thy desire and design to have him for ever after death. If Christ
will have you put out to Sea, (as his disciples) and tell you he will come after;
Entreat him not to fail in that; thou ^^ you have not his visible presence no^,
yet desire of him to vouchsafe to you hereafter, to be always with him where
he is, as John 17.24.

8. Settle it Ever in your soul as a principle which you will never depart
from, S. and by E.
that holiness is in Christ. South is by East, and holiness is by Christ.
Christ was holy when a child; and holiness is as near to him as himself is to
himself; it is his essence; and therefore abominate all loose and lewd
principles which would set up Christ without holiness, and possess or persuade
thee that thou may have Christ though thou mind not holiness; or which
would exalt holiness without Christ; and persuade, that even Nature, Reason,
Education, Morality, can make thee holy enough to enjoy God, though thou never
hear of, nor know Jesus Christ. Let Ranters and Socinians keep those poisons to
themselves. Be thou for Christ and Holiness, for Holiness and Christ, still
together, never asunder in points or practice.

CHAP. VI.
The chird quarter of the duties in the Christian Compass.
HAving past two parts of our Compass, we will hasten over the other two; only
let me entreat you to mind and con these well, e're you proceed to learn the
other. But when you have got by heart, or rather into the heart this half, then
proceed unto the next, which is our Southern quarter, and here remember your
eight points likewise.

1. Set thy self always as before the Lord: Imagine nay believe it, S.
thou art always as directly before the Lord, as the South is just in a strait
line before, or in the face of the North: I have set the Lord always before
me; he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved: 'Twas the saying of David,
Psalm 16.8. nay, of Christ, who was David's Lord and ours, as it is clear by Act
2.25. This is the nature and life of holiness, to eye God always; without
holiness we shall never see God here, nor hereafter; And it is holiness which
fixes our sight upon God. The Southern Sun does not more directly cast his
beams upon the North, then the sanctified soul does cast his eyes, and every
glance of his soul upon God. It Is the height of thy soul, the Meridian point of
thy piety always to have thy face and thy heart toward thy God.

2. See weakness hastening thee to death, S. and by W.
even when thou art at highest pitch or point. Even the Sun at the height in
the South, moves immediately to the West, and its first differenced motion from
South, is by West. You remember in our points of knowledge, chap. 3. I termed
West our death point, and South our holiness point, etc. Now it is in allusion
to that notion that I make this my second practical Rule in this quarter of our
Compass. Even holy men at, and in the height of holiness are by death. It Is
appointed for all once to dye. As sin has brought death upon all, so holiness
does not exempt any, I mean death natural. It Is true, in a spiritual divine
sense, Saints do not, shall not, cannot dye; but in a litteral humane sense,
even the highest Saints that have come up to highest degrees of Sanctity, have
and must drink of deaths cup; and it is much for the advance and strengthening
of holiness in our hearts, to see our selves always stepping toward the
grave, going to set in the point or place of death.

3. See Sin (which is the sting of death) as taken out, S. S. W.
and away by Christ, if ever you expect to dye in peace. Often mind, and think
upon that Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. and search thy soul, to see whether upon
good ground thou can say, Oh death, where is thy ^ing! It Is not sword, or
plague, or devouring Monsters at Sea or Land, which can make death st^nging, if
the soul can see the bloo^ of Jesus to have cleansed it from all its sins;
Death only stings with poison and pain such as live and dye in their sins. But
to souls who are true believers, who are washed with the blood of Jesus, death
is a Be having much honey, but no sting at all.

4. Store up Wisely Some provisions every day for your dying day. S. W. and by
S.
Dying men need cordials, and so do dying Christians search and lay up
promises; study and store up experiences; How will you be able to see sin as
gone, except you be acquainred with sin-pardoning-promises, and except you have
eyes, and taken notice of divine experiences? Mark how, and by what God at any
time speaks peace to your soul in the blood of Jesus. Treasure up every hint
and intimation of Grace and Glory, which at any Sermon, in any duty, upon, or
after any eminent danger and deliverance (which thou ^^st had) the Lord has
sweetly given in unto thy soul. Oh what reviving comforts, what
conscience-cordials unto a dying soul are the r^memembrances of such and such
discoveries and tastes of God at such and such a time! Verily the experienc^s of
our life are often cho^ce refreshings in, or at our death.

5. Set Worldly things under your feet before death come to look you in the
face; Its the world, S. W.
and the things of it, which next to sin, makes death bitter: We therefore fear
to dye, because we are loath to leave the world: houses, trades, lands,
relations etc. make the thoughts of death dreadful; where as were we weaned
from those, we should with much ease and quiet of mind, be willing to go down
to the grave.

6. Still wait and stand upon your watch with loins girded, S. W. and by W.
and Lamps trimmed: Be not so mad as the foolish Virgins, to have a Lmp without
oil; nor so foolish as the wise were, to slumber, and let your Lamps be
untrimmed; But see your Lamp be ready, your oil prepared, and you your selves
as w^se, waking, watchful, ready servants, who upon any call or knock can go
out to open to your Lord, and to meet your bridegroom: study Christ's words,
Luke 12.35.36, 37. and practice his counsel which he there gives in this
particular.

7. Weigh Soul-works, and all, W.S.W.
in the Balance of the Sanctuary, lest when thou come to be weighed at the
night of death, thou be found to have deceived thy self, and be too light. Many
never put their soul into the Balance, to see whether or no that be not as
Belshazar, found wanting, and too light. Others never weigh their works, or
words, etc. but do thou try all by weight, allowing grains for infirmity (which
God permits.) Certainly it will be a dreadful word if it be said to thee in the
night, Thou art to dye, (as it was said to Belshazzar in his) Thou art weighed,
and found too light: Judge thy self by Gods weights; his weights are internals,
sincerityes, Christ's Righteousness; but word weigh nothing with God,
pretenses, semblances are too light with him; all man's righteousness in his
balance, weigh not as the dust of the balance; God loves truth in the inward
parts, and they alone hold weight in his Balance, that are found in his Sons
Robes.

8. Wind thy soul about Christ's neck, W and by S.
and so thou may dye in peace. Simeon with Christ in his arms, could sing
and dye, Luke 2.29. Though the Papists hang about a Crucifix (as many of them
have done) yet I am confident it has been rather a hinderance than a help to
them: Superstition cannot be a solid comfort: yet Christ embraced by faith, and
hugged with delight, makes death very pleasant. The Sun never set clearer in
the fairest evenning when it came to its Western point, then the soul can, and
does, when it lies down with Christ in his arms, and goes with him as it were
in his bosom to his burial.

CHAP. VII.
The last quarter of a Christians practice, according to his Compass.
I Have thus run over three quarters of my Compass, I must now finish the
fourth; yet I desire my Reader to stay, and to proceed no further till he has
well learnt the former. The points of our Christian Compass are not so soon
learnt as our Sea-Compass is.

But yet to finish this, I shall mention, and pray mind well these eight points
of our last quarter.

1. Whatsoever thy condition be in this world, W.
eye God as the disposer of it, and therein be contented. Phil. 4.11. The
turbulent Sea is not so restless as the discontented mind of man. Man under
discontent foams and rages, and casts up nothing but mire and filth, whereas
the contented soul sails always as in smooth waters, and makes all fair
weather within, even then when it is foulest without. Did discontented souls
but know and remember how much they dishonor God by not resting in that which
his providence brings upon them; and how great enemies they are to themselves
in fretting against, or under that which they cannot help, they would then
wholly cease from their discontent, and strive to rest in the will of God. A
contented mind may well be called and counted a Kingdom, for it has much of
the Kingdom of God in it. he has learned much in spiritual practical
Navigation, that has learned with Paul, in all things to be content. Certainly
godliness with content is great gain, Indeed godliness teaches us to be
content in all estates, whether we get or lose.

2. Wale Not according to the course of the most, W. and by N.
but after the example of the best. The most are the worst; and the best are
always the fewest: the broad way of the multitude leads to death; whereas the
narrow of the few (that walk wisely) leads to life. Indeed it is not easy to
find out the narrow path or life and peace. The broad way of death is open and
obvious to every eye, as the vast Ocean is to every one at Sea; but the narrow
way, like the channel at the end or entrance of some Isle (as it is with ours in
the West) is hard to be discerned and to find out. It Is thy wisdom to study to
know exactly the narrow way which the fewest find, in which thou may safely
arrive the Haven of happiness, and not to roll up and down the broad Sea of
the wide world with the multitude, and so perish without any comfort, albeit
with many companions.

3. Weigh not what men speak or think of thee, W.N.W.
so God approve thee. Not he who commends himself is approved, but whom the
Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10.18. Neither is he a Jew which is only outwardly;
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit,
and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans 2.28, 29
It Is the madness and misery of many they mind man more then God; and so they
may be well reputed of, and reported by men, they are not conscientious, nor
careful of their carriage toward God. But be not deceived, God is not moved;
he knows what is in men, and at the last day we shall be judged according to
Gods Law, and not according to man's judgment. And he that studies to approve
himself to God, will be seen to have been wisest in that day.

4. Never wink at small sins, N.W. and by W.
nor neglect little duties. Indeed, no command of the great God is little; nor
is any sin against him little. But comparatively we say (and that aright) that
some sins and duties are small. An idle word is a small sin in comparison of an
oath; and profession is a little duty, if compared with doing or suffering for
the Name of Christ. Yet beware of little things in Religion. A small leak, if
neglected, may ^^nk a ship; And a little negligence in looking out at Sea, may
endanger all unawares; walk therefore circumspectly, Ephesians 5.15. Ste^r to a hairs
breadth in duty, and fly from the appearance of evil; make conscience of the
smallest duty to do it, and of the least sin to avoid it.

5. Never wish rashly for death, N.W.
nor love life too inordinately. Call not for death before its time, neither
hanker thou after life when thy time of death is come. Jonah did evil to wish
to dye, Jon. 4.3. Men in a pet, under a pain, upon some cross or trouble, are
too apt to cry out, O that they were dead! Poor souls! they know not what they
say. Are they fit for that which they so frowardly wish for? what if death
should come at I wish, would not they cry out, Lord take it away? Beware
therefore of this distemper; Thy times are in Gods hand: he has numbered them;
neither substract nor add unto Gods number, if God will have them many, do not
wish them few; and if God will have them short, do not desire them long.
Consider, he is wise, and good, and supreme, and knows what is best, neither
can any resist his will, to lengthen or diminish the days which he has
determinedus. O learn to live and to dye in his will!

6. Now work wisely ere Night come; N. W. and by N.
while you have the light and life, walk in it, before the night comes when
none can work, Joh. 12.35, 36. Defer not, nor put off the great things of
eternal life, unto the uncertain time of thy natural death. How many are gone
down to the place of the second death, by putting off repentance and faith,
etc. till their death came, when they had not space nor grace to do either, and
so perished for ever for the defect of that which they did defer. Remember
therefore the wise counsel of Solomon: Whatsoever thy hand finds to do do it
(defer not; stay not, but) do it with thy might: for there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go, Eccl. 9.10.
The soul who puts off his great work till the last, may dye ere he has begun
to do that which he can never sufficiently do, should he work all his days.
Take the present time for every work which God by his word, Spirit, Providence,
or any other way does call thee unto.

7. Name Nothing when thou pleadest with God for thy soul, N. N. W.
but Christ and free Grace. Prayer is and ought to be thy standing daily work,
and Christ and free Grace ought to be thy constant argument in thy prayers:
whatever thou wishest or would have of God, say as Daniel, Do it for the
Lords sake, Dan. 9.17. Cast thy desires, thy hopes, thy soul, and all, upon the
merits of a dying Christ, and upon the tenders and promises of free Grace. In
the time of thy life, at the hour of thy death, and then when thou shall be
brought to thy trial after death, renounce all things, and plead none but
Christ. Cry pardon (Lord) justification (Lord) peace (Lord) life, glory, all
for thy Christ's sake and upon the account of thy free grace.

8. Now welcome Christ N. and by W: if at death thou will be welcomed by
Christ. Entertain Christ in the world, if thou will be entertained by Christ
when thou go out of the world. Many say unto Christ, depart now, as those
Job 21.13. To whom Jesus Christ will say, Depart then. Observe Christ in every
approach and providence to thy soul, to the world, etc. and say, Oh welcome
Jesus! Let the Messengers in preaching of Christ, be beautiful even in their
feet to thee: Let the providence, and occurrences of the grand changes in the
world, by which Christ comes to make way for, and to set up his own kingdom;
let these be dear and welcome to thee. Fret not against, murmur not under any
dispensation in which Christ comes near to thee or others. Welcome Christ in a
sickness though sharp; in a sermon though plain; in providence though terrible.
In all things, in every thing wherein Christ is; O bid him welcome now, so will
he bid you we^^ome when you come to dye. If you ask where he will bid you
welcome? Take it in a word, He Will bid you welcome to his fathers house and he will
carry you into a Mansion which he has prepared for you in his fathers presence.

Thus are we come about our compass. We have run from North to North in a
round. From God to Christ, from Christ to holiness, from holiness to death;
and by death we are in our Christian circle come about to God again. And thus
we have our princi^al Points in our Sea or Saint-Compasse.

CHAP. VIII.
The points on which the Christian compass must turn, and the box in which it
must be kept.
I Had thoughts to have passed presently to my last head of spiritual
Navigation. But I must add a word or two more. The occasion is this, I perceive
my Sea-Compasse is lifted up upon a point or pin which it turns and runs round
upon; and there is a box in which it is kept and stands. Hereupon I shall add
two words answerable to these two things.

First for the point upon which our Compass must stand and turn, I cannot think
of any other but CONSCIENCE A tender, quick, enlightened, and inlivened
conscience is the only point upon which we must erect the practical rules of
our Christian Compass. Mind that therefore. Herein imitate that great Pilot
Paul; Lab^^ always to have a conscience void of offense toward God and man.
That with him you may say, We trust we have a good conscience, Heb. 13.8.
Indeed without this, there is no trust to those rules. What are the best rules,
if men make no conscience of them? A painted compass upon the leaf of the book
is of no use, to stere by. It must be an erected compass set on a needle, which
stirs and moves, by which our ship at Sea is to be guided and cunned. And
written rules, though never so full or few are of no profit, if they be not
laid upon the conscience, and that conscience quick and tender. Remember
therefore this as an additional, yet fundamental point, That if ever you will
be the better for the former compass, you must make conscience of the same.
Eye it therefore, and out of conscience unto God endeavor to steer according to
it. In every point of thy compass, eye God as the main, and out of conscience
unto him, carry thy self in all things as near as possible according to this
compass. Then may thou rejoice, and expect that God upon thy endeavors
should speak unto thee, Well done, steer away, or steer thus. And certainly
it is no small rejoyceing in those things to have the testimony of our
conscience, that in all simplicity and godly sincerity, by the grace of God we
have had our conversation according to those rules and that compass, That may
be, and thus are agreeable to his own word.

Secondly, For the box in which this comp^sse must be kept. I shall only name
our MEMORY. O treasure ye these rules there; and strive to be as ready and
expert in this compass, as the Mariner is in his Sea-Compasse I have on
purpose made this little, that our memory might hold it. Had I been as large as
I might, I should have made my compass too large; and I fear the biggest and
best memories could not have contained it. But it is short, that the smallest
memory might retain it. Wherefore do as our Seaboyes do at first, Con over this
Compass again and again. Get it into the head, nay into the heart; that when
thou art any where (though in the dark, or deep) and can not have the help of
larger discourses, these things may be in thy memory to help thee rightly and
safely to steer and carry thy self upon all occasions. I will not say if thou
remembrest these things, thou need no more. But this I do humbly assure thee
of, If thou remember these things and do them, thou shall not miscarry, but
safely arrive at the Port of eternal felicity, where thou shall have cause to
bless God for the little help of this short Compass.

CHAP. IX.
The third head of Divine Navigation opened, and spoke unto, viz. Affectionate
Meditation.
I Called Divinity the Art of soul spiritual-Navigation, and branched it out (
Chap. 2.) into three heads, viz. Speculative, Practical, and Affectionate. I
have dispatched the two first, and shall now treat upon the last. Affectionate
divinity does principally lie in the secret motions or movings of the soul
toward God in the Affections. These affections are raised and warmed, and
especially appear active in meditation. As affections are the motions of the
soul (therefore by some ancient Philosophers called the feet of the soul) so
mediation is the motion of the affections. The things therefore which I shall
hint at, about the affections, I will put into some practical rules of
Meditation. Meditation being as it were a Lymbeck, or Still in which the
affections heat and melt, and as it were drop sweet spiritual waters. In this
last part I shall therefore hint at some affectionate mediations which our
spiritual Seaman is to be acquainted with. Now my meditations shall be of two
sorts, viz. some meditations of a more single simple nature; and others of a
mixed, such as we call miscellaneous. Fixed and simple meditations, are such
as may arise from some particular special texts of Scripture which concern
Seamen; of this sort I shall only instance in two.

First that of Psalm. 77.19. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy paths in the mighty
waters. This Scripture in deed is used in a Spiritual sense, with reference to
the secret unknown ways of God, in his actings in the world, and in his
dealings with his Saints. But yet it relates unto, and is spoke of God in
allusion to the literal Sea and waters, where God makes his way; for he
walks, and is in the deeps, as on the dry. Hence meditate thus.

1. Why should I fear dangers more, or sin less at Sea, then on the land! The
Lord is here even in these mighty waters: Amidst all those rolling waves he
walks and rules. Then though I steer in the mighty ocean, yet J'le fear no
evil, for God is with me: And yet J'le fear to sin, for God is here, as well as
at land. Though I am not on shore near Magistrate, or punishing place; yet
here, at Sea is the great God, who is chief Judge of all the world; therefore
even here I Will stand in aw and sin not.

2. See (oh my soul) is not here a place for worship as well as on land? Is not
God here on the waters? and ought he not here to have his worship? This great
ocean is no other then his open temple. Even here he walks; those Seas and
winds do serve him at his pleasure. O my soul! worship thy God even here: Say
not, shall I live on land, to go up to the Temple? Lo the Lord is nigh thee,
even before thee. Worship thy God in the mighty waters; kneel before his
footstool, and adore his presence even in the seas.

3. What though thou be alone on these deeps (O my soul) as to relations,
society? Though wife, children, friends etc. be on shore; and thou (as to them)
upon Sea alone, yet art not thou alone (altogether O my soul) for the Father is
with thee. He walks in the deep, while thou walk on thy Deck. His path is
in the waters, and thou have always his presence. Rejoice (O my soul) thy God
is at Sea, though all thy friends be at land.

4. Oh that mine eyes were enlightened to observe the invisible paths which God
makes in these waters. God is here, and I am not aware of it! The way of a ship
in the Sea is not seen; how much less are the print of his feet, who is past
finding out? Come, Oh thou Spirit of Annoynting! And as God moves upon the face
of the mighty waters, move thou on my soul, that I may see and apprehend the
Divinity which swims in the deep.

Thus meditate on this Scripture, till thy soul melt in thoughts of God. And if
at any time thy soul thinks of God, and is troubled, (as was Asaphs, when he
spoke or penned the words of this Psalm, as appears in the beginning, ver. 2.)
then in that very trouble remember, Gods way is in the waters: even in the
midst of those waters of affliction (which came into thy very soul) the Lord
is; and in them he is walking with thee. In that Sea of sorrow and desertion,
wherein thou art as an afflicted Soul (ship-like) tossed with tempest (as it is
Isai. 54.11.) and xot comforted: Mind this, that the Lords path is in the Sea,
and his footsteps are not known. Therefore he may be, and is with thee, though
thou see him not; and he may be preparing choice calm refreshings for thee
though thou perceive it not. Indeed that is the scope of this Scripture.

The second is that, Psalm. 107.23, 24, 25, to the 31. They that go down to the
Sea in ships, that do business in great waters. 24. These see the works of the
Lord, and his wonders in the deep. 25. For he commands, and raises the
stormy wind, which lifts up the waves thereof. 26. They mount up to the
heavens, they go down again to the depths; their soul is melted because of
trouble. 27. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at
their wits end. 28. Then they cry unto the Lord in their troubles, and he
brings them out of their distress. 29. He makes the storm a calm, so that
the waves thereof are still. 30. Then are they glad because they are quiet: so
he brings them to their desired Haven. 31. O that men would praise the Lord
for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!

On this Scripture meditate much; and to help thy Meditations, note in it these
particulars.

1. Observe of whom it speaks, viz. of Seamen; so all along the Verses, They
that go down to the Sea, etc. 2. To what end, viz. That they should consider
their affairs, observations and experiences, in order to the raising of their
hearts to see and praise God for his goodness, see ver. 3.
But more express, to help exact meditation, remember that here is set forth;

1. The man at Sea upon civil accounts, verse 23. 2. The spiritual work or
duty of him in that his business; and this is set forth in many branches. 1 He
is to eye God in his works and wonders, v: 24. 2. He is to eye God in every
storm and tempest. 1 As the author of it, v. 25: 2 As the helper in it, v: 29:
Therefore,
3 He is to consider his danger in every storm, how near to death, and how full
of dread or fear, v. 26, 27. 4 He is to know his duty in that danger, v. 28. 5
He is to consider his joy at the end of danger, as ver. 30. 6. He is to
remember to praise the Lord for his goodness, upon the whole, verse 31. Now
upon these heads meditate thus.

1. O my soul! the way in which thou art is safe; for it is lawful to traffic
by Sea as by Land. There is no wickedness in thy way, unless thou thy self do
make it. The Lord as well allows, approves, and prospers those whose business
is to do in the great waters, as whose callings are on the shore.

2. But what of God do I see and eye in my way? I am to walk with God
Enoch-like, Genesis 5.24. and as a child of Abraham, Genesis 17.1. So Noah did who
was the first that ever swam in ship. He walked with God righteously on the
dry, and God secured him in a ship of his own invention in the mighty waters. I
am not to be as the ship at sea, a senseless instrument, not kowing whether I
sail, or what I carry, or where I am; Neither am I only to eye Wind and Tide,
but I am to see God, to contemplate him in all. These waters are his work. He
made them, and gathered them thus together, Genesis 1.10. He holds these winds
that blow in the hollow of his fist, Prove. 30.4. he brings these winds out of
his treasure, Jer. 10.13. And he rides upon the wings thereof, Psalm. 60.4.
Mount (my soul) above these winds and waters* and see thy God in them; for
they are his works. And surely wonderful is God in working! what wisdom in
ordering! what power in bounding and ruling these unruly things, Job 38.8, 9,
10, 11. see the place, and meditate thereon.

3. Does a tempest arise? Sit down (O my soul) and see that it comes from God.
He made the tempest to find out a sinful Jonah. He permits this, to try my
says; to stir up my prayer; to demonstrate his own power. As afflictions
arises not out of the dust; so neither do Tempests come by chance. A God is in
all; he raises, and he can still when he pleases the boisterous winds and
waters.

4. Yet consider what is thy danger. How near to death? What a step, what an
inch between thee and the grave? Be not as the fool over-hardy; nor as the
hardened profane Athiest, that scoffs at winds, and fears no weathers.
Tremble (O my soul) the next gust may overset thee; the next wave may swallow
thee up. O be not unaffected with, nor inconsiderate of thy danger!

5. Up then and call upon thy God, Jon. 1.6. That is thy duty in thy danger:
Slumber not, but pour out prayers to him that made and can still the Tempest
at his pleasure; hold thy sails with fervent Sighs; hand thy cords and tackling
with a Heart secretly praying. Let thy best anchor be within the vail; pray in
faith, cry in hope. The Almighty can with a word make a calm, Psa. 65.7. Christ
can say, Be still, and Winds and Sea must and will obey him, Mat. 8.27. Have
thy hand at the helm, and thy eye at heaven; God it may be raised the storm to
awake thee from thy soul-sleep. Rise up therefore and call upon God; he will
bring you out of your distresses.

6. Reflect (O man) then what was thy joy when the wind began to slack and the
storm to cease. It Is good to eye what comforts God gave in at such a time.
Forget neither thy soul-meltings in a storm, nor thy heart-cheering upon a
calm. O how did God as it were build up thy broken heart? was not thy soul
almost shattered as thy sails? and were not all thy comforts broke as thy
cords? But what reviving after death; and what a resurrection as from the grave
had thou in such a place at such a time? etc. was not thy soul refreshed as
with wine? and thy spirit recovered as with a cordial, when after that, or the
other Tempest, God gave a calm?

7. Then praise thy Lord [O my soule] and forget not ALL, nar not ANY of his
benefits. Record and recall to mind the great goodness of thy God, and praise
thou his miraculous mercy. Set forth to others thy experiences, and let the
children of men know by thee, what are the wonderful works of Jehovah. Tremble
at the thought of being (as too many are) altogether forgetful of deliverances.
Be not as those whose sinning at land, evidences they forget every storm and
danger, every mercy and deliverance at Sea. But, Oh do thou (my soul) praise
the Lord for his wonderful works to thee (the poorest of the children of men.)

Enlarge these and the like Meditations upon this Scripture; and by them try
the like way of meditaring upon other Scriptures.

CHAP. X.
Mixed maritine, or Sea-meditations to stir up spiritual affections.
I Have hinted an example of meditation upon Scripture, I will now offer some
mixed Meditations relating to Sea-affairs, such as may serve to excite and
direct in this third and last part of Divinity, viz. affectionate.

1. What a little thing is between me and death. It Is but this board of which
the ship is made, if that break I am gone; my burial place is always by me; I
shall need no Sexton to dig my grave; my dead body will make its way to the
bottom of the waters, and there shall be my grave till the great day.

2. With what care does the Pilot eye the Compass to direct? How exactly does
he observe and consider all his land marks? And how careful is the steersman at
the helm, to hearken to, and to follow his direction! O what negligent
creatures are we in our spiritual Navigation! How short do we come of this care
and circumspection? As if the shipwreck of our souls were a lesser matter then
the shipwreck of this vessel.

3. How sharp do all the ships crew look out to espy land, to discover shore
and harbor whereto they sail? And what welcome news is it to hear that he at
the topmast head has descryed or discovered Land, though it be afar off! Ah
(my soul!) why art thou so lazy to look out? So backward to cast thine eyes,
to use thy Prospective to discover Emmanuels Land, which is afar off? What! is
not the Haven of Heaven worthy thy observation? Is it not joy to hear (by thy
watchman) that thou art near the fair haven of the holy Land? Look out, look up
(O soul) and rejoice to see how near thou art to thy blessed port.

4. What care is there of this cable to preserve and strengthen it, both that
it may hold fast to the Anchor, and that it may not break any where, but hold
fast the ship to it? Surely I have in my vessel both my Cables I have in my
vessel both my Cables and Anchor too, ( The great promises of grace, and the
good hope which is through that grace, as it is 2 Thessalonians. 2.16) and this Anchor
is cast within the vail, Heb. 6.19. where it has sure ground, from whence it
will not slip. Why do I not carefully and diligently attend it? Why do I not
study to secure these Cables and this Anchor, that in every storm and tempest
they may secure me?

5. With what desires do all the Seamen tarry and pray for a good wind? How
troubled are they at a cross wind? and how much perplexed at a calm? What
means all this, but a desire to speed the voyage, and to arrive the intended
and desired Port, which a calm and no wind does as well hinder as a storm and
cross wind. Call thou (O my soul) upon the Spirit (who is the breath of God,
and the wind of the soul-ship) call upon him to arise and blow. Be grieved
when thou art becalmed, so as that thou must float and fluctuate upon the
waters of this world for want of the wind and gales of the Spirit. Mourn
likewise when thou art hindered so as that thou can not speed, and haste in
thy Heavenly Voyage, by reason of cross breathings and opposite winds of thy
corruptions. Be sure diligently to observe every gale; spread all thy sails;
neglect no opportunity; take the wind of the Spirit when it blows, and
rejoice, that in the help of it t^ou hastest to thy desired port.

6. What labor and pains do all take in a storm? How do these tend the
sails, and those the pump? How do these stand by this, and the others by the
other rope? And how do all secretly [at least] cry out and say, Lord save us,
that we perish not! Why then do thou (O my soul) Jonah-like lie and sleep
securely in many a tempest which does befall thee? Is the sinking of thy soul
less then the perishing of a ship? or art resolved desperately to go a-drift,
to see if God will save thee at a venture? O take heed of this, Awake and call
upon thy God; up and take hold of the means. Set every faculty a work: This is
the hour and power of darkness, as Christ said, [truly we may speak it of our
present times.] If ever there were a tempestuous time now it is. Soul! art
insensible? Do not thou see before thee many an Alexandrean, and Hymean
shipwreck, as it is, 1 Timothy 1.19. Hark! The winds blow, the floods arise, thy
sails and rigging are rent and torn; many a stately ship is sunk by thee; and
thy leaks are more then the pump of thy repentance can clear; yet hope in God,
and be laborious; though salvation be of grace, yet good security is not
without works and diligence.

7. How does each Mariner and Seaman eye, and care for the whole crew as well
as himself? How does he mainly intend the safety of the whole vessel, while
yet he singly cares for his own Cabin? What a safe and sweet harmony is there
between the care of the whole and each particular part? And how well does self
and the public consist together? Fool that I am, why do I not thus in the ship
of the Church, seek as well the good of others as of my self? Mind so my
own, as not to neglect others; and mind so others, as yet particularly to
mind my self. How many (like him in the Gospel) ask concerning the number or
multitude of such as shall be saved; and yet in the interim, neglect to stir
themselves to secure their own salvation, by striving to enter in at the strait
gate? And how many so singly eye themselves, and enquire what they shall do to
be saved; that they seem altogether to neglect, and not to care for others?
Steer (Oh my soul!) a strait course between these rocks; regard thy self, and
yet mind thy fellow-passengers. Let not self-privacy wrong the public, nor a
Pragmatick publickness cheat self.

8. How often has a calm evening deceived the Seaman, who when he thought he
might go to his cabin and sleep securely, has bin raised up in half a watch
by some unexpected and boisterous storm? And on the oher hand, How has some
stormy day (which made the Seamen fear a tempestuous and sad night) how often
has such a day ended in a calm at night? So that when he thought to watch with
fear, he could go and lie down to sleep in peace. Surely thus it has bin more
then once with thee [O my soul] in the voyage over the Sea of this world. Many
a storm have thou unexpectedly met withal, when visible appearances promised
nothing but peace and joy; so that when as thou have said, I will lie me down in
peace etc. and my mountain is so sure I shall not be moved; how upon a sudden
has God hid his face, and the tempter arose in a tempest and thou were
suddenly troubled? so that where thou were ready to say, I am in peace, and may
rest sweetly, Trouble came and thou were afflicted, and tossed as with a
tempest, and not comforted. But can not thou call to mind on the contrary to
thy Redeemers praise, that sometime thou have expected trouble, and yet have met
with peace? And when thou have said [ Hezekiah-like] I shall go in bitterness
softly all my days; then has not the Lord ere thou did expect it, speak
peace in the blood of the Cross, and by the word of the Promise? so that about
the evening time [when thodidst fear a night of darkness and tempest] it was
light, and thou could rest and lie down with joy in the bed of grace, in the
bosom of Jesus. Recall (O soul) thy spiritual experiences to remembrance by
these sea-observations.

9. How beautiful is the ship, when under sail, going before a fair wind, and
making fine weather? With what ease and cheerfulness do all the sailors tend
their business? And how sweet and pleasant is such a passage, when neither
winds nor waves do in the least interrupt or endanger the ship in its course?
Has it not been thus sometimes with thee (O my soul) have not thou sometimes
sailed with a full and fair gale? Have not the winds above thee, and the waters
under thee, sweetly served thee in thy voyage? Have not speeded well, and
sailed far upon some Watches? Verily it becomes thee to call to mind such
former days, and to render praise even for what is past: And by or from the
thought of some former Soul-calm, and sweet experiences (which then thou have
enjoyed) to learn to live, and hope in any tempest and storm that hereafter
thou may meet withal.

10. How useful and serviceable is every Rope, yea the least (about the ship)
in its proper place? And how well skilled are the Seamen in them? How do they
know them all by name? and with what dexterity and strength do they hand, and
hale, and hold any of them as occasion is? Surely (O my soul!) all thy
spiritual tackling is useful and necessary. Every word of God is good. Every
precept, promise, threatening, experience, etc. all, and each of these are
occasionally to be remembered and improved: yea every work and providence, every
mercy and affliction should be known (as it were) by Name: And were thou but
divinely dextrous, and spiritually skilful, thou might make special use of
all in thy spiritual Navigation.

11. The ship has not only Merchandise and treasure in its hold, but it
carries force and strength upon its Decks. Here are instruments of war; guns,
etc. to secure from enemies and pirates, as well as Commodities to traffic
withal. all. And surely (O my soul) it becomes thee to mind the weapons of
thy warfare, that whole Armor of God, which out of the Magazine of the
Scriptures thou art to be furnished withal. Go into, and take a sight of the
Armory as it is opened Ephesians. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. There are Enemies and Pirates upon
the soul-Sea: Men (yea and devils) of wrath and war, that way-lay thee. Expect
an onset, and provide. None ever did pass over the Sea of the world, but met
with Pirates. Thou must resist and fight (yea, and that unto blood) to secure
thy self from being taken or sunk. and remember this, and look about thee (O my
soul) thou carryest petty Pirates within thee, that will never fight for thee,
(flesh will not fight against the world and Satan) nay, which war against thy
soul. Look to it therefore to watch against those within, that thou may the
better maintain thy fight without.

12. Still by our Helm stands the compass, that the steersman may always eye
it. As soon as his hand is on the Helm, his eye is on the Compass; and with
what exactness and strength does he hold the Helm, to steer to a point by that!
Thus it becomes thee (O my poor soul) to eye thy Compass in all thy stirring
and steering up and down the world. It Is not enough to hand and hold the Helm,
to put forth strength to stir and do, (indeed this is very good against
idleness) but thou must eye the rule, that while thou stirrest it may be within
(as we say) are according to Compass. Many who are not idle, are yet evil
employed; who though they stir, yet it is not according to compass; and it is a
thousand to one if they run not aground upon some Rock ot Sand. But let the
word be in thy hand, in thy heart; keep it, that it may guide thee. Remember
and retain it. (O my soul) as a certain truth, That they make shipwreck of
their soul who ey not, and steer not according to Compass, how active and
zealous soever they be otherwise. Actions that are irregular and without
Compass, are as bad as direct idleness, if not often worse.

CHAP. XI.
Here are some occasional Meditations to stir up, and to direct in this work.
I Have now almost done, only to these Maritine Meditations, which I call
mixed, as being of sundry sorts; I shall add twelve more occasional ones drawn
from some particular occasions; and then I Will conclude.

On the Boatswains Whistle.
What a shril sound does this whistle make? How is it heard both fore and
ought, above and beneath Deck? And how ready is every one at the sound thereof?
Surely there is no virtue in this Whistle, only the Seamen know the sound,
and use thereof, and it is therefore that they are so ready at its call to come.
Both John and Jesus piped (O my soul) but the refractory Jews stirred not;
surely they knew not what that sound meant. But show thy life and skill, (O my
soul) and upon any sound of the words whistle, stir: Upon every blast of sacred
breath which sounds that sacred silver pipe, up, and see what it means O let
the sound thereof be shrill and powerful on thy heart!

On a piece of Plank floating on the Sea.
Yonder swims the sad sign of the wrack of some: I conclude the sinking of
the passenger, from the swimming of the Plank. Blessed Lord, Why, (suffer me to
ask it) why did not save some one upon that piece of Timber? might not that
board, or broken piece have been (as in Paul's case) a little Ark to save some
from drowning by carrying them to shore? But pardon my presumption in this
question. Yet it may be there wanted a Paul in the vessel, to whom thou
might have given all that did sail therein. But why should I so imagine, and
uncharitably sink them lower who are gone down into the bottom of the great
deep. Turnin (O my soul) upon thy self, reflect and see what might have
befallen thee: That Plank might have been thy floating Tomb, or Monument, that
some other passenger might have read on it thy departure by drowning. Be not
high-minded then, but fear. Admire mercy in preserving thee. The same hand that
broke that Vessel in pieces, (whereof that Plank or piece of Timber was) can
split thee at his pleasure. And the next passengers may see the broken pieces
of the ship in which thou were, and read a better Lecture on them then thou
do on this; making better use both of instruction and improvement by example.

On a Seaman which fell asleep in the shrouds, and fell down in the Sea while
the Sermon was preaching, etc.
What another Eutychus is here! yet there is a difference. Eutychus in the Acts
(chap. 20.) was asleep in the window, and he sunk down from the third loft,
says the holy Historian: but this young man was asleep in the shrowds of a
ship, and sunk down into the Sea. Eutychus was dead with the fall, this young
man but almost drowned. Eutychus had a fairer excuse for his drowsiness (for it
was in the night) then this young man, who fell asleep at the noon of the day:
Yet [O my soul] can not say this, to excuse this young man, He had not so
holy, so rowzing a Preacher as Eutychus had. Alas! how far art thou (O my soul)
beneath Paul! Well, let the young man learn to be less drowzy; and be thou more
awaking and stirring in preaching. Yet tell others (O my soul) it is dangerous
sleeping in Sermon-time. Bid them to look about them, to attend to the word of
life, lest they sleep the sleep of death, and sink down from a corporal to a
spiritual sleep, never to awake till they are rowzed up to give an account for
that Sermon, at which they they slept and dyed.

On a great distraction in the Navy, suddenly and safely ended on a Sabbath day.
'Twas but this morning we received orders to prepare and be in readiness to
fight. It was indeed in an evil time, because it was upon a good day. A fight
is as well a misery on the Sabbath day, as a fight, and both are equally to be
prayed against. Yet necessity has a no Law. And Joshua's seven days
compassing about Jericho, will be a president for us to lie about those Ships
in a warlike posture, seeing we are put upon it. But (O my soul) what cannot
God do? He that made Jericho fall at the sound of Rams horns, has made ships
give up and yield at the sound of fellow-Sea-men, exhorting to yield to
subjection. We shall not need I see sometimes to use our guns; words can
conquer when God will. Now I know indeed that the Lord can make wars to cease;
or as the word is, Psalm. 46 9. Turns war into a Sabbath, when a Sabbath might
have turned into a War. Verily I Will praise the Lord, and sing; it is the Lord
that stilleth the noise of the Seas, the voice of their waves, and the tumult
of the people, Psalm. 65.7 He disappoints the devices of crafty Captains, and
makes the common Mariners to yield up them, that blood may not be shed, nor
peace broken. God makes even men at Sea, as well as waves, to be calm and still.

On a man that standing to sound with the line, fell overboard, and was lost.
This man sounded to secure the ship, yet he lost himself. He stood with the
line and lead to sound what depth of water the Vessel had, and he falls into
the waters, and so himself sunk to the bottom to feel the depth. Ah, O my soul!
Is not this man an Emblem of thee, who soundest the depths of Satan to secure
others? Art not thou in danger to loose thy self? Preachers look about you;
fear, lest while you sound and discourse of Satan's deeps to warn others, fear
(I say) lest you lose your selves. Mariners look to it, while you stand by the
line and lead sounding. Consider, that you may be nearer the bottom then you
are aware; 'twill be sad if you fall and sink even while you sound: but sadder,
if as your body, like the lead, goes down the bottom of the deep, your soul
sink as a stone into the depth of hell. You had need be well skilled in the art
and mystery of spiritual swimming, that so your souls may be secure and safe by
swimming to the banks of heavens shore, when your bodies sink to the bottom of
the Seas.

On the sight of many great shot made from a Fort to some Vessels, and none
taking place.
Surely the gunner intended to hit and hurt, however he still missed the mark:
he traversed and levelled to mischief vessel and men, but yet still his bullet
flew over and besides both. See thou not (O my soul) how it is God who guides
the Bullet, while man fires the Gun? Divine providence can at pleasure
disappoint the gunners intents. Bullets obey God, not men: and he that is under
the protection of the Almighty is ((...)) i.e. Shot-free. Why then should they
who are on the service of God, and a good cause, fear men or guns? both whose
breath is in their Nostrils, and at Gods dispose; and who may shoot often, but
hit or hurt never without divine permission. Sail by, go on securely (ye men of
of war, who are upon divine designs) pass by sorts, by the sides of ships. A
thousand shot shall fly a- head, and as many more a- stern; many fall over and
beyond you, and none shall fasten to do you the least hurt, while God is with
you. All Bullets fly at Gods command, and not according to the gunners intent.

On the sight of one corrected at the capstock for an offense.
How do men observe and punish offenses in all places! This Vessel is the
Sea-mans habitation, and house of correction; and the same instrument which
holds the anchor of hope, sometimes holds the offender to be chastised. Indeed
[O my soul] chastisement is at the capstock of the anchor of hope. It Is a hope
we are children and not bastards, if we are chastised. Who then would presume
to sin, when in all places there are punishments? and yet who would faint under
any affliction, when as he is so near the hold of the anchor of hope? I Will fear
thee my God (and Lord put thy fear into my heart, that I may say and hold)
never presuming to offend at Land or Sea; for thou can punish me in all
places at thy pleasure; yet still I Will hope under every punishment. For verily,
it is good that a man accept of the punishment of his iniquity with patience and
with hope. Next to be free from offending; the next mercy to that, is to be
chastised near and by hope.

On the fall of a bed (that was lashed to the ship side) in a blowing night.
I did lie down in peace, and thought to have slept so; but how is my bed fallen
under me? and how am I awakened with a fall, when I expected to lie soft and
secure? But see (O my soul) what poor things beds are to rest in. Surely no Bed
in this world is fastened sure enough to secure sleep and safety. Though the
feathers are soft, the fastening is not sure. How can that Bed stand, that
always rowles upon, on the waves of a tempestuous world? The next blast (O
secure sleepy man) may shake thy bed, and unloose or break thy cords, and then
where is all thy security and expectation of rest? Make sure (O my soul) of a
better bed, and in a better cabine then any in this world. Cast thy self into
thy Saviors bosom: That bed is soft and sure; let the winds blow, and the
floods arise, let the ship roll, and thy cords shake; yet still that bed shall
abide and not be shaken. When thou go to bed in thy Cabin (O Sea man) thou
art not sure of rest; but thou who restest in Christ, thy rest is sure; and in
him thou may lie thee down in peace and sleep, for he only can make thee to
dwell and rest in safety.

On a boy at the topmast head looking out to descry land.
How nimbly did that boy run up the shrowds, and clime that Topmast? and how
sharply does he look out for land? yea, how does the Master attend his report?
I see now that he who desires to see the land afar off, must clime high. A
low station cannot discover the remote banks of Emmanuels land. He that will
spy the white clifts of heavens fair shore, must mount the Topmast, and
Habbakkuk-like set him upon his tower. And hearken (O soul) to the report of
him on the Topmast. What chman what of the night, what of the day, what of
land, what of the shore? Surely methinks I hear the report, the land is yet
afar off; we shall see it: but it may be ere we come to an anchor, our heart
may meditate terror. Yet rejoice in this, that we are within ken of the good
land, A few Watches more we must run (and indeed we must watch as we sail) and
then we shall see eye to eye, and discern the fair haven, fairly open for us to
enter, and land where we long to be.

On an Anchor that lost its hold, and came home and left the ship adrift.
This Anchor sure had not good ground; For if it had, it would have kept its
hold, and not have left the ship thus to drive. I see the anchor of hope will
not serve the turn, to hold the soul in a tempest, except the ground of that
hope be good. There is a hope which has but an evil ground, and in the day of
distress it will fail, and force the soul to drive. O my soul, look to thy
Hope; see where thou castest it. Be sure thy Anchor be within the veil. Hope
is not good, nor grounded, except on Christ and free grace. Now the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and God even the Father, who has loved me, and has given me
everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace; even that same God
comfort my heart, and establishes me in every good word and work; that though
my hope be singly grounded on grace, yet it may be accompanied with good words
and works; that I deceive not my self, lest my anchor come home, and I run
afloat full of fear, without hopes, or hold, in the day of Tempest and trials.

On a ship that was left by the Mariners upon the Goodwin-sands in a storm, and
fetched off by some Seamen sent to relieve it by my Lord of Warwick.
What fearful and unfaithful Mariners were these, that left the Vessel to sink,
and shifted for themselves, while their stay and pains might have secured
themselves and it well enough! Ah Lord, may the ship of the state never meet
with such Mariners. But if that does, stir up some noble Warwicks to send
relief, to secure the ship which the perfidious Seamen cowardly and
unconscionably desert. Trust not in men (Oh my soul) who are unstable as the
waters. Rely only upon the living God, who never forsakes his in a storm or
tempest. If they prove fearful and false that ought to tend thy security, God
can raise up others, if he pleases, to fetch thee off at any time from any
rocks or sands. Yea, if men fail, Sands shall be so good, as to keep thee from
wracking, till Jehovah send help from above to save thee from the waters on
which thou sailest, that thou sink not and perish.

On the parting of a ships company at the end of a voyage.
With what joy do these all part? and how glad are these men to leave each
other, and yet without any malice or ill will? They love each other as
companions, and yet are glad to part company; this is indeed a friendly
farewell of friends. Why should it not be thus between thy soul and body (O my
heart) at the end of thy voyage, when death comes and calls upon thee to strike
sail and part. Why art so loath to leave the carkase [thy companion] when thou
art to go ashore in thy spirit upon Emmannels land? Come, leap and skip O soul,
part with the carkase with joy. Thy voyage is ended, thy months are out: Go
take thy pay, receive thy wages; which yet is of grace, and not of works. Be as
glad to go out of the body, and to leave it, as the Seaman is to leave his
ship. Yet remember you shall return to your ship again: when Mortality shall
have put on Immortality, your body shall be new rigged and trimmed up. And
though at the end of time in the World to come, John tells us there shall be no
Sea, yet the Psalmist tells us there shall be a River of Pleasures, on which
thy soul and body shall sail and swim in an eternal calm of unexpressable
bliss in the presence of God, in the company of Christ, Angels and Saints, for
evermore. Strike fail here, O my soul, and turmoyle thy self on the Sea of this
World no longer.

THese were some occasional Meditations of my own in the year, 1642. when I was
at sea. And I make them thus public as a pattern, that all spiritual Saylors
(if they have no better) may by this imitate themselves (upon the like
occasions) to raise up such Meditations as these are.

REader, I have now ended my Voyage: I Will conclude my Navigation. If thou by
the help of this Compass arrive the Port, [I mean Heaven] I have my aim and
end; therefore I Will add no more but this: This is my desired Haven which I sail
unto. And while I sail, I Will sing, Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men! So it is in the
Psalm which I commend to every Saylor to study and to sing, Ps. 107.30, 31.

FINIS.

