PROPOSALS of Nicholas Dupin, Esquire The first Deputy Governor of the Linen and
white Writing-paper Corporation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. To all the
Parishes in and about the City of London, and within the weekly Bills of
Mortality, to set the Poor to Work, who are not employed in the Woollen
Manufacture; whereby the said Parishes will (after the expiration of the first
Year) be not only eased and discharged of the Burden of them for ever, but
also be considerable Gainers: For by Employing 50000 Poor, in the several
Parish Workhouses, the product of their Labor will amount, in one Year, to the
Sum of 225000 l. as it is hereafter more at large explained; which Sum is to
remain for a perpetual Fund or Stock, to be lodged and secured in the Chamber
of London or Bank of England, for the Use of the Poor, besides the Charitable
Gifts, Legacies, and other Revenues formerly given and bequeathed by pious
Persons, and the Voluntary, Liberal, and Charitable Contributions to be
bestowed by well disposed Christians, toward the increasing the said Poor's
Stock, and also the Profits of the Manufactured Goods when sold.
WHEREAS Their Excellencies the Lords Justices of England, with the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, were graciously pleased in th^^
last public Proclamation, bearing Date the 13 th. of October, School. to Order,
That the Laws (for the Relief of the Poor, and setting them to Work throughout
this Kingdom) should be duly put in Execution: And whereas the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor of the City of London, did desire the abovenamed Mr. Dupin to
produce his Proposals for setting the Poor to Work in and about the said City;
and also desired him to Sign the said Proposals, which he accordingly did.
Whereupon his Lordship went to Guild Hall and appointed a Committee, where the
said Mr. Dupin was desired to give his Attendance; the said Committee having
sat several times before about Employing the Poor: In order thereunto the said
Mr. Dupin has viewed several convenient Workhouses, which were formerly
built, for to Employ the Poor of the several Parishes in and about this City;
which Proposals are as follows.

per Cent. per An. profit, which may well be afforded, for the Work will
produce One Hundred and Fifty Pound per Cent. profit at least the First Year;
and then the rest of the Stock, and remaining part of the Profit, to be to the
sole Use of the Poor, so that the Establishment hereof, will in no wise be
chargeable to any, but rather very advantageous to all concerned therein. And
these Poor who are now a Burden to the Inhabitants, will, in a short time be
able to earn by their Work wherewithal to pay Rents and Taxes, and serve the
King by Sea and Land.





Dupin will be obliged to procure and produce to the general Court or
Committee, a competent number of English, French, and Dutch Protestant Artists,
both Men and Women, who shall Work at the Parish Workhouses, and be engaged
for Eighteen Pence per Week extraordinary, over and above the common Wages for
their Work, in consideration of their pains and loss of time, to Teach and
Instruct the said poor in their several Trades and Occupations, viz. to Spin,
Weave Linen Cloth, make Lace and Fringes, Tapes, Nets for Fishing, and other
Nets, Packthread, and several other sorts of Works.







per Week, until the Company be reimbursed of what the said Wheels and Reels
cost them, then the said Wheels and Reels to be their own. Likewise the Poor
Weavers, who have Looms of their own at their Habitations, shall have Yarn
delivered to them by weight, and shall be duly paid by the Company according to
the value of their Work.







Bridewell, and the Company shall provide Hemp, Flax, and other Materials for
them to Work upon.

London, and within the Weekly Bills of Mortality as aforesaid, in the
following Trades; and that the same will require a Considerable Sum of Money to
be Employed in buying of Hemp and Flax Thread, to make several sorts of Lace,
Fringes, and for other Uses; and also in buying of Hatchels, Spinning-Wheels,
Reels, Warping-Mills, Looms, Reeds, Harnisses, Rods, Shuttles, Bobbins, Quills,
etc. And Cushions-Bobbins, Patterns of Parchment, Thread and Pins to make Lace,
etc. And Wooden-pins and Needles, to make all sorts of Fishing and other Nets;
and several sorts of Steel and Brass Reeds, to make several sorts of
Sail-Cloath, and other sorts of Cloth. Engines, Blocks, Stools, Tables,
Benches, Mallets, Candlesticks, Lanthorns, and several other things relating to
the said Trades and Manufactures, and to pay Workmen and Servants Wages. It is
therefore thought Convenient to draw Articles in order to take in Subscriptions
in two distinct Books, the one to take in Subscriptions at Twenty Pounds per
Share, payable at Three several Payments, into the Chamber of London, or Bank
of England; and the same to be Emproved and laid out as the general Court (when
assembled) shall think fit. And the said Subscribers to have their Subscription
Money repaid them at the Years end, with Ten Pound per Cent. Profit, as
aforesaid out of the Joint Stock, as it may more at large appear in the said
Articles. And the other Subscription Book, to take in Subscriptions from all
Good and Charitable Christians, who shall be voluntarily disposed to Subscribe
therein from One Shilling and upwards, gratis, to increase the said Poor's
Stock: Which said Charity Money is to be paid into the said Chamber of London,
or Bank of England, by certain Responsible, Trusty Persons, who shall be chosen
in each Parish and authorized to Collect and Leavy the the same by the Order of
the general Court, or Committee appointed by them, which will be about the
beginning of January next; which said Collectors so Authorized, are to Enter
each Persons Name, with the Sum which they will be pleased to bestow, in a
Book; and shall pay the same, when Collected, into the Treasury, and take
Receipts for it.

That the said Subscription-Book and Receipts may be produced to the general
Court or Committee appointed for that purpose, and compared by them, to prevent
Frauds and Mistakes.

Manufactures are the only means to enrich a Nation, support the Crown, and not
only employ the Poor, but also draw Foreigners into the Kingdom.

France, until prohibited by the late King's Proclamation; therefore the Paper
Manufacture is evidently known to be of a vast Consequence, when the French
were so much against the Establishment thereof, that Monsieur Barylon, the late
French Ambassador, with his Factors, Agents, and Friends, used their utmost
Endeavors to hinder the same, by enticing the Corporation's chiefest Workmen
from their Paper Mills, with Bribes, and promises of great Rewards, and so sent
them away privately to France, to the unspeakable Damage of this Nation and
Corporation; besides the Tax of Twenty Five Pound per Cent. laid by the late
Parliament, upon all Writeing and Printing Paper, made, and to be made in this
Kingdom, which obliged us to sell our Paper the dearer, and the French, on the
other hand, endeavoring to under-sell us, has been no small Discouragement in
the infancy of the Establishment of this great and beneficial Manufacture. And
this Kingdom being well accommodated with all Necessaries and Materials, as
aforesaid, by the growth and product thereof, to promote all the aforesaid
Manufactures, and being also furnished with good ingenious Workmen of several
Nations, who can Manufacture all the aforesaid Works, and teach the weaker sort
how to Work in their several Occupations, will considerably increase the King's
Revenue.

France, and so prevent vast Sums of Money which are usually sent from hence
thither for such Commodities, by employing all sorts of Artificers and
Tradesmen, as well French Protestants as others, who are to my certain
knowledge) capable of Undertaking and Manufacturing the same, though for want of
Assistance to set them to Work, several poor Families are ready to starve: But
if the said Manufactures be encouraged, and those poor Souls employed therein,
that they may live, it will not only increase Trade, and the King's Revenue,
and establish new Manufactures here, but above all, it will draw Heaven's
Benidiction on us, for those French Protestants of this Nation, who have fled
from their Native Country, and quitted Houses, Lands, Goods, Stocks,
Preferments, Employments, and what else they had of their own, are the Flower
of that Kingdom for Christianity and Ingenuity, as I have been informed by
certain learned judicious English Divines, and who think it a great happiness
to have escaped Persecutions, Cruelties, and Tyrannies, wherewith they were
daily oppressed, and have full liberty to serve God, and sing Praises to his
holy Name, under the Protection of his Sacred Majesty, King William, whom God
preserve.

Whereas it is manifest, that there never has been seen heretofore in England
such numbers of Poor who want Work, as Silk and Linnen-Weavers, and other
Tradesmen; and also multitudes of poor Housekeepers, etc. that are ready to
starve for want of Work, who are not, nor cannot be employed in the Woollen
Manufacture, but may in the Linen, in making several sorts of Linen Cloth,
Sail-Cloth, Canvas, Thred-Laces, Fringes, and Tapes, Fishing-Nets, Ropes, etc.
wherewith this Nation is supplied by other Foreign Countries, to the value of
several Hundred Thousands of Pounds per Annum, as it may appear by the
Custom House Books; which may be prevented by setting our Poor to Work in this
Manufacture, and keep the Money in the Kingdom: Therefore the employing of the
Poor being for the good of all People, as Housekeepers, Merchants, Travelers,
Farmers, and all manner of Dealers whatsoever, who are daily Sufferers, and
much injured by Robbers, Thieves, and other vicious Persons, and also very much
oppressed and encumbered with the Poor: It is humbly hoped, that all good
Christians will hereunto afford a favorable Reception, it being for the
Public Good, as aforesaid.

And for the better satisfaction of the Subscribers, The said Mr. Dupin, having
been one of the first Governors of six Corporations for the Linen and White
Writing-paper Manufactures in these three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, before specified (as it may appear by six several Charters and
Patents, enrolled in the High Court of Chancery in the aforesaid three
Kingdoms, Confirmed by four several Acts of Parliament, which passed the Royal
Assent) is capable and qualified to manage this undertaking. So that a great
number of Noblemen, Merchants and others, became Partners, and raised Stocks
of two hundred thousand Pounds, and upwards, and great Quantities of all sorts
of Linen and White Writing-paper was made in the three Kingdoms, as good as
any that came from beyond Sea, to the value of several hundred thousand Pounds,
which did employ many thousands of Poor and other People, before, and during
this last tedious War; whereby he has much improved his Experience for
discerning what is good and profitable in them to keep; and what has been
amiss and loss, to prevent for the time to come.

And whereas there are in and about the City of London, and within the Weekly
Bills of Mortality, 135 Parishes; it is, for the convenience of each Parish,
proposed, That there shall be one Subscription Book, with printed Articles, to
show how things are to be governed and regulated: Which said Books are to be
lodged in some convenient place in each Parish, in the Custody of responsable
Persons, in order to take in the Subscriptions of all People who will be
pleased to Subscribe therein; and the Money so Subscribed to be collected about
the beginning of January next, by some trusty Persons whom the Court shall
appoint.

The said Mr. Dupin does oblige himself, at his own proper charges, to provide
the said 135 Subscription Books for all the aforesaid Parishes, and all the
printed Articles and Proposals, and to view the most proper Workhouses, and
make his Report to the Court for their Advice and Approbation; and will also
produce to the said Court a List of the Names of all such Workmen and Women,
and Servants, who shall be fit and qualified to teach the said Poor to Work,
and oversee the same; and will make an Inventory of all things necessary to be
provided for the carrying on of this national and benificial Work; by which
means the Parishes will be discharged of 50000 Poor, at the end of the first
Year, and a perpetual Stock of Two Hundred Thousand Pounds and upwards, will
remain in clear profit, lodged in the Chamber of London; or Bank of England,
for the use of the Poor.

The said Mr. Dupin may be spoke with by any of the said Parishioners, and
others, at his Office at Mr. Woodward's, a Book-binder in St. Christopher's
Alley, over against Benn's Coffee-house in Thread-needle-Street, near the Royal
Exchange, where the Books are laid open, and Articles drawn, in order to take
in Subscriptions, Dated Monday, November the 28th, School.
A brief Computation of the Costs and Charges, and also of the Profits and
Advantages which will accrue and arise by Employing 50000 Poor, and others, in
the several Parishes in and about the City of London.
SUppose the aforesaid 50000 Poor be Taught and set to Work, some may Earn 2 d,
some 3 d, 4, 5 and 6 d, per Day; or suppose they may Earn, one with another, 3
d, per Day, which will amount to 625 l. per Day.

625 per Day. 3750 per Week. 195000 per Year.


There will be also 10 per Cent. clear Profit by the Sale of the Goods when
Wrought and Manufactured, which will amount to about5000. And suppose the
charitable Contribution Money may come to Twenty Five Thousand Pounds.25000.
Total.225000.


Suppose after the Charges and Disbursements in general, for Wheels, Reels,
Hatchels, Looms, Reeds, Warping-Mills, Engines, Cushions, Bobbins, Parchment,
Pins to make Lace, Stools, Tables, Benches, and Candlesticks, Workmen and
Servants Wages, and all other incident Charges, and also for the Interest of 10
per Cent. allowed to the Subscribers, about12000* There will be a perpetual
Stock remaining for the Poor, after all Deductions, at the Years end, of
about213000


LONDON, Printed in the Year, School.


