THE PARABLE OF THE TOP-KNOTS.
Licensed according to Order.
It was a serene Sunshine Morning that Dame Nature came forth from her
Retirements, to take a Survey of her Works, and recreate her self with the
Prospect of her own beautiful Image scattered through the Universe: She beheld
the Sun, that glorious Fountain of Light casting abroad his Splendors with an
unveiled Countenance; but the more modest Moon shrouded above half her Face
under a Mask, unwilling to be exposed to the lascivious Eye of every Endymion,
she saw the rest of the Planets and Staps bashfully twinkling their innocent
Glances at each other, and on all the World; she traversed the Elements, and
observed every thing kept the Order which she had first appointed it. But she
fixed a more particular Eye on Man, the Masterpiece of all her Works, the
Masterless Epitome of the whole Creation; and calling to mind his primitive
Perfections, with the Tragical Story of his Fall, she fetched a deep Sigh,
which made the Earth to tremble. Whilst she was pensively busied in this
Contemplation, I perceived her Brows suddenly knit, and she gave a start, which
put all the Elements into a Disorder. Looking about me to see what was the
Occasion of this violent Passion, I beheld a LADY passing by her, dressed
Cap-a-pe after the present mode: Upon which I heard the Venerable Matron break
forth into these Expressions;

Bless me said she! what uncouth Object is this invades my Eyes! a thing so
foreign to all the known Species of Beings! Or am I superanuated and some new
Power usurped my Place, to forge the World again, and hammer out such Forms as
never before were ranked in the great List of all my Works? Stay thou bold
Phantasm! tell me what thou art? With that the Lady turned about, and made her
this Answer.

Lady. You are merrily disposed Madam, and discover the Brilliant of Language
in your Expressions: I am pleased with your Raillery; but pray What News from
Paris? In what Arroy did the Dauphiness appear last Ball? I am told, my Commode
is a Tire too low, as they adjust it at the French Court.

Mature. Am I a-dream'd, or has the Multitude of Years impaired my Sight and
Judgment? The Voice is Woman's, but for the prating Figure I want a Name; I see
a moving Pyramid of Gayities, a walking Toy-shop, a speaking Gallimaufry of
Ribbons, Laces, Silks and Jewels, as if some upstart mimick Nature had been at
work on purpose to upbraid my Skill and tell me that in framing Woman I left
out the Essentials.

Whilst Dame Nature was thus expostulating the Case with her self, I heard a
sudden Noise raised behind me, at which looking that way, I saw Heraclitus
Ridens standing in a Corner, ready to break his Twatling string, he was so big
with Laughter; it is a fine time of day, said he, with Women, when Nature her
self will not own 'em, as if she were ashamed of her Productions: Do but mind
yonder Lady she has spent five Hours this Morning in Rigging and Careering her
self for public Appearance; and I dare be bold to say, you may as soon reckon
up the Numerous Tackle of a Ship, as give the true Nomenclature of all the
gaudy Whim-whams she wears about her: You would not wonder at me for changing
my Note, had you seen, as I did, what pains this little She-Lucifer took to
day, to mend the supposed Botchery of Nature in her Face; how she hunted after
imaginary Faults in her Cheeks, to find occasion for Black Patches; how she
placed and displaced 'em an hundred times over, pursuing the least Spot and
Freckle in her Skin to a thousand Dilemmaes. with Wash, Paint and Patch, till
tired with the tedious Discipline of her Toilet, she sails forth of her Chamber
like a new-launch'd Vessel with Pendant's and Streamers flying, and all her
Female Tackle in order from the Top and Top Gallant to the Humble Keel: Do but
regard her Rigging above Deck, and you would swear she carries B^^^-Steeple upon
her Head, or the famous Tower of Severus in Rome, which was built seven Ranks
of Pillars one above another. Such a lofty Gradation of Top-knots, if it
proceeds, will befriend the Carpenters and Bricklayers, for our Gentry and
Tradesmen in time will be forced to pull down their low pitched Houses, and
take the height of the Stories in the next Structure from the elevated Pageant
of Trinkets on their Wives and Daughters Heads, lest these fine Trappings
should be Kidnap'd from their empty Noddles by an unmannerly Brush of the saucy
Ceilings. 'Twould make a Dog split his Halter, to hear the learned Cant between
the Mistress and the Maid, when about the important Affair of adjusting her
Ladyships Arroy in a morning; you would swear they were conjuring, they sputter out
such a confused Jargon of hard Words, such a Hotch-potch of Mongrel Gibberish:
Bring me my Palisade there, quoth Madam: You Would think she were going to encamp.
Will it not be convenient to attack your Flandan first, says the Maid? More
Anger yet? still Military Terms? Let me see, says Madam, where is my Cornet?
Pray carine this Favorite: So, so, good Words; now there is some hopes of
Peace, till the blustering Frilal and Burgoign are called for, and then the old
Catter-wawling begins again?

There is a Clack of Settees, Passes, Monte lithauts, Crotches, and other
Trinkums, would make a Man suspect they are raising the Devil: at last comes
the Sur-les-font, and then Madam is completely harnessed for the Play, or the
mysterious Ruelle.

Here Heroclitus made a Digression, at the sight of a Troop of Females that
were walking by. These, said he, belong to the inferior Class of Top-knots,
they are but one Story high yet. Do but follow 'em, and you will discover by the
Working of their Heads and Tongues, that another is a brooding: I took his
Counsel, and keeping at some distance, observed their Motion.

I wonder, says one of them, why the Men should make such a noise about the
innocent Arts we use to win their Affections. They pretend to love us, and yet
would confine us to a Dress that would make 'em hate us. Whatsoever is not so
gay and polite in the World, is despised and trampled on: We have reason to
hold up our Heads, to deck our selves with all the Ornaments that may create
Respect in that wild Race. Why should not an English Commode be as allowable as
the Persian Tiara, or the Roman Septi^onium were of old? Away with this servile
Restraint! Let us appear like Amazons, defy the men, and all their grave
Preachments, or lighter Pasquils, I am resolved to be in the mode, tho it
should put me to the charge of maintaining a Negro to support the Monumental
Umbretta on my Head. With that Dame Nature steps up to her, and thus addressed.

When I first molded Woman, and sublimated her from the grosser Ore, I drew
into that fair Compendium all thr visible Perfections of the Creation; In her
native simplicity she glittered with Rays and Charms, that dazzled all Eyes:
Nothing so salvage or untain'd, that did not pay an Homage to her conquering
Beauty. She needed no other Ornament than the luster which flowed from her
untainted Virtue. How comes it to pass thot she has lost her Diadem? and seeks
in vain, to regain the shattered remnants of her former Glory, by borrowing
from every Triffle, some counterfeit perfection to set her off? You are but the
Milleners Machin, joined together by Chambermaids efficious hands. A mere Chaos
of needless Manufactures jumbled into the perfect Figure of a Woman.

The Lady that had first occasioned Madam Natures surprise, and all this
Discourse, had not patience to hear any more, but looking on her Watch that was
attached to her Crochet, made her a Revoir to the Company, excusing her abrupt
departure, by telling them, 'twas time to go to the Play house. Upon which the
young Fry of Top-knots buttoning up their Mouths in a most charmant manner,
begged of her Ladyship to vindicate the common Cause against this Clownish old
Beldame, that had made such a Coil about their Habiliments (for they had got
that modish word by the end too.). The Lady fond of the Character of a good
natured Woman, took up the Cudgels, and turning to Dame Nature, spoke to her
after this manner.

Prithee don't trouble thy head old Gentlewoman, said she, about the present
Mode; the World is grown more refined and polite since your Youthful days:
Women are not mewed up in the Nursery, as in Queen Elizabeth's time, but have
Liberty of Conversation; we are more Eveille (as I may say) than formerly
weaned from the Winter-tales of the Chimney Corners, and learning the Modes
abroad, and Customs of more civilized Matrons. We had been absolutely
barbarous, had ir not been for the Conquest of the Romans: And we should be
little amended now, were it not for the Neighborhood of the more accomplished
French. I am in love with that genteel Nation: ma Foy.

Ma Foy said Heraclitus laughing, you are much in the right on it. I ever said
the fondness of our English Women would make us Slaves to France; nothing but
French will go down with us. We Eat, Drink, and Sleep in plain English, but we
manage the rest of our Actions in French. We Love and Hate A-la-mode de Paris:
We serve our King and Country A-la-mode de Paris: We walk, talk, dance and Sing
A la-mode de Paris. In fine, we do all things en Cavalier, or A-la-mode de
Paris, (which you will) being resolved to bring in the French King by Head and
Shoulders, rather than stand idle. And as for Names, Fashions, and other
Whimwhams, brought over from France; they are but as so many Introductions of
the forlorn hope of a French Army, the Grooms of the wooden Horse that conceals
the secret Enemies and Betrayers of our Ancient Liberties and Properties.

When Heraclitus had done, a Body would have thought it was my turn to hold
forth next, who had said nothing in this Company all the while; but I was ever
kind to the Ladies, and seeing her run down by the Multitude, and Noise of her
Antagonists, I had not the Heart to side with the strongest Party, tho I judged
all to be truth they said; but seeing the Lady ready to depart, I very fairly
offered her my hand: Had she accepted my Kindness, I believe it had been better
for her Head-gear; for just as she cast a scornful Eye on me, telling me
withal, That she loved no Neuters, all her Capital Gim-cracks were caught off
at once from her Head by an unmannerly Bough of a Tree that hung over her, as
she was deserting; which cross-grained Accident exposed her Ladyships Bald-pate
to the open View of her Enemy, my old Grandame, so that I had much ado with
all the dexterity and haste I could make, to rescue her pendant Helmet time
enough to attack it to her Skull before some Bullies came up to us, o whom you
shall hear in the next.

Advertisements.
THE Parable of the Puppies: Or, The Top-knots Vindicated, will be published
next Wednesday. Printed for T. Burdet.

Religio Bibliopolae, in imitation of Dr. Brown's Religio Medici, also will be
published next Week: written by the Author of this Paper.

The History of the Royal Congress at the Hague, with the Names, Characters,
and Equipage of the Sovereign Princes that compose this most August Assembly,
together with an Account of the Glorious Canopy and Chair of State. The several
curious and admirable Fireworks, the many triumphal Arches, with the other
vast Preparations made for his Majesty of Great Britain, with an exact Draught
of the manner of King William's entering into the Hague, and reception by the
States General. Translated from the Dutch Copy, Printed at Leyden.

An Account of the late horrid Conspiracy to depose their present Majesty's
King William and Queen Mary, to bring in the French and the late King James,
and ruin the City of London. Also some brief Reflections on the Trials of the
Lord Preston and Mr. Ashton. By a Gentleman who was present at those Trials.

Remarks upon the Life, Trial, and Acquitment of Arthur Earl of Torrington.

A Penitentiary Sermon preached upon two young persons doing Penance in a
public Congregation; to which is added an accurate Treatise of Fornication;
written upon an extraordinary occasion, by W. Barlow, M. A.

The Wonders of Free Grace, or a Complete History of all the Remarkable
Penitents that have been Executed at Tyburn for these last 30 years; with a
Sermon preached in the hearing of a Condemned Malefactor.

The Third Volume of the Pocket Library, (completing the two former)
containing a further account of the Author's Juvenile Rambles, with his first
Project of Girdling the World.

The Triennial Mayor: Or, The New Rapperees, A Satyr. Price 6 d.

The Anti-Weesils, a Poem, price 6 d.

The Vanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology, by Francis Crow, M. A.


