A New Voyage TO THE EAST INDIES IN THE Years 1690 and 1691.

BEING A full Description of the Isles of Maldives, Cocos, Andamants, and the
Isle of Ascension; and all the Forts and Garrisons now in possession of the
French, with an Account of the Customs, Manners, and Habits of the Indians.

By Monsieur Duquesne.

To which is added, A New Description of the Canary Islands, Cape Verd, Senegal
and Gambia, etc.

Illustrated with Sculptures, together with a new Map of the Indies, and
another of the Canaries. Done into English from the Paris Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Dring at the Harrow and Crown near St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet, 1696.

THE Author's Preface.
IF I had taken the leisure to make a serious Reflection on the boldness of my
design, I had not published this Account of my Voyages; the raw Age in which I
made them, had been a sufficient reason to discourage me from it, besides the
consideration of the polite Age we live in. For though I have followed Truth with
the greatest severity, yet these Relations want perhaps those other Advantages
that are apt to recommend things of this nature to the Reader, such as Air and
Style in the writing of them, so much valued at present.

Yet however devoid of these Ornaments, I shall venture to present them to the
Public, after so ingenious an acknowledgment, in hopes the young Traveller
will meet with a mild and easy censure of his first attempts, while he gives
the Public a most exact account of the particulars of Monsieur Duquesne's
Voyage and Undertakings in the Indies, which has been so earnestly and
impatiently expected; of his Engagements with the English and Dutch; with the
Advantages he has gained of them; and his Conduct in bringing back a Squadron
safe with which his Majesty entrusted him, through a Voyage of six Thousand
Leagues, through Storms and Tempests, and all the rage and power of the Enemy.

Perhaps the Reader will be pleased with the variety of the Subject with which
I have furnished this Relation, which cannot but render it the more agreeable and
entertaining; as likewise with some Remarks curious enough, concerning the
various Nations and Countries through which we past, and the horrible Tempest
that surpised us in our return in the Latitude of Mascarin. I have writ all in
the natural order in which they fell out, with exactness and fidelity, obliging
my self to omit nothing of moment, and to relate nothing of which I was not an
Eyewitness: So after acquainting the Reader before hand with some Repetitions,
which by a frequent recurring of the same things were unavoidable, I have
nothing more to desire for his satisfaction, or my own advantage, but that the
style had been more polite and correct, there being nothing else wanting to
complete his satisfaction.

The Sea Coasts of Africa and the East Indies with the Islands thereof from the
Canaries to Sumatra



A RELATION OF A Voyage and Return FROM THE EAST INDIES.
CHAP. I.
An Account of the Squadron designed by France to the East Indies.
THE Enemies of France having alarmed all Europe for her Destruction, expected
their Projects would have equal success in these Parts of the World; that the
Commerce she had established in the Indies, would follow the Revolution of
Siam, and be entirely ruined, as being too much employed at home, in her own
immediate Defense; to be able to send any Forces to those distant Parts of the
World: But the GOD of Armies having defeated the Designs of so numerous and
Confederated an Enemy, has so visibly extended his Holy protection to the
sacred Person of his Majesty and his Dominions; that in spite of all their
utmost Efforts, he has been the Agressor, and set on them first and their
Factories in those Parts; a sufficient demonstration of the Glory and Strength
of France. To this Enterprise the King appointed six Ships; which were the
Bird, the Lion, the Dragon, the Jolly, the Prosperus, and the Rock; the Three
first of which were fitted at Breast, the rest in the Magazines of the East, at
Port Lewis, where the Squadron Rendevouz'd; which being joined the beginning of
February, (90,) the Equipages were didributed in this manner.

Monsieur Duquesne, whom the Court had made Commandant, pitched upon the Jolly,
mounted with Forty four Guns, Two hundred and Fifty Men. He had Messieurs the
Commander of Portere for Second Captain, D' Anberville for Lieutenant, de
Voutron, Fauche, and Baron, for Ensigns, with Ten Guard-Marines.

Monsieur le Chealier d' Air Commanded the Bird, of 42 Guns and Two hundred
Men; Messieurs de la Neufville was his Second Captain, De la Villauclers, and
Demons, his Lieutenants.

Monsieur Joyeuse went on Board the Prosperus of 44 Guns, and Two hundred and
Thirty Men; he had Messieurs Granche, for Lieutenant, his Son and de la Perine
for Ensigns.

Monsieur Hortin took the Rock, of 38 Guns, and 200 Men; Messieurs le Chevalier
de de Bouchetier, and le Vasseur were his Lieutenants.

Monsieur de Chamoreau, Commanded the Lion, which is a Frigate of 24 Guns, and a
180 Men; he had no other Officers then Monsieur de Presac his Lieutenant; Two
Capuchins went aboard him, who was bound for Surate.

And Monsieur Quistly boarded the Dragon, which is another Frigate of 28 Guns,
280 Men; Monsieur de Chenelon was his Lieutenant. Two Companies of Foot with
their Offiers, were over and above distributed a board these six Ships, and
some Religious, which the Papist Priest Tachard carried to the Indies; they
came aboard us with a Secretary, and Three Mandarins of the late King of Siam.

CHAP. II.
The Squadron Sails.
THE Squadron thus Armed, had not been Ten Days before the Isle of Groge, when
Orders came from Court to Sail immediately. So Friday the 24th of February
(90,) Monsieur Duquesne coming aboard at Five in the Evening, weighed Anchor,
after giving the parting Guns; we presently were under Sail, with the Wind at
North, and a delicate Gale as could be wished, but it did not last long, coming
about at Ten next Morning; so that we were obliged to put back again; but by
the 27th we Sailed again, the Wind being more favorable than at first.

We made such way, that we soon lost sight of Land, which we were not like to
see again in a good while: The Wind contiued so favorable, that by the Tenth
of March we doubled Cape Fenester: The Sea is commonly Boisterous in this
Latitude, and the passage dangerous, and there is no bearing much Sail here.

The Sixth Day became remarkable, by an Accident that happened to us. The
Gabier, who is one appointed to look to the Masts and Tackling, hanging on the
Foremast Sail-yard, unhapily fell into the Sea, which was then very boisterous;
we did all we could to save him, threw out Ropes, hoisted out the Boat, but all
in vain, for the Storm was so violent, that he sunk presently.

Great are the terrors of this Element, and there is nothing apter to make a
Man serious, when he considers there is but a Plank between him and Eternity.

CHAP. III.
The first discovery of Land, since we lost sight of it, Remarks on the Pike of
Teneriffe.
WE Steered our Course for the Madera Islands, where with pleasure, we waited
to take in some refreshments, though 'twas not above Nine Days that we had lost
sight of Land. But the Currents which we met having carried us too far to the
East, or rather to the great Foggs at Land, having hindered us from the sight
of it; we left it to the Right, without perceiving it, till we had doubled it.
The 9th we discovered the Isle of Savages, which was the first Land we made
since we parted from Port-Lewis; it is situated in 30 Degrees of the Northern
Latitude, and Twenty Minutes Longitude. This is an uninhabited Island, very
dangerous for the Steep Craggy Rocks that inviron it for above a League; that
scarce a Boat can go a Shore; by this sight of Land we judged we were not far
from the Canary Islands, which doubtless we should have come to sight of, the
next Morning, if we had not been delayed by a Calm, which happily lasted but a
little while; for, in the Evening it began to blow a brisk Gale, so that by the
Eleventh, at 7 a Clock in the Morning, we were within Thirteen Lagues of the
Pike of Teneriffe.

By Noon we were near it, being in Twenty Eight Degrees, Thirty Six Minutes,
North Latitude, and Three Hundred and Fifty Nine Degrees of Longitude. The Pike
of Teneriffe is seen Forty Leagues off, and undoubtedly may pass for one of the
highest Mountains in the World. Some make it seven Leagues high, others Twelve.
This proud Mountain wraps its head in the Clouds, which appears white, by
reason of the Snow that covers it Winter and Summer, rising through the middle
Region of the Air, which makes it so cold that none was ever able to mount it.

Behind this Mountain stands the Town of Canary, of which the Island bears the
Name; which is very Fruitful, and abounds in Corn, and is famous for the rich
Wines it produces, which are carried to all Parts of the World. Three are
besides Three other Islands; the first, that of Gomer, of the same side with
the Pike, and not above Six or Seven Leagues distant. The second is Palm
Island, memorable for the Death of Forty Jesuits, who going to Brazill, to
Preach the Faith of Jesus Christ, were there Martyred by the Calvinists, about
a Hundred Years ago. This latter is opposite to the Pike of Teneriffe, and is
about Twelve or Thirteen Leagues distant. We past between these two, having
Palm Island on the Right, and the Pike of Teneriffe on the Left. And the last
is the Isle of Fer, where Geographers commonly place the first Meridian. These
four Islands belong to Spain, so that we could not take a view of them, but at
a distance, by reason of the War between us and it.

CHAP. IV.
The different Opinions concerning the Trading Winds.
THe Wind which had hardly stirred all day, began to blow fresh in the Evening,
so that we could easily perceive the Trading Winds, which are so useful for
Sailing; they are called so by reason of their continuing three or four months
without changing. These sort of Winds Blow always from the North East in the
Southern parts, and from the South East in the Northern parts, which very much
perplexes curious people to find out the true reason of it. Some maintain, that
the Trading Winds are no other then those which blow from the West, and the
North with great violence, which passing over Europe to the East and South,
rarify and grow weaker as they approach the warmer Climates; on the contrary,
in the Southern parts, the Western and Southern Winds blowing with the same
violence toward Africa, are thence driven toward the East and North, and
abate by degrees as they approach the warmths of the Line, and quite cease when
they reach it.

Others explain this matter after a different manner; they will have it, that
the excessive heats of the Line draw these Winds from the Poles, where the
Exhalations and Vapors, which are the matter of the Winds, being stronger and
in greater abundance cause more violent and lasting ones, and that afterward
these Winds or Exhalations are drawn toward the Zone, and there abated by the
excessive heat.

Behold the best Account I could meet with, to satisfy those who are curious in
this matter; but whatever the Natural Cause of them may be, it may be truly
said, they are the sweetest Winds that blow.

CHAP. V.
The Squadron Anchors at the Island of Saintiague.
Hither we had reason to admire our happiness, and to hope we should soon
arrive at Saintiague, where we were to stay some days; our only misery was a
violent Fever which feiz'd our men, and of which fifty lay dangerously ill,
though we had been but three weeks at sea. 'Twas then the R. R. F. F. the
Jesuits, found an opportunity to exercise their Zeal and Charity; they Confessed
the sick, gave them Instructions for dying well, and assisted them with their
own provisions: It must be said, that from the first day they came aboard us,
they had such care, by their Holy Example, to promote a good life amongst the
Officers and seamen, that far from following the loose way of others, they
thought themselves obliegd to behave themselves according to the utmost
severity of the Christian Religion; they were willingly present at their
Catechisms and Sermons on Sundays, and at Mass every morning, with prayers at
the end for the King; in the evening we said our beads, and the Litany of the
Blessed Virgin, making an Examen of Conscience on our knees with an Act of
Contriction.

Great was the happiness and advantages we had from the company of these
Religious persons, but chiefly the sick; one of the Mandarins named Pipit died
the 7th. day of his distemper; the R. P. Fachard took particular care of him,
never leaving him till he had administerd extreme Unction, and the Holy
Eucharist to him. Of these three Envoys of the King of Siam, he converted two
to the Catholic Religion, Baptizing them at Breast, and it is to be presumed
that the third would soon have yielded too, to the Authority of his holy Life,
as well as that of his Arguments.

All the funeral Honors due to a person of Quality, were paid to this deceased
Mandarin: Four Guard Marines held the corners of the Pall, and after the usual
prayers on the occasion, threw him into the Sea, with five Guns, fired at a
distance one from another, which made it more sad and Sollemn; 'twas believed
in the rest of the ships that 'twas an Ensign died, so to honor him, and to
testify to their Admiral their concern for him, they struck their sails, and
lay by, rolling in his way sadly, as if there were none to govern them; as soon
as the ship past by, they hoist their Sails again.

The next night, which was the 15th, we past the Tropic of Cancer, which our
Pilots perceived next day by the computation they made, we had made vast way in
a little time, being but sixteen days since we left France; the winds and seas
seemed to conspire to prosper our Voyage, every thing succeeding to our wishes.

The 17th. in the Evening Monsieur Duquesne made the Cape, of which he gave
notice to the rest by the signal of a Gun, and two fires, one on the Round-top
of the Mainmast, and the other on the Round-top of the Foremast, for fear we
should run aground in the night, from which we could not be far, according to
the Elevation taken at Noon: Next morning by break of day we perceived the Isle
of May to the left, which we no sooner doubel'd, but we saw that of Saintiage,
our Commandant perceiving no ships at anchor there, hoisted a white Flag and an
Admiral Flame on the top of the Mainmast, and coming near, he sent in the Rock
to sound; there appeared at a great distance a Man on the top of a hill, who
hoisted a flag six several times, in all probability to give the Inhabitants
notice of the number of our ships. Saturday the 18th. of March, at two in the
afternoon, we anchored half a League from the shore.

CHAP. VI.
A Description of the Isle and Town of Saintiague, Manners and Religion of the
Inhabitants.
THE Commandant Monsieur de Pouriere went a shore by Monsieur Duquesnes orders,
to complement the Governor, and to desire leave to take in fresh water, and to
settle the teremony of the Salute; who easily agreed to what was desired, and
not only so, but promised we should be furnished with Beef and Mutton, though very
scarce among themselves; but when it came to the ceremony of the Salute, this
raw young Governor, who in all probality was ignorant of what was really our
due, refused to answer Gun for Gun; but the Commandant provokt at it, told him;
that the French expected other returns, and that seeing he stood so stiff
upon it, they would not salute him at all: 'Twas then he perceived he mistook
his men, and so presently agreed to five Guns each,

He made a present of two dozen of sweet Oranges and some Chocolet to Monsieur
de Pouriere, having neither wine nor sweetmeats though very common here; who
after he had received them, went to give our Commandant an account of what
past, and to acquaint him he had been informed by the Governor, that two Dutch
and one English ship parted thence but three days before, bound for the
East Indies, and that they expected two more suddenly: We lay at anchor till
Tuesday evening, without perceiving any, whence we pursued our Voyage, not a
little troubled to miss 'em, for they could hardly escape falling into our
hands: Being now late, we omitted the Salute till next morning, which was
Palm Sunday; when after our Almoner had said Mass, we saluted them with five
Guns, and they returned the same number.

Being curious to go a shore, I got leave of the Commandant, and so went in
company with F. Tachard, and an Officer, who carried a small Present from
Monsieur Duquesne to the Governor; at our landing, we saw some Negro's that
were quite naked, excepting a ragg about their wastes to cover their nakedness.
There Is a Chapel on the shore dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, and a little
further a Battery of four Iron Guns; we were forced to climb, 'till we came to
a certain Bastion, on which were mounted six old Iron Guns, of which the
biggest was a six pounder. This is the best fortified part of the Island, where
the Portuguese keep a Garrison, but the Soldiers are fitter to be pitty'd than
feared.

F. Tachard asked them news of the Governor; they showed him a Church where he
was, into which we enterd, when he presently rose from his seat, and gave us a
graceful salute, the Father after talking some time with him in Portuguese,
went out; but I continued some time observing the Ceremonies, and other things;
after blessing the Palm branches, a Negro Priest said Mass, assisted by a
Deacon.

They are more devout and solemn than we, but we were a little scandalized at
the negress women half naked in the Church, who as they star'd at us, so we
could not but stare at them; as likewise at the Governor's Guard, which was a
wretched one; their Arms were a Pike and a Sword of an extraordinary length,
with a pair of Beads about their necks.

In the midst of them stood the little Governor, of about twenty year old; a
Native of Lisbon, pretty tall, but meanly clad, and of a poor mien and air.

This is a wretched Country, and fitter to starve than live in; they have their
wine and bread from Lisbon, or from the Cunarys, the latter is 8 pence a pound,
and the first half a Crown a Bottel, which holds no more than the Chopin of
France; it is true the Negro's who are naturally fober, use little wine, or even
so much as bread; living for the most part of dry cake well pressed, which is
made of the root of a tree called Macoc, the Juice of which is a subtle poison.

They are all Soldiers or Slaves, and so given to robbery, that its hard to
escape them, if they meet one in a by place, they are very fond of knives,
ribbon, needles, but chiefly of Biscuit, for which they readily give Oranges,
Goiaves, Bannanes, and several other fruits, they have large proportioned
bodies, short friz'd hair, little beard, and whither hunting or walking, they
still carry bows and arrows about 'em.

No one will wonder at the sterillity of the Country, when he is told it has
not rained there in four years time; which has made the ground so parcht and
barren, that of 25000 inhabitants which it had, there died 6000 in two years
time of hunger, as one of their Priests told me, with whom I discoursed some
time in Latin.

The Clothing of the women is only a piece of white or blew cotton cloth,
that covers them from the wast to the knee, the rest of their body is naked,
going barefoot and bareheaded, only sometimes wearing an ordinary handkerchief
round their heads, and for the most part gold Rings, or three wooden pins in
their ears. These women have their peculiar beauties, as tall, proper, comely,
and well proportioned bodies, and a certain great air, especially when they
walk; they smoke much, and are scarce ever seen without a pipe.

I was to see the Town of Saintiague, about three Leagues from the place our
ships lay at anchor; where I was told that he whom I took for Governor, was
only the Lieutenant; the Governor residing always at Saintiague. This is a
little Town in a bottom, situated by the sea side, through which a large River
takes its course, descending from the neighboring Mountains which surround it;
It has a matter of three hundred houses; the best part of the Inhabitants are
Portuguese, the rest Negro's, these last go naked, the former clad after their
own Fashion, having all Beads about their necks.

There Is a Bishop in this Twon, a Native of Lisbon, of the order of St.
Frances; and two Convents, one of Men and the other of Women. There Is a Fort
raised at the end of the Town, mounted with two cast Guns, and at the foot of
it eight, and three Iron Guns, mouthing toward the sea; hard by, is the Isle
of Fougo, or the Fiery Island, where there is a very high mountain, whose top
casts, fourth flames continually, with a thick smoke. This is all I could
remark in the short stay I made here.

Saintiague is an Island of Cape Verde, belonging to the Portuguese, which is
situated in fourteen degrees, thirty six Minutes North Lat. and three hundred
and fifty three degrees thirty Minutes Longitude. I have already said, that
provisions were so scarce here, that we could have but one Bullock, which was
divided amongst us all, and some sheep for the Commodant, but plenty of
excellent Fish is caught here. We got some barrels of fresh water which was
none of the best, and hard to come by, having it out of a dirty Cistern, which
was a great distance from the sea. After we had filled our empty Casks with it,
Monsieur Duquesne weighed Anchor, and left Saintiague, Tuesday the 21st. at
five a clock in the morning.

CHAP. VII.
The passing of the Line in 358 Degrees. of Long. and the burning Heats that are
felt there.
WE made great way the first three or four days, but the winds beginning to
slack as we approacht the heats of the Line, we did not sail so fast as before;
being now Passion, or the Holy-week, Father Tachard would omit nothing of the
holy Exercises practiced at this time, we sung the Tenebra, we heard Sermons,
and though at sea performed all the duties of Christians who have more
convenience.

Holy Friday the 24th. of March this Father, who often studdied the Courses and
Position of the Stars, foretold us an Eclipse of the Moon, which should happen
at seven a clock in the evening, five Minutes past, and end exactly at ten,
which accordingly did; it could not be seen in France, ^r according to the
Calculation, it was ^o be at Paris at four a clock in the after^oon.

In the mean time we insensibly ap^roacht the Line, the passing of which (...)
don't admire people should dread so much, we had nothing now but faint winds,
very inconstant, and almost continual Calms, caused by the excessive heats
which are felt here, which would be unsupportable, if it were not for those
sudden gusts that abate them, and cool the air from time to time; these
sudden gusts, or rather rains, are commonly accompanied with cool winds that
greatly comfort this scorching passage, they rise and cease of a sudden, and
then a burning calm succeeds

It Is then that troops of Fish leaping above the water of all sides, invite the
seamen to take them. I remember one day when the sea was a little rough, I,
with no little pleasure, beheld shoals of fish leaping above the water, and
continuing so as long as their fins were wet, to avoid the pursuit of the
Bonites, a large fish, who is a great devourer of the rest; the others; as I
said, are forced to quit their natural Element, and have much a do to save
themselves by their often riseing above it, being often snapt by them in the
air; so that its almost impossible for them to escape the enemy, who
incessantly pursues them in vast numbers. We took a great many of these
Bonites, which resemble Shads, but are more savory and firm.

We were within five or six Degrees of the Line, and so had continual Calms,
which were almost unsupportable, and by which we suffered extremely; our Wine
and Victuals were spoiled, and our Vigor consumed, and our Distemper encreast
daily through the long and violent heats; the very air that should keep us
alive, almost suffocated us, night and day the heat was so excessive, that the
very Sealingwax we had in our trunks melted. The rest of this Month past
without any thing remarkable, save that it thunderd, with violent winds and
rain, which forwarded us very much in our Voyage.

'Twas not a little ghastly, in the horrors of dark and tempestious nights, to
see the Lightnings perform the office of the day; which gave us no other
prospect, but that of a rising and a yawning Ocean, into which two of our Men
fell.

The fifth of April our Carpenter being at the ships head, fell into the sea;
but being a good swimmer, he kept himself above water till he got hold of a
rope, and then cried out for help; one of the Seamen presently gave him his
foot to take hold of, which breaking, he drew the other in with him, we gave
'em all the assist- we could, and with much ado saved them both at last.

The way we made this night, brought us considerably nearer the Line; which we
longed to pass, almost quite spent with the intolerable heats we had endured
for fiefteen days time; only those rains which fell helped to abate the rageing
heats, and were a great relief to us; at length, after a great deal of them,
accompanied with Thunder and Lightnings Sunday the ninth of April at ten a
clock in the morning we past the Line, which we so impatiently longed for.

Here the Mariners use an execrable custom of a mock Baptism, which is fitter
to be condemned with the utmost severity than described.

CHAP. VIII.
How the sick recovered after passing the Line. Monsieur Hortin, Captain of the
Rock, dies.
TO the Southward of the Line we met with as long and frequent Calms as before;
which for some days made us as earnestly wish to get at a distance from it, as
we did before to pass it. There is nothing distresses a Voyage more than those
Calms, while unable to go backward or forward, you are forced to remain whole
days in the same place, scorching and broiling in the sun, and tumbling on
great rolling waves and surges which are met here, notwithstanding the calm, so
that one can scarce stand on the deck; but being past the Line about a hunderd
Leagues, our miseries began to abate, as the South-East winds began to blow,
when we found our selves as in another Climate, and to breath a more temperate
air: This change rejoiced us all, and was very happy for the sick, of whom two
parts in three presently recovered, besides our hopes of doubling the Cape of
Good-hope encreast daily, by the vast way we made, which sometimes was no less
than 55 Leagues in 24 hours, and had been more, if all our ships had sailed
alike, and one had not been forced to stay for the other, that we might not
lose company, so that we could not make the same use of the wind as a single
ship would.

About this time Monsieur Duquesne was informed of Monsieur Hortin's sickness,
who was Captain of the Rock, as he was a person of great experience, and whom
he had a great value for, he often visited him, and ordered the Surgeons of the
Squadron to consult of his Distemper, who seemed to have good hopes of him, but
his age made him yield to the violence of it, which took him off the 22d. of
April; all were very sensible of his death, which was presently known by the
signal from the Rock, which all day had her two Flags half down, and her Fane
quite down, the common Ceremonies with which the funeral of a Captain is
honored, with eleven Guns when he is thrown into the Sea.

Our Commandant was not much put to it to choose one in his place, who was fit
to succeed him; for he presently chose Monsieur Pouriere, who accepted the
employment, to the great regret of his own Crew, who were not a little troubled
to part with him, who they loved so entirely for his many excellent
Accomplishments.

CHAP. IX.
Passage of the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Cape of Good-hope happily doubled.
WE had calms for some days, and the winds were changeable, but this did not
last long, for blowing fresher and fresher, we past the Tropic of Capricorn
the 15th. at ten at night. In this traverse you're exposed to a great many
different Climates; as we approached the Cape, we had delicate cool winds,
which were not a little pleasant to us, after coming out of the scortching
heats of the Line: These two contrary qualities acting on the same bodies,
produced violent effects, and thence our sickness at land had its original.

Hitherto we sailed as happily as we could wish, nothing was more beautiful
than the sea, which seemed to join with the winds to Expedite our Voyage; the
very water in the hold was not corrupted, and being as happy as could be
expected in a voyage of this kind; in a little time we met with the western
winds, which were necessary to gain the Cape of Good-hope.

The third of May we had them, but they lasted but a little while, coming about
to the North, which serving our purpose as well, we sailed sixty Leagues in 24
hours with them, which made us hope we should soon be at the place where we
were to anchor, which every one earnestly desired, so that our joy was
excessive when we reached the height of the Cape. The judgment of our Pilots
was confirmed by the sight of the Velvet Channels, called so from a large Bird
which is only seen there, because half their plumage resembles Velvet spotted
with Pearl. We saw two whales, with a great number of birds of different kinds,
and all sorts of colors; the Calms delaid us there very much, and hindered our
passing it, as did likewise the contrary winds.

But with the blessing of God overcoming these difficulties, Sunday the 28th.
of May we doubled the Cape of Good-hope, with a northerly wind as good as we
could wish. It Is here our ships refit going to the Indies, and meet with plenty
of provisions; but being in War with the Dutch, who are Masters of the Cape, we
were deprived of this happiness; and so without so much as passing within sight
of it, we continued our Voyage, resolving not to stop till we reached Amiouam,
which is 800 Leagues farther.

CHAP. X.
The Bank of Needles, a most dangerous passage: And sight of the Isle of
Madugascar: Which made us rejoice.
IT still blew so fair, that next day by seven a clock in the morning we
arrived at the Bank of Needles, though it be forty Leagues from the Cape; the
Rock sounding, found ground at the first, of which she gave us notice by a gun,
and hanging out a flag; our Commandant ordered Te Deum to be sung at the end of
Mass, to thank GOD for it, after which we made it our business to get over it
as soon as possible, the winds rising making that place more dangerous, which
at last grew to a storm.

We could scarce bear as much sail as was sufficient to keep the ships head to
the Waves, which while they rolled, often entered into them; the Dragon lost
the round top of her Mainmast, which Monsieur Duquesne observing, he furled a
sail, that she might not be left too far behind, which delayed us a little, for
else we had been clear of the Bank that very day. At four in the evening we saw
the Needles Cape on our left, at about five or six Leagues distance, two sea
wolfs, and a power of strange birds.

After having happily past this Bank, and the Cape of Good Hope, we were past
the worst, and had little more to fear; we had no more to wish but to discover
the Isle of Madagascar, which was absolutely necessary in our passage to
Amiouam; fifteen days we impatiently waited for it, at which time Thursday the
15th. of Jure we made it, which greatly rejoiced us all, and for which we sung
Te Deum; for had we mist it, we should scarce have been able to have found a
place to refit, or so much as know where we were.

We were not long before we saw the Lion, who was sent upon the discovery;
Monsieur Duquesne finding he was just on the Island, struck sail, and with the
signal of a Gun gave notice to the other ships to follow him; so steering
North, North East, the wind in our stern, we left Madagascar on the right to
the East of us.

This is perhaps the greatest Island in the world; its situated betwixt 12 and
22 Degrees of south Lat. its allowed to be about 800 Leagues in compass, and
300 over; it has several Kings, each having a good part of it; they often make
War on one another, and command a great many men, of whom some are so savage,
that they care not for having any commerce with strangers, and often eat one
another, and their neighbors when they can light on them.

CHAP. XI.
The Squadron anchors at the Isle of Moelly.
WE had all along resolved to anchor at Amiouam, but the report of some, who
assured us that 'twas easier to be supplied with water and wood at Moelly,
which is but eight Leagues distant from it, made Monsieur Duquesne go thither
first; that after having well refresht his Company and supplied his wants, he
might be in a condition when he came to Amiovam, to fight and chase the ships
he hoped to meet there, being the place where the English use to take in
Supplies. This conduct proceeded from his great prudence and experience, and
knowledgein those parts; for you must know, that if you miss anchoring at
Amiouam, it is impossible almost to regain it; and if we had gone thither at
first, what a mortification it would have been to us, meeting shiping there, to
see 'em weigh anchor immediately and begone, without our being able to follow
them.

So that we could not take our measures better, and earnestly desiring to
arrive there, and the wind serving, the Pilots every day encouraged us to hope
for it. On the 20th. of June we had the happiness to descry it; and the Sentinel
whom we had placed on the Top-gallant no sooner cried Land, but we hoist our
Flag to give the welcome news to the other ships who were behind, which caused a
vast and universal joy, especially amongst the Sick, who would needs come
above-board to behold the Land where they hoped for recovery. Being now late we
durst not come too nigh, so having lain By half the night, Wednesday the 21st.
of June we came to an anchor before the Isle of Moelly, between nine and ten in
the morning.

CHAP. XII.
Monsieur Duquesne treats with the King of the Isle of Moelly for refreshments,
who furnishes him in abundance: Its Situation, Fertility Religion, and Manners
of its Inhabitants.
THe Commandant gave the Gun of Assurance, the common practice amongst strange
Nations when War is not intended, and sent in a sloop with Monsieur Voutron and
the Scrivain, to know if upon presenting the King, we might be furnished with
Refreshments and other necessaries, they were received as well as could be
immagin'd by these Savages, who seemed very well pleased to exchange their
Fruits and Cattle with us.

This great present consisted of two pieces of Indian cloth, and an old
Musket, which the latter carried, who had been in the Country before, and spoke
some Portuguese; he presented them to the King, who was then in a sweet and
pleasant Valley, called the Queen's Creek, lying by the sea side, about 7
Leagues from where we anchord. If one may judge of his Condition, by his
Brother and Sons, whom I have seen selling Hens for paper, it can be none of
the greatest; this little Prince was charmed with our Present, and signified to
the Scrivain by an Indian Portuguese, who had lived some time in the Country,
and was his Interpreter, and Intendant of his Affairs, that he thanked the
Commandant, and that he would give Orders to his subjects to furnish us with
whatever we had occasion, for our Money.

Upon which Monsieur Duquesne went a shore that very day, to regulate every
thing, that there might be no disorder or difference on the landing; and orderd
the Captains of the several ships, to command the seamen on pain of death to
offer no violence to the Negro's. Next morning we debarkt our sick to the
number of about fifty, most ill of the Scurvy, for whom we made Tents by the
Sea side; the Negro's came from all parts, with provisions, vix. Oxen, Cows,
Kids, and almost all other kinds of provisions, which we had plenty every day,
and at very easy rates.

Our Commandant finding he could at an easy rate refresh his men here after
their vast fatiegues, allowed them while they stayed every day, as much fresh
provisions morning and evening as they could eat, which were so plentiful and
cheap, that a fat Ox cost but four Livers and a half, a Cow but a Crown, and
Pullets, Kids, Eggs, Milk, and Fruits we had in exchange for Knives, Paper, and
bits of Linen.

Of all other, they were fondest of Knives and Linen: Being generally
Magicians, they made use of the first to make characters, and with the last
they covered their nakedness; and some of our men have bought an Ox for an old
tattered Shirt.

They were no less careful to supply us aboard than a shore, coming every day
in their Pirogues, which are little Banows made of the hollowed trunk of a
Tree; bringing us Ananas, Bananes, Cocos, Lemons, Oranges, and diverse other
excellent sorts of fruits, which we had in plenty, as well as of the other
provisions while we lay at anchor.

Every meal seemed a feast, and indeed we had no less than four or five several
sorts of meat at each, as much water as we would drink, besides our ration of
wine at dinner and supper, instead of Aqua-vita, which we were forced to drink
for two months; we had great plenty of Oranges, and scarce eat or drank any
thing without them, so that our present happiness mads us forget all our past
miseries, which lasted three whole months, without so much as sight of land,
and having no more than was just necessary to keep us alive.

Moelly is an Island of Arabia, which may be about 30 Leagues in compass,
situated in 12 degrees of south Lat. and 63 Degrees 40 Minutes of Long. its
very fertile through the frequent rains that fall, and hedged in with steep
rocks; both its valleys and high mountains are covered with woods, in which fat
Oxen are found, differing from those of France, by a bunch of fat on their
backs like a wenn; as likewise Kidds, Poule, Pindades, Ringdoves, and a great
deal of other game, and there would be excellent fowling if it were not for the
inaccssible Mountains. The Orange and Lemon Trees are not its least glory, they
stand so thick in some places, that one may smell them at a great distance, and
distinguish them amongst crowds of other odorifirocous Trees, not inferior
even to them; there is scarce a sweet Orange to be found, but all of a delicat
tartness, except some of a smaller growth, that have neither the form nor size
of a true natural Orange.

The Island produces besides, excellent Rice and Mill, thrice as large as that
of France, and were it more even and compact, would be very fit to live in. It
seems to be but thinly peopled, for I saw but one Village, of about threescore
or fourscore cottages, made and covered with branches of Palm, under which the
Negro's lie; the entrance into them is so low, that one must creep to get into
them; they sleep on Mats of rice straw, which they lay on the ground; one sees
nothing here which does not argue the miserable life these Savages lead.

Taking a view of this Village, I had the curiosity to enter into a wretched
Hutt, built of stone and sand; which they told me was a Pagod, or Temple, in
which these wretches worship an Oxe's head, the forehead being inscribed with
Arabic characters; they made him a grot in the wall, adorned with shell work,
where they placed this reverend Divinity, and which they removed a little after
we went in, whither 'twas they believed us unworthy to look on it, or that they
observed we slighted it as much as it deserved: The middle of the Pagod was
matted, and on the right side as you enter, there was a pole stuck in the
ground forkt at one end, supporting some mother of pearl burnt; on the inside,
which I suppose served for a lamp; and a little lower of the same side, was a
staircase of 5 steps, leading to the place where the King sits.

To so many superstitions they join a great many of the Mohammedan, so true it
is that the Author of that infamous Religion, has sprea'd his follies at so
great a distance. When we arrived, it was the time of their Ramadam, or Lent,
during which they may not eat, drink, or smoke 'till the sun's set, and they are
so exact in it, that no persuasions or threats can make 'em do otherwise.

These Negro's appeared more Savage than they of Saintiague, ruder in their
manner of living, but more plain in their dealing; they are large, and strong
bodied, but very fearful; a Pistol shot will scare them so, that they will run
into the woods to hide, so much they fear fire Arms. They were long beards, and
their hair covering their shoulders; for it is to be observed, that to the south
of the Line, they all have them thus, and to the North, have short friz'd hair;
they all go naked, having only a rag of Linen to cover their nakedness, and
some wear beads about their necks without crosses, and holes in their Ears that
your finger will go through.

I could never imagine that these Savages could be so jealous of their Wives,
for they hid them in their Cottages as we past by, that we might not see them,
judging our inclinations I suppose by their own; we saw, some of their women
who are not easily to be distinguished from their Men, but by their habit;
which consists of a piece of Linen that crosses their Stomachs, and so falls
down their breasts, with another which binds their Thghes behind and before
like drawers: They are very wild, for when I but touched one of their ears, to
observe three little pieces of wood she had in them, she skriekt out, and ran
as if I intended to eat her.

Though Idolaters, yet they are very temperate and sober; and for the most part
feed only on fish, fruits and Rice, and rarely eat any flesh, though they have
plenty. Their best drink is Tarry, which is very refreshing, and much resembles
the Cider made of pears in Britany, it costs them no more pains than the rest
of their provisions, which the unmanur'd soil freely furnishes 'em with of its
own accord. It is no more than cutting the bottom of the Palm trees, and
placing Vessels beneath to receive it.

CHAP. XIII.
The Squadron parts from the road of Moelly, on the news we received that there
were some ships of the Enemy at Amiouam.
WE had lain at anchor about Seven or Eight days, when we understood by a
Negro, who spoke Portuguese, that there lay some ships at Amiouam. Though the
information was uncertain, yet it gave us a great deal of joy, and the
Commandant gave notice that we should make ready to sail in two days, so we
made have to take in all necessaries, and to supply our selves with water,
wood, and fresh provisions, to take down our Tents, and embark the sick, of
whom we lost one at land, and three the day we landed, whom we cast into the
sea, which with eleven we lost in crossing the Line, made in all fifteen since
we left France.

This evening Monsieur Duquesne gave orders for sailing, and accordingly next
day being Saturday the first of July, we left the road of Moelly at 5 in the
morning, but were becalmed almost all that day, except a faint wind that blew
sometimes, which served us a little till six in the evening, when we came to an
anchor again, for that night; next day we sailed, and it blowing a fresh gale,
about ten we doubled the Isle of Moelly, and by reason of the Tides we were
fore'd to coast it near the Shore.

We presently made all the sail we could that we might reach Amiouam as soon as
possible, which was now in sight, the Rock still kept close to us, and in a
little time the rest came up within 3 or 4 Leagues of us: and now we took down
our hamocks, and made every thing ready for a fight, though we had no plain sight
of any shiping, till we came near the road, when we perceived one lying at
anchor near to land, and the smoke of two guns which were fired to warn the men
aboard.

'Twas now Sunset, and we had yet two Leagues before we could come up with
her; all had orders to prepare, and we as usual, were posted on the quarter
Deck, we had already hung out Dutch colors, and put a square Flag on the top
of the Mainmast, making in with full sails to set upon her by day light.

CHAP. XIV.
An Engagement at Amiouam with an English ship richly laden, which was burnt
with above three hunderd persons in her.
THis ship took a pleasure to see us coming in, believing us to be Dutch, and
the rather, because Seven ships were to be sent this year from Holland to the
East Indies, but to rid them of their mistake, the Rock who had gained the wind
of us, approacht according to orders, with a design to anchor on her Buoy; we
then took in our Flag, which very much surpised them, who presently hall'd the
Rock, and asked him whence he was bound, and the Captain answering in Dutch from
Amsterdam, they seemed mightily pleased; then he asking them again whence their
ship was, answered, from London. The Captain was just ready to go aboard him,
when the sloop which he had sent to get intelligence of us, and which he had
ordered to go aboard the Admiral if they were Dutch, keeping close to the land
side, for fear of being taken, came to give him notice that we were French;
this unexpected news surpised him very much, and immediately gave orders to
charge the guns; which the Rock observing, presently came and anchord on his
buoy, and straight powerd in his small shot, with a broad side into her,
crying, Vive le Roy^ Vive France.

The English much surpised, returned us five guns, and going to tack about,
the Rock at the second discharge splitting the Capstain, and wounded two and
twenty of his men, upon which she cut away, and hoist sail with all the speed
she could, which Monsieur Pouriere who was resolved to follow her close, no
sooner observed but he cut his Cables too, and called to us to board her for
that she was just sailing away.

Our Commandant knowing what he had to do, presently tackt, and got under the
wind with her, who fired on us with both her broad sides, seeing herself
obliged to pass between us and the Rock, who still kept the wind of her, and
power'd his Musket shot into her, but we had no sooner suffered her to go a
little a head of us, but we plied her with our great and small shot from both
our ships, the English ship scarce firing at all, and thinking of nothing but
of making her escape by the favor of the night.

But his endeavors were to no purpose, for we were resolved to ply him close
all night; after the third discharge, the Commandant ordered us to cease
firing, while a message was sent to him, that if he would not surrender, he
should be hanged up, on the Main-yard; this threatening message, which might
have frightend another, gave him so little concern, that he answered it with as
many great Guns as he could, at which we admired at the undaunted courage and
resolution of the man, to stand it out at such a desperate rate, when there was
no hopes of escapeng.

So we renewed the fight, and were board and board with him, our Mainyards
almost touching for a good while, 'twas now we galled him terribly with our
great and small shot, and scarce one missed, when if we might judge according
to appearance, he must needs have last half his Company. Yet for all this he
showed no sign of fear, or any thing like it; for we could not hear 'em so much
as once cry for Quarter: But on the contrary, receiving our shot without
firing, he lengthened out his Sprit-sail that he might come close to us,
believing we had a design to board him, at which time he longed for nothing
more, for if we had, he was resolved to blow us up, though at the expense of
setting himself a fire, but happily the night coming on, was the cause the
Commandant gave orders not to attempt it, so being contented for the present
with what we had done, we stood aloof, and lay at some distance one from
another, only the Rock would not quit her a moment, but continued still firing
incessantly at her.

By this time the rest of the Squadron came up, who presently began to fire on
the unhappy Englishman, and surrounded him of all sides, that the ship scarce
knew which way to turn her head; the bullets fell like hail into her, and the
night was now so dark that one could scarce discern any thing, which was the
cause that our ships incommoded one another, notwithstanding our lanthors were
all filled with lights.

The enemy having for some time received a great many shot from us, without
making any return, and thought of nothing but meeting with a convenient
opportunity to make their escape. When Monsieur Duquesne observing 'twas in
vain to wast powder and shot, and that 'twas to no purpose to think of
reducing him before day, sent an armed sloup with an Officer, commanding all
the ships not to fire any more, but only keep a strict watch on her all night.

It might be now about eleven a clock, the action having lasted without
intermission since eight, when the Commandant ordered us to repose our selves
for a while; and the sloop going to the Rock with these orders; Monsieut de
Pouriere, the Captain of it, sent us a young Malouin Seaman, who made his
escape from aboard the enemy by swiming, and had come aboard him, after his
second discharge.

This man informed us, that the English Captain, after giving all his men a
large bowl of Canary, exhorted them to fight it out to the last; telling them
at the same time too, that he was resolved to set fire to the ship before ever
it should fall into our hands, if we proved to be French; which he but too well
performed, as you will see by what follows. The ships name was the Herbert* built
for eighty Guns; carrying but 54; and two hunderd and fifty men, with about
fourscore passengers, amongst whom was a rich English Bankrupt, who had
fourscore thousand crowns in silver, having with him his wife and a daughter, a
great beauty about twenty years old, with two young sons, one of which was born
under the Line.

He told us the Cargo of the ship consisted of Laces, and Brocard of gold,
scarlet clothes, Bevers, Iron, Tobacco, Canary wines, and a great deal of
Money; ordered for commerce, and paying off the English soldiers in the service
of the Company, who had received no pay in four years time, and that if taken
would prove a vast rich Prize, which very much rejoiced us. But the desperate
Captain took care that none should be the richer for it, or gain by what he lost.

So we gave over firing in good time, for besides that it signified nothing; we
should a done our selves as much damage as the enemy; at length he made four or
five shot at us, to waken our Squadron out of that profound steep it seemed to
have been in, and then lay still; and continuing so for some time, about two in
the morning the wind blowing fresh, she made all the sail she could to escape
the approaching danger.

He thought the same happiness would have attended him now; which he had had at
the Canary Islands, where its said he cleared himself of three stout Algerines
that surrounded him; but he soon found to the contrary, for he was no sooner
under sail, but we began to follow him, when seeing there was no possibillity
of escaping, and that as soon as 'twas day, we should bear down upon him in a
line, and sink him; Fired with rage and despair, he took the most cruel
resolution in the world; and without any more delay set fire to his ship,
placing two chests of powder under the highest part of the stern, near the
Mizzen Mast; making his escape himself through the Gunners room in his boat, in
which they perceived a light, but he endeavored to hide it that they might not
follow him.

This dreadful spectacle amazed us exceedingly, and as eargerly as we
endeavored to attack her before, as hastily we attempted to avoid her now; our
men looked on it as belonging to themselves; and could not but censure the
Captain, for acting so cruel and inhumane a part, as not to save his Cargo, or
perish with them himself. But this horrible proceeding quite ruined the
opinion, we had before conceived of his bravery.

Some of our men heard these miserable people crying out like the damned, and
running up the bolt sprit in crowds, endeavoring to avoid the flames, which
raged so violenty, but 'twas in vain. The ship continually burning for three
hours, when at length the flames catching in the powder room, it blew up all at
once; so that in less than half a quarter of an hour there was nothing to be
seen of that rich ship, but dreadful conflagration.

Our single ship fired for her share no less than 200 and 80 guns, and we had
five men killed and six wounded; I could not receive an exact account of what
the rest suffered, but I am certain we suffered most; after having repaired*
what damage we sustained, we steered our course North North East, and left
Amiouam behind us, Monsieur de Pourier being unable to regain the Point was
constrained to cut his cables.

CHAP. XV.
We past the Line a second time in the 7th. Degree of Long* without feeling any
extraordinary heat, one of our Seamen unhappily drowned.
WE were to pass the Line again before we could arrive at Pontichery, though in
doing of it, we felt no extraordinary heat, nor the other usual inconveniences,
nor were so much as becalmed; of the contrary, the wind increasing still more
and more since our departure, on Monday the tenth of July we repast it at
eleven in the morning, in the 70th. Degrees. of Longit. without so much as
perceiving when we were under it, by reason of the Southern winds which blew so
fresh, that the heat was less then that we often feel at Paris in summer: Never
was Voyage happier; sailing no less than three or four Leagues an hour, and the
winds as good and constant as we could desire.

Sailing so succesfully, we could not miss arriving quickly in the height of
the Maldives, which we left of the right, without so much as seeing them; though
we had sent the Lion on the 20th. to discover them they are seldon past unseen,
but our Pilots according to their Card, and their calculation, told us they
must be there, so we reckoned we should soon be at the Isle of Ceylon, whither
we were ordered to go, to see if there were any of the Enemy's ships there, for
besides that the Dutch, had several Collonies there, the English came thither
every year for Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and Cloves, with which this Island greatly
abounds.

The same day one of our Seamen was drowned about six at night, when the rest
of our men were at supper; all things seemed to conspire to his loss, a slack
wind in our stern, made the ship roll very much, and instead of eating with his
Comarades according to custom, he went on the Deck to kill a Kidd, were
treading on the blood of the Kidd, he slipped, and fell into the sea, to which
the rolling of the ship very much contributed; he was a pretty way off us
before we perceived it, and so could give him no help by casting out ropes,
the Mariners did all that they could, and Monsieur Duquesne ordered them to
take down the sails, and hoise the boat out, but 'tvvas too late; and we saw
him perish, without our being able to give him the least assistance.

Next day, being the 22d. there happened a pleasant, but an unlucky, mistake,
presently after noon, the Seamen cried Land before us; and we immediately
believed that 'twas the Coast of Coromandal, or the Isle of Ceylon, we made the
ordinary signal, and presently after discovered eight Islands, near one
another, which joined to the view we had of land to the South, made Monsieur
Duquesne say, that 'twas certainly the Maldives; the Pilots could not be of his
opinion, and the reputation of their skill and judgment was concerned, to
differ from him: In the mean time after perusing the Cards and their Journals,
they owned their mistake, and agreed that the biggest sight of land, was the
point of the Maldives, which is the most Northerly Island of all the rest which
we found too true; and we attributed the cause of this mistake, to the strong
Currents which they found had thrown us too much to the west, we presently
tack't about, and lay by all night, for fear of being run aground by the tides.

CHAP. XVI.
Vicu of the Isle of Ceylon, famous for its Beauty, Riches, and the mountain of
the Peke of Adam; a Dutch Pink with eight chests of Silver made Prize.
FRom break of day 'till Friday the 28th. we made all the sail we could, when
Loyseau* who kept the head of the Squadron, made a signal of his discovering
land, and after we had descried it our selves too on the edge of the Horrison,
we hoisted our flag to give notice to the rest: 'Twas not long before we
plainly perceived the Isle of Ceylon, at which we very much rejoiced, having
all along expected to meet some of the Enemies ships there. I think I never saw
a more pleasant Country, being very even and of a vast extent, and one of the
most rich and fertile in the world; you see here a great number of tall Trees
ever green; some forming lovely Arbours, others beautiful alleys, in the vast
plains which stretched themselves toward the sea side, besides a rich smell of
Nutmegs and Cinnamon, charming and delicious beyond Expression.

Of the three Mountains in this Island, there is one remarkable for its height
and name, being the Peke of Adam, and by some believed that Adam and Eve were
buried here, which is as great a certainty as that other opinion, they have
here; that God in this Island established the terrestrical Paradise, which I
leave to the more knowing to judge of.

This Isle is placed between 6 and 10 Degrees. of North Lat. and 103 Degrees. of Long.
its form is round, and may be about 250 Leagues in compass, or better. The
Dutch who are Masters of it, draw an immence revennue thence, for the Nutmegs,
and Cinnamon, as well as the Pearl, which is fisht up here.

Coasting the Island we discoverd two sail a head of us, who seemed to keep at
a distance from the Island, but presently made to land when they saw us. Our
Commandant impatient to know whence they were, thought to snap them by hoisting
up English colors, and making all the sail he could; the Dragon as the
swiftest sailer went to cut off their way, and when we were within shot of
them, we fired a gun, as did the Dragon too, and the ball so scared em that
instead of coming aboard as we hoped; they presently fled for refuge to a
house by the sea side; a fevv hours after, the Sentinel who was on the top,
cried a Sail; I cannot easily describe the different motions of joy it caused
amongst us; some went up to the round-top, others to the fane, others who
could not so easily do it, stood in the shrouds, and the rest made use of their
Perspectives to discover a vessel, which could not yet be seen but by her top,
yet after an hours sailing, she was plainly disern'd, to be three Leagues off.

The Sun was already set, and we feared but one thing; which was, that she
would sail off in the night and so escape us, by taking a contrary course, so
that we scarce knew what to do, though we were sure she lay at anchor, our
Commandant considerd of it, being loath to do, as he had done before at
Amiouam, where he shot a matter of eight hunderd shot at random in the night,
when fifty would serve by day light, so he resolved to ly by her all night,
without attempting any thing; by which means we should confirm her the more in
her mistake of us.

So we anchord in 25 fathom water at seven a-clock, and next morning being the
25th. weighed anchor again at 5 in the morning the wind blowing fresh quickly
brought us to the sight of her, for which we were so much concerned all night,
least she should make her escape. We first heard Mass, after that we
breakfasted, and then Monsieur Duqusne orderd to hoise up English colors; the
Enemy mistaking their friends, answered us by hanging out Dutch colors,
whithour stiring from where they lay, giving us all the time and opportunity we
could wish for, to attack them, and now indeed it was in vain to attempt an
escape, if they had known we were French.

This Vessel lay at Anchor in the road of Mevelle, under the shelter of a high
ground, which hindered her having a sight of us the night before. The Rock whom
we followed entered into the same road, and anchored by her side, which she had
scarce done, but the Dutch underdanding what we were, endeavored to get ashore
in their sloop with their richest things; at the same time Monsieur de Pouriere
manned out his sloop* after our Commandant had returned back again, unwilling
that any should share the first advantage with him, which was very
Considerable, else the enemy had not had time to go ashore, and save what they
did, and we had certainly taken 2 Women who cary'd off eight hundred Caupants
of gold, to the vallue of above 10000 crowns in Pearls and Jewels.

While these fled ashore, we made a detatchment of six Guard Marins and several
Musketeers to arm the sloop, and the boat, in which Monsieur Dauberville, our
Lieutenant, was commanded to board the Dutch man; I was chosen with one of my
commarades to accompany him, and the other four going in the boat, we went
directly to the Pink while the men aboard her Smoking their pipes veiw'd us
with little or no Concern, but seven or eight, more affirighted than the rest,
cried out to the Negros, who were not far off; to fetch them a shore in their
Perogues, which they did; notwithstanding all our threats; the Dutch lept into
it confusedly, but our men in the boat Coming up with them at the first fire so
scared them, that they chose to Row back again to their ship, and there abide
the utmost.

We were within pistol shot of the ship, when we saw one of the Seamen busy at
one of the Guns, upon which we in a manner gave our selves for lost, and
Monsieur Duquesne had the same opinion of us; and had they been men of any
resolution, nothing had been easier than to have destroyed us, by levelling one
gun at the boat, and another at the sloop.

'Twas now some time since our Squadron had hung out French colors, and the
enemy-thinking all resistance vain; took down theirs, when we presently boarded
them, without the least resistance, crying, Vive le Roy.

One would scarce believe with what earnestness and violence the Seamen
pillage, when they enter a ship, breaking open trunks and boxes, and rifling
every thing, nay, they were so violent in plundring these Dutchmen, that some
of them fell on the Captain, who was smoking quietly with his Lieutenant,
tearing the gold buttons out of the neck and sleeves of his shirt, and taking
six Caupants of gold from him, which is a sort of long money of Japan, of the
value of ten crowns a piece.

Monsieur D' Auberville having embarked all the Spoil he received from the
Seamen that boarded her, sent back the Boat to our Commandant; who landed some
men in it, soon enough to recover eight of those Eleven Chests of Silver, which
the Enemy had carried off in their sloop. Our men soon discovered them, by a
track of Rix Dollars that were scattered on the Sand, which lead them directly
to the place where the Dutchmen had hid them; but our persuit being vigorous,
they they had not time enongh to convey them to a Counter about 2 Leagues
distant.

Some of the Seamen got no less than 3 or 400 Crowns in the plunder, for their
share, and afterward their thoughts run on nothing else but more prize and
pillage. This was a new Pink, of about 70 Tun, and came from Batavia ballasted
with Rice, to load Nutmegs and Cinnamon at Ceylon. We fetched her out of the
road of Mevelle, and brought her to an anchor hard by our Squadron; the
prisoners we desperst amongst us, Monsieur Duquesne took six of the chief of
them, with the Captain and Lieutenant, whom he treated at his own Table, and
omitted no part of Civillity, that might lessen the sense of their present loss
and imprisonment.

CHAP. XVII.
Another small Dutch Vessel taken.
HAving chosen a Pilot, and some Seamen to conduct the Prize, we sailed the
last of July in the evening, and came to an anchor nearer Land, but sailed
again early next morning, still on the watch for more Prize. We were very much
delayed here by a calm that lasted four days, and the slow sailing of the
Prize, which could not keep us company; we took in some of our sails to stay
for her, this made the Commandant resolve to send the Lion with her to
Pontecherry, where the Squadron was to call, while we cruis'd about the Island.

Being thus separated on the 6th. of August, we perceived a ship a head of us,
when we presently made all the sail we could to come up with her before she
could gain the land, which she endeavored with all the speed she could; at a
distance we believed her as big as the Rock, but after giving he chase for 2
hours, we found she was a small Vessel of thirty five Tuns; carrying Dutch
colors, we fired one gun at her without ball, to make her strike, which she
presently did, and lay by till we came up, seeing us hang out English Colors,
but the Captain of this little Vessel was not a little surpised, when he saw
us take in the English Colors and hang out French, and took down his own, when
we presently commanded him aboard; who answering he had near a boat, we sent
our sloop, who brought him, and 20 more Dutch prisoners aboard, whom we
distributed amongst the several ships.

This poor man looked upon himself as lost* with his whole Family, and the first
favor he desired of the Commandant was, to take pity on his wife and six
Children which he had, which was promiss'd him; when Monsieur Duquesne gave
orders to bring his Chest aboard, which when 'twas searched, there was found
neither money nor merchandise of value in it, any more than in the Vessel, so
he had leave given him to return with his wife, who was a Negress; but the
command of his ship was given to another, and a Pilot and other Seamen put
aboard.

CHAP. XVIII.
Six Dutch ships under the Fort of Negapatam, avoid being attackt by the
advantage of a Sand bank.
AFter we had cruis'd for some time upon the Isle of Ceylon, we left it, and
made toward the main Land; the 9th. of August we anchored within five leagues
of the Negapatan, which is a Town on the coast of Coramandel, where the Dutch
have a Fort, and a considerable Factory. Next day, having weighed anchor early
in the morning, we arrived there betimes, and every one being greedy of Action,
we were overjoyed to see six ships there, that seemed to us of a considerable
burden.

The Fort discovering us, set up Dutch colors, and three of these ships, of
which the greatest, as Admiral, hung them out on the Main mast top; we answered
them presently with English colors, which did not puzzle them a little to
discover what we were; in the mean time we made in with full sail, ready and
forward to engage.

But just as we thought to seize our prey two accidents happened that baukt us
extremely; the wind blowing from the land, and a Sand bank which we
discovered, hinderd us from coming within shot of them; we past on still
sounding, and were once in four fathom and an half, the ships mudding the water
as they past.

These delays and these turnings, gave them time to discover what we were; so
that the Admiral who anchored at large, suspecting our tacking about so long,
made close into the land, intending to run herself aground, if pursued, others
followed her example, and two ranged themselves under the Cannon of the Fort.

Monsieur Duquesne meeting with such difficulties, would undertake nothing of
his own head; but called a a Council of War, in which it was resolved to run no
riske, for besides that there was nothing to be done, we were in great danger
of running a ground on the Bank, so we tackt, and stood to fea.

An hour after we discovered three more, which we reckoned would make us amends
for our former loss, but as soon as we came nigher, we discovered them to be
Danes by their colors, and so had nothing to say to them; They lay at anchor
before Trinqubart, five Leagues from Negapatan, where they have a Fort and
Factory.

CHAP. XIX.
The Indian Princes take the Factories in their Dominions into their
protection, and defend them from the Insults of a stronger Enemy.
WE anchored two Leagues farther over, against a Factory that belongs to us,
where there are only two French who have but four or five port-holes, with as
many guns to defend them, which rather make a show than a real strength; when
they discovered our Squadron they hung out a white flag, notwithstanding, that
they had reason to believe us Dutch or English.

But in the Iudies, each Factory sets out their own National Colors be it in
time of War or Peace, be they never so weak, or the approaching enemy never so
strong: For if the English, for example* insult a French Factory, the Great
Mogul, or another Prince, in whose Country the Factory is, resents it as done
to himself, and oblieges himself to make amends for any damage received.

A little after we hung out white colors, which very much surpised our
French, who did not know what to make of such a novelty, but when we added the
Admiral flame on the main mast top, and considering the building of our ships
when they came to an anchor, they no longer doubted, as they told us
afterward, but that it was Monsieur Duquesne's Squadron, which they had every
day expected, upon which they presently came to Complement him; our Sloop which
was sent to them, met them half way, and brought them aboard, where we longed
for their Company; as well to learn News of them, as to meet with our
Countrymen, in so distant a part of the world, with whom we might happily
entertain our selves, and be informed of what was necessary, we did them some
honor, for going to the Council Chamber, where Monsieur Duquesne expected them,
they past through two double Lanes, lined with Soldiers and Seamen, who pressed
hard to see them, that they could scarce go along, they told us little news,
and next day we parted for Pontecherry, where we with reason expected to hear
more, and with more certainty.

CHAP. XX.
The French Squadron arrives before Ponticheri, the chief Factory of our
East India Company; situated on the Coast of Coromandel.
THe Coast of Coromandel is very beautiful all along; the pleasant mixture of
Meadows and Trees ever green, making a Charming prospect, you meet with
mountains here and there, which intercept it, but are themselves a prospect no
less pleasant: and some rising grounds, which you overlook and loose your sight
in delicious* fair, and wide extended plains; besides a number of beautiful
habitations by the sea side, where you meet with another entertainment, which
to me seemed very diverting, which is a great number of Catimarons, in which
the Negros of the Country go a fishing, they are made of two or three pieces of
a Tree, bound together with Coco cords, with a Mat sail of a Triangular form,
as they sit in them their breech touches the water, and yet they are not afraid
to launch out ten or twelve Leagues in them; the sea is some times covered with
these Catimarons, which sail so swiftly, though with nere so small a wind, that
at a distance you would take them for birds skiming up and down on the surface
of the waters.

We past by a Dutch factory, before which there lay only one bark, that was not
worth the taking coasting a long, we at length arrived at Porta-Nova at eleaven
in the morning, near which we saw four Pagods hard by one another, in which the
Negros worship the Devil, we saw there three ships, of which the biggest
carried a flag on the top of the Mainmast; these were worth the attacking, but
whither they were willing to spare us the pains, or rather prevent their own
danger, they hung out Danish colors, And nothing could impose upon us more,
though we cannot Vindicate our weakness in this matter, considering they lay at
anchor before a Dutch factory, and knowing too, that the Danes had but three
ships in the East Indies, which we had just left at Frinquebart; after having
made a faint to discover them, we left them to continue our course.

We had so little wind, that we scarce expected to arrive the same day at
Ponticherri, and being afterward downright becalmed, we were obliged to
anchor 2 Leagues short of the Courtoir, which is a Fort belonging to Prince
Gingi, a friend to the French Nation, being now within 2 Leagues, we took our
own time, and next day being Saturday, the 12 of August, the wind blowing a
little fresh, we sailed, and at eight in the morning arrived at Pontecherri,
where we found the Lion and the Dutch Pink, who came thither but the day before.

We had scarce anchored within half a league of the land, when the greatest
part of the Officers of the Fort came to wait upon the Commandant; the Fort
saluted us with eleven guns, and we could return but nine, because the Deck was
so encumbered. Next day Monsieur Martin, Director general for the French
East India Company came aboard, where he was received with a salute of five
guns, and nobly regaled by Monsieur Duquesne, who delivered him his Majesty's
Letter, by which he enabled him, and a few days after performed the Ceremony of
girting him with a Sword by his side.

Our arrival here sprea'd a great and general joy, which appeared even amongst
the Negro's of the Country; who in their way expressed their satisfaction, and no
doubt our own French had reason to rejoice, to see us come with a force
sufficient to make the Indies tremble; and their joy was equal to the
consternation of the enemy, who secretly dispatched notice to all the Factories
on the Coast, to be on their guard, against six French Privateers, the
stoutest, and the best, that had yet been sent from Europe into those parts.

This allarum which the English and Dutch gave one another, did not a little
increase the glory and reputation of France; they were no more to be seen
strutting in these parts, and hectoring the Fort of Pontichery, threatening to
burn the Director in it, as they had done but two months before our arrival,
with I don't know what other Rodomontado's; of the contrary, let their strengrh
be what they please to bluster it in these parts, they did not care for seeing
us, or having any thing to do with us.

We began with debarking the eight chests of Silver we took out of the Dutch
prize, and four Musketeers conveyed the Captain and Lieutenant to the Fort till
farther orders; our Commandant went a shore at the same time, and was received
with a salute of five guns. Monsieur Martin entertained him so nobly, with the
other Officesr of the Squadron, that feasting and hunting was all our
employment, while we lay at anchor here.

CHAP. XXI.
The Negros before we debarkt bring plenty of fresh provisions aboard. Money of
Ponticheri.
THe Negros constantly came aboard us with fresh provisions; as Piggs, Hares,
Henns, Bananes, Lemons, Oranges, Chibbols, Reddishes, Giraumont, and several
other sorts of pulse; which were not so cheap as we expected, for the Negros at
the first sight of our six ships, knowing we should have need of all, presently
raised their prizes, to that degree, that whereas before one might have bought
thirty Henns for a crown, they now cost a Fanon a piece, which is six sols
French.

The Fanon is a little piece of mixed gold, of the shape and size of a half pea,
and no bigger; there is another of pure gold, called a pagod, of the value of a
half a pistol, shapt like the Fanon, only bigger, and the figure of an Idol
impressed on one side; they have besides silver Roupys of the value of half a
crown; and for their small money of Caches and Doudous of copper, there goes
fourteen of these last to a Fanon, and two Caches to a Doudou.

The Negros found they were such gainers by us, that from morning 'till night
you might see them fishing up and down in their Catimarons; and indeed they
furnished us with the finest fish that ever I tasted, which they caught in such
abundance, and with so much speed, that for three pence half penny we could buy
as much as would satisfy eight persons.

Our Men fed on Mutton, Pigs, and a power of herbs, which they through into the
pot; which with other provisions made very good fare, but the Rice, of which
all our bread was made since we took the Dutch Pink, was not so agreeable;
especially to us who were so little used to it, besides the untoward way of
making it, for after washing it in salt water, they bakt it with a little salt,
and we were often forced to eat it mere dough and full of chafe.

CHAP. XXII.
The Author's Reflections on the Sallys of his Youth, and the fatigues of his
Voyage.
VOyages of this kind, teach youth a great deal of experience; and by the
miseries they meet with, convince them of the folly of their extravagancies. I
am sure this Voyage instructed me largely in the knowledge of my own, for which
I need not now be beholding to the examples of others. I suffered all that is
extreme in hunger and thirst, and those Coroding miseries, galled me into more
wisdom, and fretted me into a sense, of my, and a better vallue for my Father's
house, and a soberer course of life, which I so much slighted before; this I
got, whatever I lost; but I went far and paid dear for it; if any price can be
too dear for wisdom.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Negros flock to the Sea side to see us land, others come to help us in
their boats.
I Was one of the first that landed, though it be very difficult at Ponticheri,
by reason the sea all along the coast rolls in mighty surges on the shore, so
that without a great deal of care, boats are apt to be lost in landing and
thetefore anchor at some distance, and wait the Negros coming to take them a
shore in the Chelingues, which are flat bottom boats, the planks sowed
together with Coco cords, being light and very high of the sides, they humor
the roling of the surges, which has no sooner cast them on the shore, but the
Negros leap out, striving who shall carry you out, first on his back.

I saw a great number of them at landing, of all sorts; some half naked, others
thinly clad in muslin shirts, and turbants on their heads, and several with
their bodies painted of diverse colors; they saluted us in raising the right
hand to the top of the head, which is the most respectful way of saluting
amongst them; you see the Caze's raised of each side, and a Magazine of the
Companies, and behind it there is a stable, in which there were eight Persians
horses, which the Officers rid when they went a hunting, and two Suret Oxen,
which drew Monsieur Martin's Coach.

The Suret oxen are a rarity worth the seeing, being no less than ten or eleven
foot high, and proportionably thick; they draw a cord of two inches thick
through their nostrils for a bridle; though they appear very dull and heavy, yet
they will trot continually in the deep sand, and the roughest ways.

A few steps farther, as you go toward the Fort, is a sort of a street which
leads to the Bazar, the place where the Market is kept; encompast round with a
parcel of paultry shops, where the Negros sell tobacco, pipes, sugar, colors,
onions and others things of that kind.

CHAP. XXIV.
A short Description of Pontichery, and the Garrison; of the Negros and
Negresses.
POvichery, commonly called Pontichery, is situated on the coast of Coromandel,
depending on Prince G'ingi, in 12 Degrees. Nor. Lat. and a 114 Degrees. of Long; the
French have within these two years built a Fort of four Towers, mounted with
twenty four guns; neither the walls nor situation seemed strong to me, but the
garrison, composed of a 150 French soldiers, are able to defend it against any
attack.

Monsieur Martin and the chief Officers are lodged in it, with the Capacins, who
serve the Chapel which is built there. A great many of the Soldiers are
settled there, and married to Portuguese Women, so that they scarce ever desire
to return to France again, they have built themselves houses, in which they
live very happily; and though that bread and wine is a little scarce, they have
every thing else in great plenty.

They drink Punch, Rack, and Lemonade, to which they accustom themselves very
much; and if they trade never so little, and are good husbands, they may lay up
money; so that it is not to be wonderd, that most of them having come hither for
ill things done in France, they are not fond of returning thither, from this
very hot and distant Country.

All the Inhabitants are black, and of a comely Stature, having long hair and
beards; their clothing is nothing but a white Cavage, with a turbant on their
heads of the same color, with gold pendants set, with pearls in their ears,
the chief Merchants cover part of their bodies with a red or yellow scarf,
which they throw over their shoulders, and wear Baboaches, which are a sort of
shoes, never going barefoot like the rest, and are followed by several
Servants, who carry their Parosals or Umbrellos.

The Women are generally little, and inclind to love; they are girded with a
callico scarf, one end of which crossing their shoulders, covers their
breasts: they gather their hair about their heads, and knot it about their
Ears, which are loaded with gold Rings.

They are as fond too of adorning their arms and legs with braceletts; and wear
gold rings on their toes as well as their fingers, and add to these, odd
bizzarre ornaments, another of making hols in their Nostrils, where they hang a
ring of gold or any other mettle which is their greatest pride.

CHAP. XXV.
An ample Description of the different sects, manners and religions of the
Inhabitants of Pontichery.
I Have yet spoke only of the best sort in general, of whom there are several
different in this Town; as the Moors, the Faquiras, the Brames, the heathen
Malebars and Christian Malebars, the Talingars, the Marchois, and Barias.

They are as so many several Tribes, who never inter-marry, and whose Manners
and Religions differ from the Marquoise and the Parias's the meanest and the
basest, of them all; their Habitations are separated from the rest; they go
barefoot, wearing only a bit of linen just to cover their nakedness, the
Marquoise follow fishing for the most part, and wear rush bonnets like miters,
they make use of Chelingues, and Catimarons, and eat any thing that is offered
them. The Parias are shoemakers, and the most infamous of all, the nastiest in
their way of living, and eat the bodies of dead creatures though they died of
sickness, not sparing the rotton stinking gutts, and are very vile and
miserable, but the Brames and the Faquers are those who are most esteemed.

The Brames are the Gentlemen, and only they are permitted to wear silk strings
in bandaliers, and three lines on their faces, two white, and one red in the
midple; their heads are shaved, except a tufft which they leave on the top,
they wear Muslin turbants, and commonly shirts of the same, with a delicate
Callico, to touch which is a crime that deserves punishment amongst them.

So that a French man one day ignorantly touching one that belonged to a Brame,
who was bathing himself, they came to the Fort in crowds to complain of him to
Monsieur Martin, and to demand him in order to have justice done on him, they
pretended he was burnt, so they were obliged to hide him, and after often
remonstrating to them, that what he had done, was out of ignorance not
disrespect, they were at last appeased; they eat nothing that has life, neither
flesh nor fish, nor so much as eggs, living on rice, Milk, Roots, and the like.
They will not be so much as seen eating, and are so jealous of their honor, that
they think it a great disgrace to enter into the house of a mean person.

These Brames, as all the rest, have a great Veneration for cows, and will not
on any account suffer them to be killed; being so useful to mankind by their work
and labor; and when our men kill any, they are forced to do it in private, for
fear of provoking these Idolaters, who on the tenth of Jan. the first day of
their year, celebrate a feast in honor of them.

On these days after feasting themselves they lead all the cows and oxen into a
lake, where they wash them by the sound of drums and the trumpets, and paint
their foreheads and horns; after which they lead them to a public place, and
each holding a nosegay in his hand, they dance round casting water on them, and
often prostrating themselves on the Ground the Brames direct these ceremonies;
and glory in being the most zealous observers of these sort of superstitions.
And are the instructors of others.

The name of their Idol is Ram, and when they salute any one with respect, they
call him by that name. For they not only worship this supposed Divinity, but
the rest of the Statues, which they believe serve him; they carry them about on
sollemn days; some have eight and some four heads on a body, siting on a bird,
that holds a serpent in his Beeck.

Others squatting on their tails like Monkies, have the head of an Elephant,
and belly of a woman; they pray to them often, and are careful of washing their
heads with Coco water, and rubing the rest of their bodies with oil.

If you inquire into the reason of their senseless Superstitions and ridiculous
follies they readily answer, that they received them from their Ancestors, in
whose Example they Glory in, without the least desire of being better informed.

The Faquirs of Ponticheri, as at other places, are persons of no certain body,
who wander up and down doing penance, and that little clothing they wear is
so wretchedly poor, they vow chastity, and voluntary poverty, and when Alms is
denied them, they wound themselves, to move compassion.

As for the first Vow of Chastity, they have little pretense to it, and the
very opinion the people have of their sanctity, is the occasion of the most
loathsome obscenities in the Female Sex.

However these Faquirs impose penances on themselves, which they inviolably
observe as long as they live, viz. as to have both their arms always raised
above their heads, one foot constantly lifted up, and a great many other
painful postures, which they continue in to their deaths. I saw one with his
head in an Iron cage, which he carried night and day on his shoulders, eating
through the bars; these wretches, as well as others, paint their bodies and
faces of a great many different colors, which makes them look dismally.

Though their superstitious Rites are for the most part the same, yet they
worship a great many several false Gods, as Trees, Rivers, the Sun and Moon,
etc. In an Eclipse they meet by the sea side, crying out hideously to the noise
of some instruments of brass, bathing themselves, and believing that as they
wash themselves, they clear and brighten the eclipsed planet. They burn the
bodies of the dead, and before the French settled at Ponticheri, these men's
wives in proof of their conjugal love and fidelity, burnt themselves alive with
the corpse of their deceased husbands; but we afterward changed this custom
amongst them, and indeed 'twas no very difficult matter to persuade them to it,
being ready enough to embrace an opportunity of being released.

When any one dies, they carry the Corpse on a Beer, covered with Callico, and
strow'd round with Bannany Leaves, to the Place where it is to be burnt;
attended with a Mournful sound of Trumpets, their Relations meeting them by the
way crying out, aloud Apa, which is as much as to say, Father; Jumping and
beating their breasts with so much Violence, that they often faint away in the
Ceremony, while the rest of his kindred stay behind to comfort his Children,
etc.

When they are near the funeral pile, they set down the Beer, to change the
situation of the body; placing the head where the feet were; after which, one
of the company, who never ceast crying all the way, having washed his hands,
lays three small quantities of Rice on the Funeral pile; and taking four little
pieces of wood, and putting one on each hand, a third at his feet, and a fourth
at his head: He afterward makes three holes in a pot full of water, and
sprinkles round the corpse three times. When they presently take it up, and
carry it to the place where it is designed to be burnt.

Then they lay it on the Funeral pile, the face to the wood, and the legs crossed
under the belly, and after covering it with straw and cows dung, which they
spread over it very neatly, they set fire to it; blowing the Trumpet till the
Corpse is quite consumed; and the pots in which the water and Rice was carried,
they beat to powder with sticks.

But if the Corpse is to be interred, the grave is made with steps to go down,
and a rising at the bottom, on which it is seated cross legged; the relations
strew flowers and ashes on it, and then cover it with earth.

The Mallebar Christians have built a fine vaulted Church, in which the
Missionaries of Ponticheri commonly officiate, and where the Jesuits say Mass;
I have seen the Negros so devout, that it very much edified me to see their
Zeal to be so solemn and pure.

Flesh is very little used amongst these people, particularly here; where they
live wholly on rice and fish; they will not eat or drink after an European; much
less taste of what he has dressed, These Malabars may marry at the age of four or
five, but then they are separated again till eleven or twelve; when they are
permitted to dwell togather.

While I was a shore the marriage of a rich merchant, who served the Company,
was sollemm'zd, and after this manner; two Bambouss were placed at each corner
of the Fort, encompassed of the out side with fireworks; in the evening he came
fourth, according to custom with his wife, in a rich Palanquin, carried by
twelve Negros, preceded by two hundred Flamboys ranked in very good order;
their nearest Relations accompanied them a horseback, and of all sides was
continually heard the confused noise of Fifes, drums and Kettle-drums; ten or
twelve dancers richly dressed followed them, dancing from space to space to the
sound of little bells; and when the married persons past before the Bambouss
that were prepared, the fire works were lighted, which were so intermixed with
Petars and Muskets, that they made them entertaining enough.

This Solemnity having lasted a good part of the night, they regaild themselves
with Bethel, Chocolet, Bannanes, and made themselves drunk with Rack, which is
stronger then Aquavitae, and very much in use amongst the Indians, as is
Bethel, a leaf very like the Ivy, which they eat, after spreading a little Lime
on it, made red with ginger, lapt up in a piece of Raique resembling Musk; this
is of an excellent taste and smell, and serves to redden the lips, and sweeten
the breath.

The women, for the most part, all along the coast are hard favored, and go
barefoot and bareheaded like the men, from whom it is difficult to distinguish
them; only for a piece of cotton cloth which covers them from the navel to the
knee; they wear their hair lank, very much oiled and greased, with holes in
their ears, that an egg would almost pass throw; and black lank breasts, with
nipples almost as big as an Apple; they carry their children on their hips,
their legs dangling on each side. I have seen of them that were not above four
months old creeping on the sand on all four, and muddling like Ducks in the
water.

They smoke perpetually, and without scruple indulge themselves in the vilest
lusts, and so readily prostitute their Bodies on all occasions, that their
lusts exceed all other qualifications.

CHAP. XXVI.
The French Spuadron sails, to fight fourteen Dutch and English ships that lay
under the fort of Madras.
IN the mean time our Ships took in fresh water, and debark't what was to be
left at Ponticheri; and amongst the rest four Brass Guns, of 18 pounders, to
strengthen the Fort, the biggest of those it had before, being but Twelve; and
while we were refreshing our selves after our long fatigues, the Commandant
understood by a Letter of Monsieur Martin's, that there were fourteen Dutch and
English ships ac Madras, who expected us there, with a Resolution of fighting
us.

He accordingly took the best measurs he could, and prepared to fight them:
Omitting nothing that might prove advantageous for the attacque: And thereupon
he presently ordered us to turn that little vessel we had taken off of the Isle
of Ceylon into a Fire ship, and to unring the Dutch Pink, which after Monsieur
Poureire had taken her top mast, and placed it in the room of his own which was
split in the Action at Amjouam, we left her naked at Ponticheri; from whence we
departed the 24th. of August at two in the afternoon, carrying the Captain and
Lieutenant along with us prisoners.

In about an hours space, we saw Conjumelle, a place situated by the sea side,
the sweetest on all the coast; the Dutch having a Factory, hung out a flag
there.

The wind blowing fresh in the evening, we took in some sail for fear of coming
to Madras in the night; the passage from Ponticheri thither, not being above 20
Leagues: so sailing gently the rest of the night, we discovered a ship a head
of us, which hoist sail as soon as ever she saw us; we took it for granted she
was a stout ship, sent out by the Enemy to observe us.

So we presently brought down our hamocks, having put all the chests in the
hole, since our departure; so that in less than half an hour we were fitted for
the fight, which we the more eagerly desired, because it was St. Lewis's day.

And now we perceived the ships, which seemed to us to be ranged in a line
under the Cannon of Fort St. George; which is a strong and noble one, hanging
out English colors; we had Mass said betimes, then took a short breakfast, and
after hoisting the white Flag, and adorning the ships, and the round tops with
Flower deluce't shields, we made all the sail we could, till we came over
against St. Thomas's, a Town belonging to the Portugues, 2 Leagues from Madras,
where formerly stood the noblest Fort of the Country.

This place is remarkable for the Martyrdom of St. Thomas the Apostle, who
suffered here; his Sepulcher is this day to be seen on a rising ground hard by
the Town; the shore was covered with people, who came to be spectators of the
action that was like to ensue.

CHAP. XXVII.
Combat of Madras.
WE now perfectly discovered the number of the Enemy's ships, and their
strength; I counted fourteen, of which only eleven carried Guns; that is, six
Dutch, with their Admiral, which seemed to carry 60 guns, with a flag on the
main top mast; and five English, of which the Admiral, who was 60 guns too, had
a flag also on the main top.

Monsieur Duquesne, observing the greatest of them anchord next to us, and that
the rest lay between them and the Fort, hung out a flame of Orders, to command
the several Captains aboard, to concert the manner of the attack, and to gain
the wind.

It Is indeed convenient, that the Lion and the Dragon should coast it from St.
Thomas's to gain the wind, and throw out a small anchor by the sides of the
lesser ships, that the others followed by the Rock, the Flowrishing, and the
Bird, should attack the rest; and that while we fired on the Dutch Admiral,
which was our part, Monsieur d' Auberville should endeavor to approach it with
his fire ship by the favor of the smoke. These orders given, each took his
post immediately to execute them.

Never men more heartily desired to come to action than ours, and we had reason
to expect an answerable succes, and by the manner of our falling on, our
thoughts ran more on a certain Victory, than an uncertain fight. The Lion and
the Dragon who made all the sail they could, were presently within shot of the
Fort, which began to fire upon them; yet notwithstanding they past by with
little or no damage; and according to orders, came and anchored over against
the ships they intended, and fired furiously upon them. It might now be about
One in the afternoon, and we followed them so close, that the enemy had scarce
answered them again, when we came up with the Dutch Admiral, and gave her a
broad side.

It Is not very common to see six such ships as ours attack eleven large ones,
and to bear all their fire, and that of a strong fort too; the least of whose
guns were twenty four and thirty six pounders, and indeed the fire was so
terrible of both sides, that nothing was to be seen but fire, smoke and ball.

'Twas then that Monsieur d' Auberville disdaining danger, in the midst of that
shower of Ball, attempted to fire the Dutch Admiral; who seeing a fire ship
coming toward him, in vain endeavored to avoid it; Monsieur d' Auberville
showed great courage and conduct in this undertaking; so having quickly fastened
the fireship to the Admiral, with chains and graples, and set fire to it, he
leapt into the boat, which returned safe to his ship, in spite of all the fire
of the enemy.

All expected that this undertaking would have had the greatest succss, and
that the Admiral could not escape being burnt; nay, the Dutch themselves were
of that opinion, for they presently quitted her, and got into 2 boats to make
off. But unhappily the graples (being only made of hoopes) breaking, she fell
off, and Drove ashore, consuming none but her self, which the Dutch observing,
they with great joy returned aboard again, from whence they fired as before:
The fight still continued with great obstinacy, till 5 in the evening; when the
Commandant gave orders to cease firing. We had not a man killed, except a Valet
of a Mandarin, whose bowels were carried away with a Cannon ball; But we
suffered more in our masts, which was partly the reason we quitted them so soon.

CHAP. XXVIII.
After the fight, we took and burnt an English ship in the face of the enemy.
HAving anchored about a quarter of a League distant, where we past the rest of
the day in refitting; between ten and eleven in the evening we had a false
alarm in our Squadron, I don't know how; a sloop that in all probabillity knew
not what had past, came directly to the Dragon; the seamen on the watch
discovering her, fired at her which made her retire presently; however this
alarmed the whole squadron, which immediately had orders to be in a readiness,
and to keep a strickt Guard all night, for fear of a surpize, though the contrary
winds, and the disposition of the ememy was a sufficient security against it.

But in affairs of war one cannot be too vigilant; for then, whatever harm
happens, it cannot be imputed to folly or neglect, however this unaccountable
trifle of a sloop disturbed us all, and deprived us of our rest that night.

Next morning we saw the ships lying nearer the Fort, and ranged in a better
line then they were before. We then perceived our oversight in not boarding
them to rights at first, by the much greater difficulty of attacking them a
second time; they had now placed themselves at such a distance from each other,
that the Fort might fire at us, without hurting them; a piece of management
they had neglected the day before.

Considering the difficulty of a second attempt, and the uncertainty of
succeeding, we resolved to pursue our course, though with an easy sail, that we
might give them time to folus, if they thought they could make any thing of it,
but there appeared not the least disposition in them; on the contrary they
fired several guns for joy that they had escapt us so cheap; but we understood
afterward that they buried some Officers, who were killed in this action.

However we still pursued our course under a slack sail, eying a vessel we
discovered at anchor two Leagues before us. The Bird, which kept a head of the
Squadron approacht within shot of her, and sent in his sloop armed, with an
Officer; who found nothing in her but such trifling things as the English had
not time to take away, we left some men to sail her, but she proved so slow,
that we chose rather to set her a fire than to be troubled with her, which he
did, (after taking out of her whatever might be of any use) not far from a
Dutch Factory, named Pailliacat, and in the sight of the enemy.

CHAP. XXIX.
An English Vessel chaste, and run aground.
WE afterward lancht out into the Ocean, and by that means lost the sight of
Masilipatam, where they make the finest painted Calico's in all the Indies, and
the most vallu'd in Europe; after some days, having regained the Coast, the
30th of August, in the morning we perceived a Vessel near the shore without a
Topmast; though we made toward her with Dutch colors, yet she hung out none,
and we observed that she had not so much as a flag staff, which made us believe
she was a Moor, and Monsieur Duquesne being farther convinced of it by her
building presently tackt about, and stood away.

Next day, being the last of this month, we discovered another about three in
the afternoon, which presently hoisted sail, and fired several Guns at her
departure, we presently made all the sail we could after her, and gave the
chase signal to the Lion, and the Dragon, who gaining the wind, got between her
and the shore, to prevent her running her self a ground; the rest of us kept
under the wind to intercept her course; but notwithstanding she being far a
head of us, and making all the sail she could, ran herself aground at a place
called Cangam, near a River which bears that name, before we could come within
shot of her.

It was now too late to attacque her, or so much as to perceive how she lay; in
this uncertainty we anchored so, that she could not escape us without being
seen, and in the Morning, Monsieur Duquesne sent Monsieur de la Neufville,
second Captain of the Bird, to view her with all the sloops.

This little Squadron of armed sloops, as is necessary on such an Expedition,
quickly reached the place, where that change of waters is observed, which is
caused in the sea by the overflowing of this River; we now began to sound; by
reason of a vast number of little rocks that lay under water here abouts,
beyond which this ship had run her self aground; we went two fathom and a half
water, without being able to come near her; so that we could not immagin, how
'twas possible for the Vessel to get so far in.

About a quarter of an hour after, we saw a topmast floating on the side of the
ebb, with seven seamen clinging to it, who were half drowned, and who by signs,
of Crosses, desired us to save them; Monsieur de la Neufville going toward
them took them up in his boat, where they no sooner were, but the seamen fell a
rifling these miserable people, for the money they had hid in the wast bands of
their breeches. They were, Portuguese, who informed us, that 'twas an English
ship of 36 guns coming from Massilipatam, that from the time she was run
aground, the Captain debarkt with 40000 Roupies in silver, which is 20000
crowns French, and her richest lading that could be best carried off: That the
English, who were but fifteen, saved themselves a shore, except two or three,
whom we saw on the deck; adding also, that they themselves had made the same
shift, in order or get a shore, bnt the tide of ebb instead of landing them,
carried them farther out to Sea.

We saw her struck at one end, and so we judged, there could not be above three
foot water where she was; the vast surges that roll all along on this coast,
went over her stern, so that in the condition she lay, there seemed to be
little likely hood of getting her off, but by pieces. They ask't the Portuguess
if the sloops could come at her without danger, they answered, that we must
steer directly toward her Stern, But Monsieur de la Neufelle not judging it so
easy a matter, resolved to run no such hazards on the bare word of Strangers,
in an enterprise, which in the opinion of every one, would have succeeded
better than he expected.

The Negros appeared thick on the shore, to see what we would do; both the
English and they expected to see the ship pillaged or burnt; but they were not
a little pleased with their mistake, when they saw our sloops tacking and going
off again, accompanied with great rains. We were afterward informed that there
was aboard a great deal of Scarlet cloth, and Masslipatam Calico's, so that we
lost a considerable booty.

CHAP. XXX.
Two English ships richly laden escape our Squadron, which anchors before
Balazor. Our Admiral happily avoids being burnt.
THE calm hindered our departure this day, but the next being the 2d. of Sep.
we sailed with a fresh gale that just began to blow. The two following days we
discovered another ship, and presently made what sail we could after her;
sometimes, she made toward the land, as if she intended to run a shoat; then
she would tack, and stand out to sea, as if she did not know what course to
take. At last seeing the Lion and the Dragon ready to come up with her, after
some hours chase, she struck her topmast, which she would have hoisted again
immediately; the Dragon hanging out a white flag, fired a gun at her, which
obliged her to ly by, till the Admiral came up.

She proved a Moorish ship, bound from the Maldive Islands, laden with Coris's,
which are certain shells that pass for small money at several places, as
Bengale, Siam and Guinne. We sailed together almost to Balazor, where we
arrived later than we expected, by reason of the calms we met; however on the
seventh we came in sight of it at 4 in the evening.

Two English Vessels which lay in the road as soon as ever they saw us at a
distance, presently hoist sail; thinking it better to quit the place than to
expect us, though they were secure enough; the Great Mogull on whom this Country
is dependant, suffering no vessel to be attackt in 8 fathom water. They made
toward the mouth of the Ganges, to anchor at a good distance from us;
expecting as they said, a Convoy of twelve ships, because they were richly
laden with Coupans and gold ingots from Japan; but we had the wind so scanty,
that they could hardly fly, or we pursue, but we observed we were the better
sailors, for when they came to an anchor, we were within two cables length of
them.

The Commandant ordered three guns to be fired, to give the Director of the
French Factory notice of our arrival, and sent his sloop to Balazor next day
for fresh provisions, which did not return again in three days, being no less
than seven Leagues by Land. Monsieur Pele the Director, and several other
Merchants came aboard, who brought two ships laden with provisions with them,
which by reason of the wind, were oblieg'd to anchor at two Leagues distance
from us till it changed, but there appearing no likely hood of it, we went and
joined them.

He received us with a flag, and one of them saluted us with seven guns. The
fresh provisions were distributed amongst the ships of the Squadron, of which
we stood in great need, for we were half famisht. Monsieur Duquesne writ to
Monsieur Deslandes, Director general, who commonly resides at Ougly, a Town
situated on the bank of the Ganges, fifty Leagues from Balazor; to make ready
two thousand sacks of Biscuit, with the Merchandise that was to be transported
to France against the 15th. of December, when he expected to return.

The same day about two in the afternoon, we had the saddest alarm that could
happen aboard, a fire began in the Lions room through the negligence of the
Mate, but the Countermaster happening by good providence to be a sleep there,
suddenly wak't and cried Fire, every one scared and alarmed, run to draw
water, and to wet linen clothes to extinguish it; it had already reached the
cable room, but we followed it so close, and took such care, that it did little
damage.

About three days before, and I know not for what reason, (which ought to make
us admire and thank the Divine Providence the more) we removed the powder out
of the Lions hold, (which is put there in times of action,) and that very
happily; for if it had continued there, the forecastle blowing up; we should
have had but little time to have saved our selves in the sloop.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Squadron leaves Balazor for Mergui, which we could not gain; is dispersed
by a storm, and suffers extremely.
THE 13th. of September we parted from Balazor for Mergui, we had little wind
that day, and a calm at night; so that after having several times weighed and
cast anchor in vain, we were forced to make use of the Currents, and to drive
with the tide when it served us.

On the 18th. at night there happened an Eclipse of the Moon, which lasted from
seven, till thirty Minutes past nine, a third part was darkened; I believe
neither this nor that I mentioned before, were seen in France; for 'twas about
two in the afternoon when we saw it there.

'Till this day we were still troubled with weighing and casting anchor
continually: The 29th. in the evening this long calm changed into a violent
storm, that after loosing two anchors we were oblieg'd to hoist sail though the
wind was against us; the storm encreast so, that about midnight we thought we
should a lost all our Masts.

In the morning we saw none of our ships but the Bird, the tempest having
separated the rest. The Rendevouzse was to be at Negraille, in case we could
not make Mergui our port, for which, the wind was quite contrary, and so
violently accompanied with hail, that we `struck our top sails three or four
times a day; being fearful we should want water if this weather lasted, and
though we had supplied our selves for six months at Ponticheri, we had so wasted
it, that we had not enough for one month. Monsieur Duquesne began to manage it
with care retrenching the Rice, which consumed a great deal of it, and ordered
Biscuit in its place, and stinted the whole Company to a pint a day.

I never was more sensible of the violence of thirst; the salt Victuals, and
the Extreme heats had almost parcht me up, once in the extremity of this
suffering, I offered five Crowns for a pot of water, but could find none that
would accept of it, each laboring under the same evil, so that there was no
remedy but patience, which is but a small relief to him that is stinted by
nature.

At length the wind changed, and continued good for five or six days, in which
we recovered what we had lost of our way; But it becoming changeable again, we
sailed sometimes losing, sometimes gaining, without hopes of seeing Mergui so
soon as we expected, which very much afflicted us.

The last of September in the morning, we discovered a sail a head of us,
steering the same course; we made what have we could to know what she was, and
after three hours chase, we came within shot of her, who hung out a flag all
red; we hung out ours, which they saluted by hoisting their topmast three times
for want of guns. Monsieur Duquesne sent his sloop to bring the Captain aboard,
who showed him a Passport signed by Monsieur Martin; he was accompanied by
three old men like himself, clad in Muslin Shirts, and Turbants on their heads,
and each a long beard, they were rich Moorish Merchants, bound from
Massilipatam for Mergui: they had a flag all red by way of distinction, and to
show they were more than ordinany; for the common flag of the Moors, is no more
than a cimiter crossed with its scabard on a red ground. We regail'd them with
wine, Tea, and sweetmeats, and after viewing exactly and admiring our ship,
they departed without selling any of their goods, which they held at too dear a
rate. Next day we lost sight of them.

The fifth of October, discovering another ship we steered toward her for some
time, believing she was one of our Squadron, of whom as yet we had heard no
news since we were separated at Balazor; but as she made off with all the sail
she could, and that 'twould have carried us too far out of our way to have
persu'd the Chase, we quitted her, to make our best advantage of the little
wind we had; it never was so changeable, for if it favored us for a day, 'twas
a calm again at night, or perhaps contrary for four or five days after; in the
mean time the water in the hold was very much diminisht, and our thirst
encreast more and more with that little we drank of it at meals, and the
violent heats.

CHAP. XXXII.
A wonderful shower of rain falls: We discover the Isle of the Andamants, a
barbarous people.
GOD who never abandons his own in such extremities as there showed us in some
measure the same favor he formerly did the Isralites in the wilderness; and by
a large and unexpected shower of rain, which supplied us all with the means of
quenching our violent thirst, that tormented us so much.

How eagerly did all endeavor to taste of this celestial Manna, every one,
sought vessels and all other shifts to save as much as they could, and then
with what greediness did they drink it, I am sure no Champaign wine ever drunk
like it to me; we filled 27 barrels with this water, which refresht us very
much in the midst of our distress, not so much as knowing where we were.

We continued a long time in this uncertainty, but having at last a good wind,
we judged by the Latitude, that we were not far from the Andamants, nor by
consequence from the Coco Islands, which are but ten Leagues thence; which was
the reason we lay by every night, or five or six hours together, for fear of
running upon them.

The 12th. of October before sun rise, we discovered the Isles of the
Andamants, which we left on the right, lying in 13 Degrees. 40 Minutes North Lat.
and a hundred and 16 Degrees. forty nine Minutes Long. the Inhabitants are the most
cruel and savage in the world, they neither trade nor correspond with any other
whatsoever, not so much as suffer any to land upon their coast, and if by
Chance they are so unhappy as to be driven upon it: these Barbarous savages
immediately kill them, and dress them for food.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The great straights that Monsieur Duquesne was in for want of water, makes him
anchor at the great Isle of COCOS.
AN hour after discovering the Isles of the Andamants we saw those of the
Coco's, which we endeavored to gain, that we might take in water at any rate:
We had the wind almost quite against us, but in such extreamities as these, the
utmost was to be tried, for fear of missing them, and though they were in sight
of us, yet we several times lost hopes of gaining them, in the mean time we
tacked so often, that on Sunday the 15th. at 3 in the afternoon we anchored on
a little Island which lay South-East and by South of us, bord'ring to the South
East of all the rest, but placed wrong in the Card. We observed it to lie in
14 Degrees. N. L. of one side; at about two Leagues distance from it there is
larger Islands, which lay to the East of us.

The Commandant sent the sloop armed a shore, in case they should hinder their
landing; but none opposing it, they ransak't the whole Island with all the
eagerness and nicey, as such violent thirst could inspire them with, without
being able to discover spring or river, and consequently any Inhabitants; they
past the night easy enough, by reason of the abundance of Cocos they met with,
which supplied the defect of water, of which they brought us the boat full next
day, and two Lizards of a prodigious length, with three Tortoises's, one of
which was big enough two make two meals for the whole Crew; but as it was not
that we wanted most, Monsieur Duquesne sent the sloop presently to the other
Island, ordering the Officer if he met with water, to give notice of it by a
signal of two fires.

The Bird which could not get so near the wind as we, lay at a Loofe, and
therefore could not come at an anchor with us, till four in the afternoon, in
the morning Chavilier Dair came aboard us, as well to know our necessities, as
to inform us of his own; for he told us we wanted not only Water, but meat for
his Table. Monsieur Duquesne reflecting on the miserable condition the last
Tempest had brought them too, the Dangers they had run, and those they should
be exposed too, in case they attempted to gain Merguy while the wind was
contrary: He resolved therefore, in case there was no Water in that great
Island, to Steer his course directly to Negraille, it being a place designed
for our Rendezvouze, and winter Quarters, if we were not able to reach Merguy,
or force the Siamoi's to entertain us.

About Two in the afternoon, we saw the sloop returning, and presently we hoist
sail and met her, in order to take our measures, according to the news she
brought us; which indeed was such, as could not be more Welcome than in our
present distress: Our Company was all on the Deck to see the sloop returning
laden, though yet uncertain with what, shouted for joy; they asked what she
brought, and being answered, Water, at that word immediately all our trouble
were dispersed, by this pleasing draught, of which we drunk unmeasurably; and
then anchored with satisfaction near the great Isle, about a League from Land.

CHAP. XXXIV.
WE would not loose a moment of time in going a shour; where we loaded fifty
tun of water and wood, though not without great toil, by reason of the landing,
which is very troublesome at low water. The sloops being obliged to anchor at
large, we were forced to go up to the Neck in the Water, to get a shore; by
reason of the vast number of small Rocks that inviron this Isle.

They who admire shell-work, may glut their fancy here; for the strand is
covered over with the most beautiful shells that can be seen. The Island
produces no pallatable fruit but Cocos, the vast plenty of which was very
benificial to me, and some others, whose curiosity had obliged us to lie in a
part of the Island where there is no sweet Water to be had; we kindled a great
fire, and past the whole night by it, eating and drinking Cocos; not being able
to sleep, by reason of the Maraingevins, that continually stung us; they are
little flies, like those they call Cousins in France; But much more troublesome
and pernicious, they appearing only in the night.

Every one will justly wonder, that the same fruit should yield both heat and
drink, yet such is the Coco; the tree is lofty, Crooked at the Foot like the
Pinetree, its branches are gathered at top; the fruit is commonly as big as
ones head, the bark being so exceeding thick, you cannot find the Coco till you
have stripped it, at the end there is a hole, which you no sooner touch with your
knife but there spurts out a clear water, very sweet, and refreshing; they are
of a small size in this Island, but I remember at Moelly they were so large,
that three of us could scarce deal with one of them: You must split the Coco to
get at the Kernel, which is white and about the thickness of your finger, and
tastes almost like a hasel-nut; of all fruits this is perhaps the most useful;
the Indians besides meat and drink, draw a certain oil from it, into which the
Water turns after it has stood sometime; they make bowls, and cups, of the
shells and ropes, and Tow of the bark, to bind and caulk their boats with.

This Island is nothing near so steep as others I have seen, but then 'ts so
wooded with high trees, that it is one impenetrable forest all over; besides a
great many curious and unknown birds, we saw Lizards of 5 or 6 foot long, and
as thick as a Man's leg; whose deep mouths were set with teeth as dangerous, as
their claws are with talons, however they fled at the sight of us, and do no
harm if not attackt; their flesh is wonderful white, and some of our men eat of
it, and found it good.

It is stocked with different sorts of Insects; amongst the rest there is one
very little Annimal which seems to be all legs, very remarkable by their
various colors, and a pretty shell on their backs. There Is another creature of
the shape of a serpent, which I have often heard cry distinctly in the trees;
Tocquets, so being ignorant of its other Qualities, we called it by that name,
as none of us saw any Fallow Deer while we were here, I believe the place is
scarce fit for them, and much less for the habitations of men, for I believe it
never was inhabited. It Is true, that in the Eastern part of the Isle, I
observed two little hills, whose seeming fertility, together with the beautiful
verdure of a Meadow at the bottom, inclined me to believe there might be some
cattle feeding thereabouts, though I saw none,

We arrived here Tuesday the 17th. and departed Saturday the 21st. of Octtober
at 8 in the morning for Negraile, or rather for Mergui, if the wind permitted,
which blew very faint, so that 'twas the day following before we reached a
certain Island that lies ten Leagues distant from the Cocos, and in 14 D. N. 50
Min. Lat. it has a chain of rocks that runs a matter of three Leagues out into
the sea. Sailing pretty near it, we left it to the Southward of us.

CHAP. XXXV.
Monsieur Duquesne quits his design of going to Merguy, by reason of the
contrary winds; and anchors at the Negraille Islands, where he meets the rest
of his Squadron.
HEre Monsieur Duquesne lost hopes of gaining Merguy, and without striving any
longer to come near the wind, resolved to go to Negraille, whether we presently
steered our course; the 24th. we discovered the land of Pegu, and we anchored
in ten fathom water, tho we were above 8 Leagues from it, sailing again next
morning: About 4 in the afternoon we understood that there lay four ships at
anchor between the great and the little Island of Negraille, which we made no
doubt were our own. Who had stood in to that place.

So the Commandant having given them the signal of knowledge, in seting his
Topgallant in the form as a banner, they answered him with the same signal, and
sent their sloop to us, which could not get aboard us; so night coming on,
together with the danger of the banks, that are very shallow in diverse places,
oblieg'd us to anchor again over against the Diamond, a little Island 3 Leagues
from Negraille, which we left to the right when we came to an anchor.

This next day, being the 26th. we continued still at anchor waiting for the
tide, when about eleven we saw a ship, which after having doubled the most
northerly point of the great Isle, came and anchored within half a League of
us; we commanded the Capt. aboard, who was a Portugues, bound from Madras,
where he was an eye witness of the action we were engaged in. He told us the
news of the English Admirals having lost his nose by the bursting of a gun, and
that the Dutch had no less then two hundred men killed, which are not stories
like those the enemy published after our departure from Madras, and spread over
all the Indies; of the falsness of which I shall hereafter give you an account.

This evening three sloops having observed our ship, we entered by the favor
of the tide, amongst the rest, where we anchored within musket shot of two
lands; we debarkt five or six sick men on the little Island, and built two
Tents for them on a lovely and spacious plain, that presents it self to our
sight at landing. We lay 8 days there, feasting on Venison, and Wildboar, and
very large Tortoyses, which we took on the Isle of Diamonds, with which the
whole Company feasted themselves twice a day, for all had free leave to go a
shore, not excepting the very prisoners.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The Squadron lying at anchor, Monsieur Duquesne orders five armed sloops to
chase an English ship; who carried out to sea by the winds, were like to have
been lost. The Death of Monsieur de la Villauclers, Lieutenant of the Bird.
THat we might the better forget our past Misfortunes, Monsieur Duquesne,
according to his usual goodness, furnished us with Fusees, powder and ball, to
go and shoot some Fallow-Deer; of which there were large numbers in this
Island; our ship was already on the bar, when news was brought, that an English
ship was arrived at the point of the great Isle; none of the Squadron being in
a condition to go out after her; he sent out five armed sloops, under the
command of Monsieur Neufeville; as soon as the English saw them, they made full
sail; however they came within Musket shot of them, and fired at one another;
but the wind rising, and the enemy making off, Monsieur Neufeville was oblieg'd
to tack about; the wind and Tide which still encreast, drove our sloops a
matter of 7 or 8 Leagues out to sea, and in vain they endeavored by rowing to
recover the land; four of which with much a do returned back, after they had
been the sport of the winds, and suffered extremely through hunger and thirst;
having had no provisions with them.

They could give us no account of the fifth, which was Monsieur Neufeville; I
heard this sad news a shore, which troubled me the more, because there was a
Lieutenant my very good friend aboard; we gave them for lost, but it pleased
God, almost by a miracle, to restore 'em safe, about two days after, in which
there were 25 men, so spent with toil and hunger, that they excited our
compassion.

About this time died Monsieur de la Villeau Clerk, Lieutenant of the Bird,
dyed of a Fever: the greatest part of the Officers assisted at his Funeral, and
we buried him in the plain with a discharge of seven great guns.

CHAP. XXXVII.
A Desceiption of the Islands of Negraille, and an account of what past while
the Squadron lay at anchor there.
NEgraille consists of two Islands about a Cannon shot distant from each other,
and about 4 Leagues off from the Terra Firma of Pegu; one of which is three
Leagues in compass, the other twelve; they are situated in 116. D. of Lon. and
15 D. N. Lat.

It Is strange that so convenient and happy a place, should only be inhabited by
an innumerable number of wild beasts; as Tigers, Elephants, Wild Oxen, Staggs,
and Wild-Boars, which live there undisturbed in the midst of the greatest
plenty; no other Island is so stored with game, or has better hunting; besides
the beasts I have named, which are seen in vast droves; there is plenty of
Ring-doves, Wood-cocks, Teal, Parrots, and an endless number of strange birds
of diverse kinds.

The are Swans, Lizards, and Serpents of a great length, and a great number of
Crocodils, called Caymans, who in the day time hide themselves in rivers, the
better to surprise the beasts when they come to drink; this subtle creature
fastening on the nose of the Wild Oxen, draws them in, and after drownding them
eats them.

At the little Island where we took in Water and Wood, are seen two spacious
and beautiful plains, covered with good feeding, in which the sight loses it
self: Through the midst of it, a pleasant river takes its Course; whose Water
is exceeding good, and easiy to be come at; there we bathed our selves almost
every hour in the day, under the thick shady trees, and in large and greedy
draughts, quenched the violence of our raging thirst.

All this place is marshy, and in many places with salt water; yet in the woods
there are places where they don't reach, and where there is sweet water always
to be found; which the beasts drink of, who come thither in troops of a hunderd
at a time, and feed quietly together; without fear of being disturbed by the
Huntsman.

One of my companions and I going a hunting, we followed some Hearts and Hinds
very warmly, which carried us further into the wood than we were aware of; so
that after two hours pursuit, being quite tired, and intending to return back
again, 'twas more than we could do, to find our way, though we still flattered
our selves with hopes; but after long trying in vain, we at last began to
despair, and almost to give our selves for lost; being already overpowered
with hunger thirst and weariness.

We past through a great many Thickets, the paths being only beaten by the wild
beasts; the sight of whom diverted our melancholy wanderings in a desert
Island, destitute of all Subsistence; exposed to Tigers, Wild-Oxen and
Serpents; in this sad condition, knowing not what to do, we adrest our selves
to God; and took observations of the Sun; Steering our course by it. So after
much labor and fatigue, and beating about from four in the morning to 4 in the
evening, we at length discovered the plain in which our Companions were
encamped; from whence we went to our tent, rejoicing that we were not oblieg'd
to lie in the woods, that night.

These two Isles differ but little, save only this, that the greatest,
nourishes a great many Tigers, and greater variety of strange creaturs then the
less, where the convenience of water, and the beautiful walks renders it very
happy and proper for human habitation. The Hunters had so disturbed these wild
Inhabitants, that the Oxen, whose calves, they every day killed; became so
furious, that the Femals ran at all they met.

A Captain of the Marines belonging to the Bird, being a hunting with 2 others,
was set upon by one of these creaturs; she broke his leg, and tore out his
bowels, while he was climbing up a tree to save himself; this spectacle so
frightened his companions, that instead of shooting at her, they fled and left
him exposed to her fury; but however they went back afterward and took him up
half dead, bringing him to the Tent; whom we were oblieg'd to leave at
Pontichery, his wounds and bruises, not permitting him to return to France.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The Squadron departs from Negraile for Balazor; hindered by calms; Monsieur
Duquesne in vain endeavors to supply himself with fresh provisions at Cheduba.
WHile we were taking in Water, and Wood, and other Necessaries for our
departure, we saw a Vessel anchoring half a League off from the Diamond;
Monsieur Duquesne taking notice of it, sent the Lion after her; who found she
was a Portuguese ketch, that came to take some Tortoises before she went to
Pegu; the Dragon joined her a little after, so these two Frigates lay cruising
out till the twelfth of November, when we sailed out from between the two Isles
of Negraile, to be the readier to sail when the wind should present.

We had no sooner anchored again over against the Diamond, but Monsieur
Duquesne sent for the Captain of the ketch aboard; he was a Genoese by nation,
and 'twas from him we understood the enemy reported they had killed two hundred
of us in the fight off Madras, and fourscore of our Officers, of whom were
Monsieur Duquesne himself, and Father Tachard; whom we buried in the night at
St. Thomas's; we were not a little surpised at this news, for what likelihood
was there of Father Tachards being killed, who all the time of the fight was in
the hold, and so could not be lost, unless the ship sunk; and how was it
possible, for us to lose fourscore Officers out of thirty, which was the whole
number we brought out of France.

However a report attended with such particulars, did not fail to gain belief
every where; and they managed it so, that at Ponticheri it past for a certain,
truth; and all along the coast, none knevv the contrary, but themselves; who
were so far from believing it, that they could not conceal that they were more
afraid of us than ever; the best part of them removing with their best effects
from Madras, for fear we should return and make a descent: And this did not
look like the security, and triumph of Victors.

Yet this boasted Victory, served till our return, to conceal the disgrace of
having eleven large ships, under the protection of a Fort, insulted by a
Squadron of six; I cannot imagine what people will think of them, when they see
Monsieur Duquesne revived again, and the fourscore Officers raised from tht
dead; and our whole Company as Complete as before, excepting only four that
were killed.

Tuesday the fourteenth of November, having taken about fourscore Tortoises, we
sailed for Balazor. That day a Seaman of Provence deserted us, who enraged,
because he could not revenge himself for some hard usage he thought he had
received from his Officers, remained at the great Isle of Negraille; whither we
had sent the sloop in the morning to look for our men that had been a hunting
since the day before; without taking any other provision, but a little Rack and
some Biscuit in his Pocket, a hatchet, and three great nails; in all
probability to make a Catamaron with, in which by the favor of the tide, he
might gain the Country of Pegu, which was but four Leagues distant.

Scarce had we lost sight of Negraile, but the little wind we had, turned into
a downright calm; which lasted a long while, and was very Tiresom by reason of
the violent heats, and a malignant Fever that began to spread amongst the
Seamen; which we with reasnn attributed to the extraordinary fatigues they had
gone through, and to the pestilential serenes of these Marshy Islands, which
are damp, unwholesome Vapors rising after Sunset; and the whole Crew, that
before enjoyed so perfect a health, became very much infected; so that Monsieur
Duquesne through a necessity of being supplied with fresh provisions was
oblieg'd to stop at Cheduba, an Island in the Kingdom of Racam, situated in 18
Degrees. 23 Min. N. L. and 115 D. 34 M. L. where we say for a while, and sent three
sloops ashore.

As soon as ever these fearful Islanders perceived them, they fled to the
woods; there came a band of them afterward to the sea side with Lances and
Bows in their hands, making signs that we should not Land; notwithstanding
which two of our men did, (and put them out of pain,) by letting them
understand as well as they could the reason of it; but 'twas impossible to
persuade these savages to supply us with any fresh provisions for our money, or
by the way of exchange, though they had plenty of Fowl and Cattle.

They are of a swarthy complexion, and go naked; have very thick hair, and are
taller than ordinary. 'Twas no small mortification to fail of being supplied
with those Provisions and necessaries we expected to meet with here; our
distemper increasing daily, and having scarce fresh provisions enough to serve
the sick, the number of whom by this time amounted to 60, and 'twas not long
before I was one of them, but was so happy as to have but six fits of the Fever.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The Squadron anchors before Balazor, where we supplied our selves with fresh
provisions, and took in Goods for France.
WHatever care we could take to manage our fesh provisions, the number of the
sick soon consumed them; so we were forced to have recourse to Monsieur
Duquesne, who at the instance of Father Tachar'd stinted himself of his own, to
supply them, who else had perished through Want.

I cannot hear omit the indefatigable pains this good Father took with them; he
toiled with the Almoner from morning till night, visiting some, serving others,
and administering the Sacraments to the dying, and performing the utmost that
lay in his power. What the Commandant spared, proved but inconsiderable, when
divided amongst fourscore sick persons, who yet were glad of it till they got
to Balazor, to the sight of which we came the last of November in the morning;
we sailed four days along the coast, and the banks of the Ganges, which is one
of the four principal Rivers of the World; and on the third of December, we
came to an anchor within three Leagues and a half of the Land, where after
firing three guns of notice, as the first time, the Commandant sent Monsieur
Fauche to give notice of his arrival.

We presently prepared to set a shore at the mouth of the River, those, who had
the disease of the Country, and to get fresh provisions aboard for the rest of
the sick; the number of whom was too great to let the English know of it, who
had a Factory too at Balazor, and might make their advantages of it.

Monsieur Deslandes, Director general, arrived from Ougly. 2 days after; almost
at the same time as the Mergui, an English built ship of 18 guns, with two
others, that the French took from the Siamois, which were partly laden with
Saltpeter, and some bales of goods, that were to be put aboard the Squadron;
we unloaded 'em out of hand, and several other great Barks, who every day
brought us the rest of the goods; while we were loading, Monsieur Deslandes
continued a board us, whom the Commandant entertained very nobly, and honored
him several times with the discharge of guns, as well from his own ship, as the
rest, who complimented him thus in their Turns.

We were very ill furnished with fresh provisions here; the beef and mutton was
mere carrion, so that two of the Captains who were careful of the health of
their men, threw, what fell to their share overboard; I never saw any flesh so
red, or so likely to procure a flux; however our Captain who did not much
concern himself with such things, and the violence of hunger, made us digest
them with rice, which was now our bread for four months.

This fare was none of the best, and I longed to go to Balazor to mend my diet,
but could not get leave, by reason that at our first landing there were some of
the Seamen who got drunk with Aquavitae, and quarreled with the English, one
of whom they killed with a knife, which was the occasion of hindering the
others going a shore, without so much as excepting some of us, who were not
given to such kind of quarrels.

The two Mandarins being gone to Balazor, to Inquire out a convenient passage
to their Country, understood that them was a Moorish ship bound suddenly for
Mergui, they agreed presently for their passage with the Captain, and
afterward came to take their leave of Monsieur Duquesne, and Father Tachard,
who was glad to be rid of the burden; The Father who had them under his
protection, and who was in honor oblieg'd to see them used respectfully, having
received them from the hand of the late King of Siam; procured from Monsieur
Duquesne a Compliment, to dismiss them with five guns.

We recommended to them the mierable state of the French who languisht in their
prisons, and Monsieur Chamoreau, Captain of the Lion, besought them in
particular, in the behalf of a Brother of his, who was actually a prisoner
there, though to be plain with them, I believe their interest was very
inconsiderable: And if I may believe the account a Jesuit gave me of them,
'twould be as much as they could do to keep their own feet out of the fetters,
when they came home.

Father Duchast, whom a long Residence in Siam, had rendered him knowing in the
Maxims and policies of this Nation, arrived at Ougli, and came to salute Father
Tachard, and to put into his hands a great quantity of provisions, which the
Jesuits of this Town sent to those of Ponticheri; after he had put them aboard
us, he he returned very well pleased with his Voyage, and us too; for he was so
civil as to let us have all the curious stuffs he had brought from Ougly at
reasonable rates. Monsieur Vasseur, second Lieutenant of the Rock, dying next
morning, we threw him into the sea, with 7 guns discharged for his Funeral.

CHAP. XL.
The Squadron parts from Balazor to return to Ponticheri, we found a great
number of Moors there, who fled for refuge to the French.
THe near approach of an ill Season; but chiefly the earnest desire of Monsieur
Duquesne, to return to France, made us hasten our departure; after having taken
in fresh Water, and all other supplies necessary for our Voyage, we commanded
our sick aboard, whom the land Air had perfectly recovered. And on Saturday the
30th. of December, we parted with Monsieur Deslandes for Pontichery, being
followed by the Company's boat laden with powder and ball for the Fort.

We took our course South East and by South, with a fresh gale, which soon
turned into a calm; and lasted from the first, to the fifth of January, 1691.
When it began to blow a fresh again; and on the tenth in the evening, we
discovered the land of Madras; at which the Commandant lay by, for fear of
passing beyond it in the night, resolving to stop there the next day, if he
discovered any shiping, though the fright and consternation the enemy was in,
gave us little ground to expect it; yet nevertheless we met one, whom the fort
had no sooner warned of our arrival by six guns, but she fled; not believing it
a sufficient protection.

We followed her with all the sail we could make, and at last came up with her,
notwithstanding she had been so far a head of us; about four in the afternoon
seeing the Lion and the Dragon within shot of her, she run herself within a
little bank at Sadraspatam, where her men presently went a shore. But in vain
had she sought for safety there, if the sea, which was very ruff, had not
hindered us from boarding her; yet we earnestly desier'd it, being ready to run
any riskque in the pillageing and burning of her, but Monsieur Duquesne judging
otherwise of it, pursued his Voyage, and this evening came to an anchor some
Leagues beyond Madras, from whence we departed next morning being the twelfth,
and arrived at Pontichery at one in the afternoon; the Fort saluted us with
nine Guns, and we answered them with as many: Father Tachand went a shore
presently, taking with him what he had aboard, intending to make his residence
there.

I could not immagine that the loss of his Reverence, could produce such
different effects as it did; there were some who were very much afflicted at
it* and a great many others, who of the contrary were very little concerned:
and most of the Seamen, who are little verst in the merits, and worth of Men,
were as incensible of the loss of him, as if they had never enjoyed the
advantages of his company; however he wanted not the civility of seven Guns at
his departure.

The Public is like to be oblieg'd to him for an account of his Voyage, which
at parting he put into the hands of Monsieur Duquesne, to deliver it to the RR.
FF. Jesuits, who were to see it printed, but it contains no return; I read
nothing in it which I had not seen, and which I have not inserted in this;
except a letter from one of their Fathers, who is at present in China; which
contains a full account of the Revolution that happened at Siam, and this has
very much enlarged his Relation.

Since our departure from Pontichery, they had planted on the shore a new
battery of eight Guns, 18 pounder each, being those we had brought from France;
and we found above twenty thousand Negros there, who had fled thither for
refuge, under the French Pavillion, to avoid the Troops of the Great Mogul; who
had besieged Gingy, the Caputal of the Prince of that Name.

This is a very great Town, about fifteen Leagues up the land; the strongest,
and the only one, able to resist the power of the Mogul; with whom this Prince
has continual war: And whose Troops, though to the number of fourscore thousand,
where, as they told us, shamefully oblieg'd to quit the Siege, through the
vigorus resistance of the Garrison and the Town, where the Prince of Gingy
commanded in person.

Two great Lords of the Country who where at Pontichery when we lay at anchor,
had the curiosity to come and see our ship, accompanied with five and twenty
servants, which they took out of above three hundred, that each of them had; we
put all things in as good order as we could, and brought all our Company above
Deck, the number of which they admired at; but the Sea incommoding them very
much, and not being able to stand on the deck, they returned immediately; with
a salute of 7 Guns and 7 vive le Roy's.

CHAP. XLI.
The Squadron leaves the Indies to return to France, passes the Line the third
time, without any inconveniences, in the 170 D. of Long. The beginning of our
Navigation is happy.
AFter we had taken some hogsheads of water aboard, and some other provisions
we wanted; the Commandant took leave of Monsieur Martin, who saluted him from
the Fort with three discharges of eleven Guns. That day we gave the parting
Gun; so on Wednesday the ^4th: of January we sailed by four in the morning to
quit the Indies for this time; and return to France; the wind was very
favorable to us, and soon carried us a considerable distance, from a land,
which we wished six thousand Leagues off us.

It seemed to me as if this long Voyage we now entered on, would never be
ended, and though we sailed never so swiftly, and I had made the Voyage already,
yet I fancied we should never come to the end of it: however we made such way,
that February the 24th. 3 in the afternoon we past the Line the third time, in
107 D. of Long. without any inconveniency of Calms or Heats. Such a happy
beginning of a Voyage was no little comfort to us, and the hopes 'twould
continue so, sweetened our toil, and made the time more pleasant than before.

The 16th. We had the sun in our Zeinth, that is, darting his Beams
perpendicularly on us, casting no shadow, but on the contrary an excessive
heat, which we were forced to bear, without so much as one drop of Water to
refresh us between meals; this heat diminisht insensibly as we departed from
the Sun, and entered into cooler climates; which however did not hinder our
experiencing great miseries and fatigues, and had we not been unaccustomed to
'em, should scarce have been able to have undergone 'em.

The 25th. in the morning we past the Tropic of Capricorn, and met with
Blustering winds in these Latitudes, which forwarded us very much on way; but
afterward became so outrageous, that we could more willingly have embraced the
most tiresome calm.

CHAP. XLII.
A dreadful tempest happens in the Height of Mascarin, which disperses the
Squadron, and is in great danger of being lost.
BEing now the time of Carnevall, Monsieur Duquesne was obliged to give us
Wine, instead of Rack, which we had drunk for four Months before, at this time
every one is desirous to fare a little better than ordinary, but in vain did we
attempt it at sea, where good cheer is generally scarce, but especially in such
long Voyages as these; the Seamen danced Morning and Evening, and were very
merry; which joined with the fair wind we had, served to lessen the time, which
was more irksom to us, than any thing else.

The Wind already blew so strong, that we sailed no less than 3 Leagues an
hour; and increasing on Tuesday the 1st. of March, obleig'd us to furl all our
Sails, except the foremast; and the air was so thick and Cloudy, that we could
scarce descern from Ship to Ship, which proved but too Fatal an Omen, of that
dreadful Tempest that ensued. Sure nothing could be more Frightful and amazing,
than to see the air condensed, and our beloved Element representing a dismal
scene of Death. The Winds spent their utmost rage, and seemed to groan beneath
their Burden; while the yawning seas torn with their fury, eagerly desired to
make a prey of us: Yet still kept us in suspense, even in the Arms of Death;
about Four in the afternoon, the foremast sheet was blown to rags, and the vast
noise and Universal rouling of the ship, filled us all with confusion and
horror.

And now being about 3000 Leagues from Land, we saw ourselves exposed to the
outrageous Element; without sails, and distitute of all means that might tend
to our safty. The vast prodigious waves no sooner rolled over our Decks, and
filled our ship with water, but greater still returned, and seemed to sink us
to the Bottom; so that sometimes we had scarce time to take breath, and hardly
knew whether we were in the ship or the sea.

In this miserable condition and approaching danger, every one plied the pump;
and the short remainder of the day, we spent in fastening a sprit sail to the
yard of the foremast sail, which we had no sooner done, but as an addition to
our misery, a dismal shout was heard at the sight of one of our ships, which
driven by the violence of the Storm, was just ready to run fowl of us, and
split us both.

All that is horrible and amazing in death; presented it self to our view;
himself at the last moment of life, knew not what course to take, or what he
should do to avoid it* we unfurled our two sprit-sails, which were no sooner
loose, but the winds blew them into a thousand Shatters however they served to
Clear us of the ship to which we so happily showed our lights* that hoisting
her foremast sail she past by, without damage on either side.

In the midst of so many alarums and continual dangers, we past the rest of
night in pumping, and rummaging the inside of the ship, which was so wet that
there was not a dry place to be found in it to lie down: Rivers of Water ran
continually over the deck; the Boxes, chests, and all the hamocks were thrown
down, and nothing was to be seen throughout the whole Vessel but the perfect
picture of a shipwreck, to which the winds and Seas seemed to conspire; this
night we had the the Jack Staff carried away by one single Wave.

We waited for day Break with more impatience than our Friends for our Return*
as though 'twould alay the storm, or rescue us from danger; at last it came, but
alas it only served to give us a clearer sight of our Misery, so that Friday in
the morning, the wind and the seas having abated nothing of their rage, but
still increasing; and finding our selves quite spent, we with horror beheld the
Wild and almost inevitable death that waited for us.

We had recourse to GOD as the only means left, and with tears in our Eyes, and
terror in our Hearts, we implored his Infinite Goodness, by the suffrages of
the Blessed Virgin, and St. Joseph; whom we prayed to interpose their credit to
obtain mercy for us. In the mean time we plied four pumps continually, and
having discovered two great Leaks, the one before, the other aff't we were
oblieg'd to make a well in the bottom of the keel, and to draw the water thence
with Buckets and Pails to prevent sinking.

'Twas strange, that though watching and fasting had quite spent us; yet we
should gather strength out of our very weakness, and work and toil on, without
so much as reflecting on our miserable condition; each of us thought of nothing
but disputing his life, which he saw pressed and attackt with a thousand dangers
at once.

We continued thus toyling in our Misery, till four in the evening, when not
knowing what farther course to take to save our selves, or to resist the
violence of the storm, we a second time adrest our selves to GOD, vowing upon a
deliverance to have a Service, or each his particular Mass said at St. Anns in
Auray.

We crept up upon the Deck, and our Almoner on his knees, under the quarter
deck, as did all the rest invok the aid and mercy of Heaven, in the name of two
hundred and fifty Saints more, who poured out their Souls in the same devotion,
imploring the mercy of GOD; never was a more moving Spectacle seen, and I then
with horror read our ruin in the disparing looks of Monsieur Duquesne, who
kneeling on his bed, and looking fixedly on the raging Seas, mounting high in
the air, and threatening us with ruin, seemed to tell us there was no more hopes
left but in the immediate Favor of Heaven: The Vow being made, he let himself
fall on his bed, saying his only hopes were in the Infinite mercy of GOD, and
that 'twas invain to strive any longer.

This, I own threw me into the last despair, yet we were resolved to try once
more what we could do; resolving to save our selves, or perish; we tried to
hoist a second time our foremast sail, where we used care in taking of the
rise; each with fear and impatience waited the success of a course, that was
either to save or ruin us; and at this very time we were quite consumed with
the labor of the merciless Sea.

A little after a Seaman, whom the Sea had swept out of the ship, was thrown in
again by the Waves, and saved.

But GOD at last showed us mercy, and pity, and was pleased to put an end to
all our Fatigues and sufferings; for unfurling the foremast sail, it resisted
the wind; when full of joy and acknowledgement for so visible a protection, we
began to pursue our way; and in our turn, triumphing over those Waves that had
so insulted us for two days together.

We ran thus the rest of the night, and next day, being Saturday, the wind
began to alter about four in the morning; so that at break of day we saw our
selves out of that danger, which continually threatened us for eight and forty
hours together, without sleeping, or eating, or drinking, save a little Biscuit
and Rack.

When we had stopped the two leakes as well as we could, we fell to settling all
things in the inside of the ship, that were in confusion; for nothing could be
seen but Chests and Arms, etc. scattered up and down; fowls and beasts drowned;
in short, an Emblem of an universal Deluge: each now taking breath, began to
provide for himself, some pressed with hunger, began to search for Victuals; but
the kitchins being spoiled we could have none dressed in three days time; and
others almost dead for want of sleep, fell to drying their beds and clothes in
the Sun.

Never was the returning spring, after a long and Torrid winter, more greatful
than the sight of the Sun to us, which composed the remainder of the storm, and
hush't it quite asleep: This was a truly happy day to us; but seeing our selves
all alone, we reckoned we were preserved by Heaven, only to carry home the
dismal news of the loss of the rest of the Squadron; we sailed on, still
continuing our way, and endeavoring to discover what was become of the rest of
the ships, whose rendevouze was appointed at Martinico.

CHAP. XLIII.
As we approach the Cape of Good Hope, we meet with contrary winds, with much
fatiegue and sickness. Monsieur Duquesne finds part of the Squadron which he
gave for lost.
THe beginning of the month we sailed with all success imaginable, during which
time we often saw certain dark Birds with yellow Beaks, but toward the end, as
we approacht the Cape of Good Hope, meeting with contrary winds we suffered
great fatigues, which were very prejudicial to our men, and occasioned the
Bloody Flux, and other Distempers; and the Cold increasing daily, was as great
a Mortification to us now, as ever the heats had been before.

The Severity of the Climate had not been so tiresome, if our passage had been
more speedy; but we scarcely had sailed above forty or fifty Leagues, but the
Wind chopped about, which forced us to ly by till it came fair again; and these
delays were very uneasiy to us, by reason of the continual rains, and excessive
rowlings of the ship.

The third of April, I remember amongst a number of other Misfortunes, we had
Thunder, Lighting and contrary Winds, oppressed us, all at once; which gave us
all imaginable disturbance, and the excessive roulling and tossing of the ship
would not let us take one moments rest, or suffer us to stay a minute in a
place, and sure nothing could be more irksom than our present condition was,
especially the little hopes we had of a speedy deliverance.

The next day we received an unexpected comfort; for about Seven in the morning
we perceived, through the vast Fogs that arose, two ships a head of us, to whom
we gave chase, though all alone, and had suffered so much in our Rigging; they
immediately made us the Signals of Acknowledgments, in furling the Fore-sail,
and lashing the Fore-top-sail; to which we answered in the same manner, and had
no sooner hoisted up a white flag, but they did so too: We quickly perceived
they were our own ships, and as soon as came near them, they severally saluted
us with five Guns a piece, and a Vive le Roy; the first was the Lion, whose
Poop, as well as ours, was carried away; the second was the Dragon, who for
eight days had been separated from the rest: If we were glad at the sight of
them, they were not less surpised at our return, they believing us lost ever
since they had seen a Topmast floating on the Sea; they told us, that the
Squadron had suffered extremely, and that the Bird had been forced to heave her
Boat and four Guns over board to save herself; and that the Flourishing and the
Rock were nigh being lost, all the Goods in the first being spoiled, and the
last having been obliged to pump continually to save themselves.

CHAP. XLIV.
We gave thanks to God for finding our selves on the Bank of Needles, which we
happily passed, and the gentle Trading Winds succeeding, we sailed prosperously.
AS bad as this news was, we were glad to hear it, for we never expected to see
or hear of one another more, and great would have been our satisfaction in
pursuing our Voyage together, if the South West Winds, which lasted eight days,
had not obliged us to lie by; at last they changed, and having seen a little
Bird, of the size of a Sparrow, we judged we were not far from Land.

Having sounded several times without finding ground, though according to the
variation, and the Point of the Pilots, we should have been on the Bank of
Needles. The 7th. of April we saw a Whale, and several Birds, as Cormorants,
and Velvet Channels, were sitting on the Water, which gave us to understand we
were very near Land; so that next day being the eighth, the Dragon having found
ground, hoisted a Flag to give us notice of it, we presently huddled over a few
prayers, according to custom, and sounding all along we found ground in a 100
fathom Water.

It was wonderful strange that in this place, where the Sea is always so
boisterous and violent, it proved a dead Calm, followed by so gentle a Breeze,
that we past this Bank of 24 Leagues in length, with our Top-gallant Sails
only: Thus having doubled the Cape of Good Hope we took heart, and hoped for a
prosperous Voyage hence forward, the Winds being now so favorable.

And indeed we made great way, for after having sailed 200 Leagues beyond it,
we began to breath in a temperate Air, and to have fair and clear Weather,
constantly accompanied with the gentle Trading Winds; it seemed as if God was
now pleased to give us a little comfort, after so much misery and Sufferings;
and, to say truth, we extremely stood in need of it, for the Vessel was not
able to bear any more weather; our Men were very sickly, and grew so more and
more, with what they had suffered in doubling the Cape; so that every day some
of 'em died, either of the Flux, or of the Scurvey.

Yet still we had reason to believe our selves happy, the Cold abating by
degrees, and warm weather succeeding, which was no small relief to those who
were ill of the latter Distemper; the Sea was now no longer dangerous, but on
the contrary all was calm and pleasant, as if we had made an Inland Voyage.

CHAP. XLV.
Our pleasant Navigation invites us to fish. A Description of an extraordinary
Fish called a Requiem.
THis happiness, and the Diversions we gave our selves of Gaming, Dancing and
Reading, charmed the fateigues of so long a Voyage; besides these, we often
delighted our selves with Fishing, and in one calm day we caught numbers of
Tons, Goldfishes and Bounites, and a large Fish called a Requiem, by fastening
a great piece of Bacon to the hook.

This monstrous Creature is between 15 and 16 foot long, and almost as big as a
Man, it has no shell, but a skin thick and rough like Shagrin, with a Muzzle
half round, distinct from the rest of the head; four fingers below, toward the
Belly is placed the larger mouth, whose two Jaw bones have each three rows of
Teeth, which are large and flat, yet very sharp, so that whenever he eats he is
forced to throw himself on his back.

It seems as if Nature, wonderful in her productions, would by that means
suppress the devouring Appetite of this greedy Creature, which I have seen
return three times to the same Bait, though the hook had torn his Gills before.

This Monstrous creature does not shun Men, as other fish do, for he no sooner
sees him in the water, but he follows him, and when he designs to quit the
prey, he throws himself upon it, carrying away that part on which he fastens
first; he is never seen but in a calm, following ships to catch whatever meat
or rubbish the Seamen throw out.

Certain little Fishes of the size of a Sardine which Swims before, (free from
the insults of this creature as devouring as it is) and serve him as a Pilot,
for from thence it is they are called by that name; they are such faithful
companions to him, that when he is taken with the hook, and drawing in, they
lie on his back, and suffer themselves to be drawn in also.

I had forgot to mention how we found in the belly of one we took, a Knife and
six pound of Bacon, which in all probability it got at the hook; I believe
there is no creature in the World so hard lived, and difficult to kill.

I took notice of one thing, among several others on board our Ship, that was
peculiarly amazing in this fish; which was this, that it being cut in pieces,
and each piece, separated from the heart, yet they all moved alike, which
surprised us very much.

This fish has a sort of marrow in the head, that hardens against the Sun, and
being powdered, and taken in White Wind, is very good for the Chollick.

CHAP. XLVI.
Monsieur Duquesne meets with two more Ships of his Squadron and sail together,
in Order to anchor at the Isle of the Ascension.
WHile we enjoyed the innocent diversion of fishing, a more sollid
entertainment diverted us for some time, the wind which we had directly in our
Stern, made us dispatch no less than 40 Leagues a day, sailing now as
expeditiously since our departure from Pontichery, as we did unsuccesfully
before.

The 25th. of April, the Dragon having given a signal about 3 in the afternoon,
that she saw two ships, the Admiral ordered her to give chase to them; they
seemed to be Dutch bound for St. Helens, from whence we were not fat; but when
we came up with them, we discovered they were the Bird and the Flourishing,
which we had not seen in two Months before. Our Squadron had now been all
reunited, if the Rock, which they told us, was a head of us, had been in
company; We made use of the Wind, which was very favorable to join her at the
Isle of Ascentions, near which we should pass to take some Tortoise aboard.

We never had more need of going a shore, for our Company was harrast and quite
spent with our poor diet, and continual pumping night and day; for our refuge
was nothing but a little Brandy at our meals, with Biscuit and stinking flesh,
and this was but a small relief to the sick, who died 3 or 4 at a time, and
were pittyed in vain by others, in whose power it was not to help them.

You might see fifty at a time, some dried up with a Fevour, and others
consumed with the Bloody Flux, a third sort bloated and disfigured with the
Country-disease, for we could not get one drop of good Wine, or a bit of fresh
meat for them, since our fowl and Sheep, designed for their use, perished in
the Tempest, which surpised us in the height of Mascarin.

You may imagine that the long continuance of such ill diet, began to be very
loathsome to us; the Scurvy, and weakness of a continual Flux had brought me to
nothing; but I was still preserved, and though I had the same distemper with the
rest, yet not the same destiny; for I often saw my self surrounded with the
sick, and dying, without the least fear of death, being fully persuaded I
should recover when I went a shore at the Isle of Ascension, which we all
impatiently longed for.

The Admiral, who without doubt, is one of the most expert in the Art of
Navigation the King has, believed we were now drawing near it; and accordingly,
after having run some Leagues more on the eighth of May, at Two in the
Afternoon it appeared to us.

We no sooner came near the shore: But an infinite number of various sorts of
Birds, Inhabitants of this desert Island, came in flocks, as it were, to meet
and receive us; they crowded so thick about us, that we killed them with
half-pikes. Here we anchored in 30 fathom water, over against a great
Sand-Creek, where the Tortoises go ashore, which is at the foot of the Mountain
of the Cross, so called, because of a Cross which the Portuguese have planted
on the top, where all Ships that touch there, are obliged to leave a Letter in
a Bottle, to inform them from whence, and where they are bound, as also the day
they past by.

CHAP. XLVII.
A Description of the Isle of Ascension, and of the great Tortoises that are
found there.
AS soon as we had cast Anchor, the Seamen began to fish, and catch vast
numbers; next day I went ashore, although it was very difficult landing, the
Sloop being obliged to set us ashore on a steep rock, where we were forced to
creep on all four, with a great deal of trouble and danger; several of our sick
that were landed here, died presently, not having strength enough to bear the
Air, and the difficulties of climbing the Cliffs.

There is no Water found in this uninhabited Island, nor any thing to be seen
but parched barren Hills, and Vales without verdure; nay, not so much as a
blade of Grass, or any Herb; so violent and piercing are the Rays of the Sun.
It Is situated in 7 d. 30 m. of S. L. and may be about five leagues in compass.
At first it appeared full of Mountains and Craggy Rocks, covered with Birds
dung, who make their Nests on the top of them; but in the West of the Island,
two high Mountains rise, which are a little green, being better moistened by the
frequent Dews, which causes the ground all about, to abound with the largest,
and best tasted Pursloine that ever I met with.

As weak as I was, the desire I had to be cured of the Scurvy, in taking the
Air at Land, which is the only remedy for this evil, made me run up and down
this part of the Island; where I observed one thing that was very
extraordinary: The Birds which stood thick on the Rocks, suffered us to come so
near them, that we might take them with our hands, and I stooping to gather
some Pursloine, several hovering round my head, came and pearcht on my Hat, of
which I took four alive, and killed two more with my Cane.

The great numbers of these Birds, destroy the young Tortoises as soon as
hatched, for they love their flesh so well, that they are continually pursuing
them; and before they leave the Egg, or are able to gain the Sea, or swim on
the surface of the Water; they kill them with their Beaks; but after they are
grown bigger, the lightness of their shell makes them swim with more strength,
and defends them from these Birds of Prey. Yet notwithstanding this vast
destruction of them, their number is immense; the Tortoise being one of those
Creatures, that multiply most. Nor will they admire at it, who consider it as
one of the largest fish, that has its Nutriment from this Element.

Its shape and color being known by most people, I thought it unnecessary to
give you a particular description of it here; I shall only say, that its head
resembles that of an Eagle, and the Fins, which are about a foot and half long,
are hid under their Shells: And for that reason, when the Requiems (a fish I
have mentioned before) meet with the Tortoises, they always seize upon that
part first, and so kill them; their Shell being but thin, and incapable of
resisting so great a strength, as that of the Requiem: This Battle I have often
seen my self, and so can the better attest the truth of it.

Some who have been ill informed, have said, that they make use of their Paws
in fighting, as the Land Tortoises do; but nothing is more false than this,
they having nothing like a Paw, only a few Prickles at the end of their Fins,
which they Crawl ashore with, and dig holes in the ground to lay their Eggs in;
which having done, they immediately return to Sea again, leaving them covered,
to be hatched by the warmth of the Sun.

Great care and diligence must be used in the taking of them, for they are very
quick-sighted, you must range your self in the night, in several places of the
Creek, where they are known to come ashore, and when you perceive them at a
sufficient distance from the Water, run to 'em and throw 'em on their backs,
and then it is impossible for 'em to rise again.

The Tortoises that are taken at the Isle of Ascension, are the biggest that
ever I saw; there are some that weigh three or four hundred weight, sufficient
to feed so many men at a time; the flesh is very wholesome and delicate, and the
Eggs, which are exactly round, and are found in great quantities along the
coast, are almost as big as an Hen's, but their shells are so thick, that if
you throw them against the ground, they will rebound without breaking.

CHAP. XLVIII.
We leave the Isle of Ascension, and happily pass the Line a fourth time by the
346th, Degrees. of Long. and come to an Anchor at Martinico.
AFter having stayed here three days, to refresh our selves with Pursloin and
Fish, we left it on the 10th. at Four in the Afternoon, and the eleven
Tortoises which we took on this Isle, were a great support to our sick; the
goodness of God still favoring us with a fair wind, on the 22d. of May we past
the Line a 4th. time, by the 346 Degrees. of Long. and indeed we stood in need of
an expeditious return, for we had no less than 60 on board who lay sick on
their beds, and they who were on their legs were so spent, that they moved
compassion: Amongst the first were Monsieur Baron, the Almoner, and the King's
Secretary, all three afflicted with the same Distemper, viz. the Scurvy, and
died within a few days of one another, notwithstanding all care imaginable was
taken of them; only Mr. Baron had the honor of seven Guns given him, being a
Major Officer; so that our ship by its shattered condition, and our own
miseries, resembled those Hospitals, where one sick Person is no sooner dead,
but another takes his place.

In the mean time we made the best of our way toward Martinico, where Monsieur
Duquesme had orders to touch at; and just as we expected to discover it we met
with a Squadron of 10 ships, the Admiral of which had her Flag on the main-top
mast, which made us believe they were the Enemy; however superior they seemed
to us in strength, we presently prepared for a fight, brought down our Hamocks,
and threw the Chests into the hold; at least making a show of courage, though we
desired nothing less than fighting, in the miserable condition we were in.

Each reasoned differently of the matter, as he was more or less concerned for
his Life, his Goods, or his Liberty, which he now reckoned in the utmost
danger. Monsieur Duquesne, whom Glory and Interest had rendered more discerning
than the rest, inferred that if this was an English Squadron sent to intercept
our passed, France must be the sufferer, for we should never be able to resist
them.

But while this was considering on he resolved, that during the rest of the day
we should go as near the Wind (which we had of them) as possible, and that when
night came on, we should steer a false course to avoid them, which was the only
way we could take in the present exigency.

A Capuchin, a Passenger (who was our Almoner since the death of the former)
gave the general Absolution above deck by order of the Commandant; after a
succinct Exhortation in few words, put us in mind of that Courage and Bravery
we had formerly shown on the like occasions; exhorted us as much as his fears
would permit him, to abate nothing of it in the present necessity, when our
Lives and Liberties was both at stake.

This Discourse out of season, made me resolve on a certain thing I scrupled to
think of before, which happily had no further consequence; for night had scarce
concealed us from the Enemy, but immediately tacking about we made a false
course; in the morning we found our selves as secure as we could wish, and in a
few hours in sight of Martinico, where we came to Anchor over against St.
Peter's Fort, Thursday the 7th. of June. There rod at Anchor in the Harbor
four of the King's ships, Commanded by Monsieur le Chevalier de Arbouvill, who,
as an inferior Officer to our Commandant, struck his Flame, and saluted us
with seven Guns, and we in return answered with the same number.

CHAP. XLIX.
We put the sick a shore. The whole Squadron rejoins, and prepares to return
immediately to France.
WE immediately debarkt the sick, and lodged them in an House for that purpose,
upon the shore near the River; who were furnished with Bread, Wine, fresh Meat,
Oranges, Lemons, Bananes, Ananes, and all sorts of Refreshments; as were the
rest of the Company, which with the plenty of Fish the Negroes brought on
board, were sufficient to restore us to our former vigor.

We understood there, that the ten ships we met in our return, were English,
bound home from Barbados, whom the Squadron of Monsieur le Chevalier de
Arbouville had obliged to raise the siege of Guadaloupa, with the loss of 500
of the Enemy, and a great many Cannon, having understood since by some French
prisoners, who had made their escapes, that they were so much concerned at the
sight of us, that as soon as 'twas night they presentlv tackt and stood a false
course as well as we.

They told us also some news from France, and amongst other things, that of the
death of Monsieur Segnelay, and of the worthy choice his Majesty had made of
Monsieur de Poutchartraine to supply his place. The death of this Minister was
the reason we met with no new orders at Martinico, as he promised our
Commandant, nor the Flute laden with Provisions which he was to send thither,
which was the occasion of a greater scarcity there than we expected, Meal and
fresh Provisions being somewhat scarce at Martinico, eversince the War.

This Island is so well known in France, by the relations that have been made
of it, and the Trade it maintains there, that I ought not to speak much of it,
except some small matters I observed in the short stay I made there; but that
which pleased me most was, the many fine Houses situated on the Mountains all
about, whose Avenues, Allies and Arbours are composed of Jessamins, Orange and
Lemon Trees, which are as common there, as Apple trees in Normandy.

The Women there would be very agreeable, but for the pale color which is
contracted by the Air of the Island, where the heats in my mind are too great
for any, but the Natives to live, happily there.

Not being to make any long stay there, we began to Wood and Water, after we
had cleaned our Ship and stopped the two leaks we had. At this time the Rock,
whom we had not yet seen, came from an adjacent harbor where she had lain
three days at Anchor before our arrival, and came to an anchor over against the
Fort of St. Peter, driven by the Wind and Tide; she ranged our side so close,
that intending to pass betwixt us and the Flourishing, she struck against our
head and broke the Beak, which so provoked Monsieur Duquesne, that he resolved
to have the head Pilot drawn under the keel, but he was discharged after three
days lying in Irons.

CHAP. L.
The Squadron departs from Martinico for France, where they at last safely
arrived. Death of Monsieur Questilly, Captain of the Dragon.
IT must be owned that Idea's which the mind forms of a future happiness are
sometimes wonderful, and delude the time till we arrive at it. I was restless
till I came to Martinico, and when there, as uneasy till I reached France, nor
was it without reason, for whatever advantage we had by being there, there was
none but desired to leave it, when he reflected on the number of those that
died there daily.

The Standard, a ship of the Company's coming from the Indies with two others,
named the Game and the Loure, brought a pestilential distemper thither from
Brurill, which had not yet ceast; so that the most healthy and vigorous amongst
us, upon the least excess, were carried off in 4 or 5 days at most, in spite
of any remedies that could be used.

This mortality which might have very much lessened the Company, and rendered
them so weak as to be scarce able to bring the Ship back again to France, made
the Commandant resolve to hasten away; we took in Wine and new Biscuit, and
after imbarking the sick, we sailed the 2d. of July at nine in the morning,
followed by Monsieur le^ehvaler de Arbouville, who was to Convoy two and twenty
Merchants to Rochfort.

We were presently becalmed, which hindered our coming within sight of the
English Islands till the 8th. when making all the sail we could we left the
convoy behind us the Merchants sailing very heavily.

By leaving Martinico we thought to have left the distemper that reigned there,
but it follw'd, us and did not take it is leave till it had swept away sixteen
of our Men, in the first fifteen days after our departure. Monsieur de
Questilly, Captain of the Dragon, struck to it, as well as others; to whom we
gave the accustomed honors, and the Commandant put Monsieur de Aubervill, our
Lieutenant in his place.

In the mean time the Wind continuing good, we past the Tropic of Cancer on
the 21st. and except a few days sailed very succesfully the rest of the month,
and during those few we met with very rough Seas, fomented by violent Storms;
but the very thought of approaching France made us easy, though we had reason
enough to be otherwise; so nothing disturbed us afterward, seeing our selves
near the end of so many fatiegues, and so long and hazardous a Voyage.

The 9th. of August the Rock hung out English Colors, to give us notice that
she discovered a sail which we saw behind us, making all the sail she could to
us; we were willing to gratify her curiosity, furled our sails, and gave her
time enough to come up with us, and after she was near enough to discover our
strength, she stood away presently without daring to come any nearer. Monsieur
Duquesne having hung out French colors, which she did too without taking them
down, though we hung out English Colors again.

Next day the Lion was dispatched to discover Cape Finister, who believing she
had sight of it, gave us the Signal; but her mistake was very great, and our
joy short, for we did not discover it till next day; the Bird, who kept the
head of the Squdron, having got a clear view of it, we gave God thanks by
singing Te Deum, the Wind being at North East, and therefore contrary, we came
within Cannon shot of the Land, tacking till it changed, which it did that very
evening, and carried us so happily for seven days together, that at last we
arrived at the height of our Wishes, that is, within sight of France, and came
all six to an Anchor under the Island of Groye, Saturday the eighteenth of
August 1691, at Nine in the morning: Whence sailing again the 19th. we entered
For Lewis full of joy for our happy return, thanking the Divine Providence who
had preserved us through a thousand dangers in this long and painful Voyage,
from which we parted from the Island Groye, the 27 of Feb. 1690.

FINIS.
THE CANARIE or FORTUNATE Islands


THE VOYAGES OF THE Sieur Le MAIRE, TO THE CANARY -- ISLANDS, Cape-Verde,
Senegal, and Gambia.
Departure from Paris.
I Had been almost three Years employed about the Hotell de Dieu of Paris, (that
is, the Hospital of God) when I heard that Monsieur D'ancourt was ready to part
for Cape-Verde, in Quality of Director-General of the Royal African Company;
when I immediately resolved to accompany him, and he consented to it: and
having agreed on Terms, the 14. of Jan. 1682. he presented me to the Gentlemen
of the Company who confirmed what we had settled.

After employing a few days in settling my Affairs, and in taking leave of my
Friends, we parted for Orleans; where we took boat for Nantes on the Loire: and
though this Passage is commonly made in two or three days, yet we were seven or
eight about it, and that not without Danger too.

The Wind was still contrary, and so violent, that the River was almost as
boisterous as the Sea; the Rivers too overflowed so, that we lost the Channel;
so that only discerning the tops of little Trees, all the rest being under
Water, we found our selves sometimes fast on the Trunks, like Birds perching on
Trees.

At last, however, we arrived at Nantes, and after ten days stay, we took Horse
for Breast: what we saw of Britany as we past, was not very entertaining; though
it is known, this Province is good and fruitful in many places; but all along as
we past, we had a very unpleasant Prospect.

Being arrived at Breast the 4th. of February, we expected to Sail in a few
Days; but the Ship was not ready, but ill careen'd, and had not half her
Furniture; and we were to wait till she was new masted, and till she was fit to
meet with stormy Weather, and the Enemy which we expected.

Two Months were spent in this Work; the Ship was called the St. Catherine, of
four hundred Tun, carrying forty Guns; 'twas built at Flessingue, and designed
for a Cruiser; Captain Monsegue commanded it by orders of the Company.

Breast.
The Port of Breast, where the Frigate lay, is the best we have in the Ocean; the
greatst Ships ride there in Safety, and sheltered from all Weather as in a
Chamber; whence it is called by that Name. Ships may sail out of it at low Water
as well as at high; for they always ride a-float. It Is as straight at the Month
as a River, and has two Half-Moons of each side, and on the right a strong
Castle, old built, which defends the entrance. This Port goes in a Spiral Line;
it is a large half League long, and about two hundred Paces wide: it is situated
between two Mountains, which cover it. All these Advantages it receives from
Nature.

In this Port I saw the greatest and the beautifulest Ships in the World;
amongst others, the Admiral, named the Royal Sun; it has not so much gilding as
the Royal Lewis of Toulon, but it is better built; longer, and a better Sailer.
It carries 120 Guns, and the great Cabine is magnificent, richly gilt, and the
Cieling is of the Design Monsieur le Poune: there are about fifteen more but of
a lesser size; yet very proper, and beautifully built.

Besides these, there were about fifty more of 90, 80, 70, 60, and 50 Guns,
without reckoning smaller Frigates of a lower Rate: next to the Royal Sun, are
the Queen, the Crown, the Glorious, the Beautiful, the Good, the Thunderer, the
the Lightning, the Diamond, etc. These vast Machines give just Wonder, and
appear like floating Palaces.

Our Ship being completely equipped, it sailed out of the Chamber into the Road
the 20th. of March; five of the Kings Ships were fitted out at the same time,
of which four were to join those of Toulon, and the fifth to Convoy some Ships
belonging to the East-India-Company.

Wednesday the 9th of April 1682. I embarked with four Sons of a Family which
went with us: as Monsieur Dancort continued still at Breast, these Gentlemen and
I diverted our selves a little with Hunting, believing we might as easily go
ashore again as we came aboard: the Director's Cook who came aboard about some
business, made use of a little Skiff which was rowed by two Lads, which we used
to go ashore in; and were now got 2 Leagues on the Sea near Cameret, without
minding which way he should get back: we were so earnest taking the Diversion
of Hunting, that we did not care where we put ashore, without minding the
Danger we ran, in passing over craggy Rocks hanging over the Sea, into which I
had like to fall two or three times. And after all this pains, we had the
Disappointment to meet with no Game; we were forced to employ our selves in
killing Larks, which proved afterward more of use to us then we imagined then:
tired therefore with this sort of Hunting, we past to a better Entertainment,
and fell to a Hare-Pasty, which we brought with us, and a Glass of good Wine.

After we had spent our Provisions, we returned to our little Boat, and were no
sooner at Sea again, than a sudden Storm arose, in which I thought we should
have perished every moment. One of our Gentlemen who was very much fatigued,
had fallen asleep as soon as ever he came into the Skiff, and was wakened by
our Noise, and the tossing of the Boat; and when we were half way, though he was
scarce thoroughly awake, he was so sensible of the Danger we were in, that he
cried out, We were certainly lost if we did not return again.

Our little Rowers were almost spent, but not their Courage, who pretended to
cheer us, saying, There was no Danger of the Boat, though she rolled so; and if
the worst came to the worst, 'twas only swimming for it: but they were mistaken
as to me; and besides, the Waves were so great and violent, that instead of
landing us, they had dashed us in pieces against the Rocks.

We followed the Counsel of our Companion, and turned back again, rowing with
all our Might; and at last, with much ado, got ashore, where we waited for
calmer Weather.

In the mean time, while we were enjoying our Safety ashore, we heard a single
Gun, and saw at the same time the Topsails loose, which is the usual Signal of
Sailing: There were several Lighters near us, which might have carried us
aboard; but we could not prevail with any of the Masters to whom they belonged,
to give us a Cast.

Thus we saw our Ship under Sail, the Admiral saluted with seven Guns, making
the best of her way, running before the Wind, with all the Sail she could make;
and I was not a little troubled to be left behind thus, and all my Things
aboard.

We followed the sight of our Vessel, haling her as loud as ever we could baul,
and discharging our Fuseels, but all in vain, the Vessel disappeared; one of
our Companions, who was but an ill Footman, took Cameret Road, believing he
should find us there; and being in search of him, we spent a good part of the
Night in looking after one another.

Many Misfortunes attended us on our way; for ever and anon, one was bogg'd in
the Marshes, another would fall into a Ditch, each calling on the other for
help, and all cursing the Chase: Hunger followed our other Miseries, when at
last we got into an Inn, where every thing was proportionable to our short
Purses; wretched Provision and Beds: however, all that we had was spent that
Night, and we were forced to depart Fasting next Morning.

As we went again in search of our strayed Companion, and coasting by the Sea,
we perceived Masts, which at first we took for high Trees which grew by the
Sea, not so much as flattering our selves that we should ever see our Ship
again, which we thought had been far enough off; but coming near, we found we
had not lost our Passage, for she Anchored in Camaret Road, three Leagues from
Breast.

Great was our Joy, and we had now no more to do but to find out our Companion,
and go aboard: we endeavored by Signals to give notice of us to the Ship, but
with no better Success than the Day before; so that the Sloap did not come to
fetch us.

As we sought all imaginable ways to get out of our Troubles, we observed a
Bark at Sea plying toward the Ship; I don't know how we came to fancy that he
whom we sought might be in it; but we fancied right, and he was the first Man
we perceived from the Shore; so we made Signs to 'em at a distance, which he
understood, and the Bark made toward us: but it being impossible to come near,
by reason of the Rocks, 'twas our Business to get aboard as well as we could.

At last we did; and after a great deal of Rejoicing at our Meeting so happily
again, we thought of nothing but taking our Rest: but this was not the time;
for the Sea was so rough, that the Waves went over the Ship, and we were wet
from Head to Foot. This, joined with the excessive Cold, and the Danger we were
in of being castaway, which the Seamen themselves feared not a little, cast us
into a fresh Concern, till after much Difficulty and Hazard we got aboard.

At our leisure we revolved all our past dangers, and presently fell to eating
after hard Fasts; we remained some time in the Road, waiting for Monsieur
Dancourt, who was still ashore at Breast. On Sunday, at Noon, April the 12th,
1682. he came Aboard, and immediately we Sailed.

When we were about three Leagues at Sea, we met the Ship Named the Burning,
which lay at Anchor, waiting the Tide to enter into the Bay of Breast; she was
mounted with 80 Guns, and came from Havre, to take Monsieur de Prouily,
Lieutenant General, Aboard, who was afterward to Sail to Algiers.

We Saluted him in the usual manner, with 7 Guns, and crying out three times
Vive le Roy; he answered us with as many, against the usual custom of the
King's Ships, who always return two Guns less; in all probability, he did it in
complaisance to Monsieur the Intendant, who was then Aboard him, and who was
Monsieur Dancourt's Friend.

After thanking him with three, we pursued our way with a North-East Wind,
leaving the Cape to the West, Steering West-South-West, where we took the point
of our departure, in 48 Degrees 20 Minutes of Southern Latitude, and in the
11th Degree of Longitude; but as I am not very expert in the Art of Navigation,
I shall not oblige my self to be thus exact in these sort of Observations, but
when it is indispensibly necessary.

Tuesday, the 21th of April, we perceived two Ships to the East of us; by their
Steering to get the Weather-gage of us, we judged them to be Privateers; we
presently put our selves in a posture of defense, which prevented their making
any attempt upon us, believing there was little to be got by us but Ball.

Sunday the 26th, in the Morning, being in 32 Degrees, as many Minutes, of
Northern Latitude, and in 4 Degrees 13 Minutes of Eastern Longitude, we saw
Cape-Cantin, the Coast of Barbary, and the Kingdom of Morocco, from whence we
were only six Leagues distant; if the Night had lasted we had lost our way, for
we Sailed to the West of the Maderas, which is above 140 Leagues thence.

Wednesday the 29th, we perceived the Isle of Anecerotte, one of the seven
Canary Islands; which we left about ten Leagues to the South-East, where we met
with a Calm, and excessive Heat.

Thursday, the 30th of April, we found our selves in 28 Degrees 30 Minutes of
Southern Latitude, and 4 Minutes of Longitude, taking the first Meridian at the
Isle de Fer, according to the Custom of our Nation; so that not being above ten
Leagues distant to the North-East from the Great Canary, we tacked on this Isle
till Night, about a League off Land. We could not Anchor by reason of the
little Wind that was stirring, and the darkness of the following Night; this
obliged us to tack about to the East* and to keep out at Sea till Three a Clock
in the Morning of the opposite side to the Land.

Great Canary, the Capital of the seven Islands.
Friday, the 1st of May, having tacked to the West, in the Road of the Great
Canary, about Nine and a half we Anchored in 24 Fathom, and found a Sand that
was partly gray and partly red, mixed with Coral; Its Situation.
the Town, with its situation stands on the South-West side, is a League and a
half from the Road, and defended by a very ordinary Castle.

When they had given us notice from the top of this Castle, they set up the
Pavillion of Spain, which we Saluted with five Guns; to which they returned not
a Gun, I suppose 'twas for want of Powder.

There is very good Anchoring in this place, if one don't come too near the
Town, to which the Rocks, that lie under Water, render the approach very
dangerous; Its Strength.
it is defended by a Castle situated on a Mountain, from being attacked by Sea;
it is Peopled by twelve thousand Islanders brave enough, and able to oppose any
Invasion; our Ship Anchored in 18 Fathom Water before the Town.

Its bigness
It Is about a League in compass; the Houses, for the most part, are well enough
built, but low, not above two Story; they are all Terras'd a top, so that the
Roofs not appearing, one would think they had been burnt. In the day time you
scarce see a Man in the Streets.

Residence of the States and of the Parliament.
Tho the Bishop, the Governor, and the best sort, have their Residence at
Teneriffe, yet in this Capitol is the Episcopal Seat, the Tribunal of the
Inquisition, and the Supreme Council, which is the Parliament of the Seven
Islands. There are four Monasteries in it, one of Dominicans, and one of
Franciscans; the two other are Bernardines and Recolets. Religious Houses.


The Canary Islands formerly called Fortunate.
These Islands, which were formerly called Fortunate, deserved the Name, if the
goodness of the Air, and the richness of the Soil, be considered; Their
Happiness.
they abound in Wheat, Barley, Honey, Cows, Sheep, Deer, and all the Necessaries
of Life: The Wine of Malvesia is in such great plenty there, that the English,
the French, the Spaniard, and Dutch, etc. furnish themselves thence every Year.

The Happiness of this Place, to be able to subsist independent of all other
Countries, for the Necessaries of Life, made the Heathens formerly believe,
Belief of the Heathens.
that 'twas the Elysium Fields, designed for the abode of Happy Souls after
Death.

They are not so happy in their Water as in other things, but this they remedy
by pouring it into Vessels of the figure of a Mortar, made of a very Porous
sort of Stone, through which it filters it self, and afterward becomes very
good.

The Richness of the Soil.
Their Harvest is commonly in March or April; in several places they have two in
one Year. The Soil is so exceeding Rich, that I saw a Cherry-Tree that had not
been Grafted above six Weeks, bear Fruit, Flowers grow of themselves without
any Care; and it abounds in Oranges and Cittrons to admiration.

The Great Canary, as well as Teneriffe, and the Palm, continued Idolaters
some time after the Conquest made of them by the Spaniards in 1460. The
Ancerotte, Fort-Avanture, the Gomer, and the Fer, first received Christianity;
and the three others at last followed their Example. The Spaniards, resolving
at last to reduce these Islands to their Obedience, sent a great number of the
Inhabitants Slaves into Spain; they who remained were Civilized, and live after
the manner of their Conquerors; and these, above all the other Inhabitants of
the Canaries, are Civil to Strangers.

Monsieur Dancourt was very well received there by the Governor of the Island,
with whom he Dined, conducted by the Consul of our Nation, Named Remond,
originally of Liege, and a very honest Man; he too Regaled us very much, both
with Wines and Fruits, and continued two days with him, in which he made
exceeding much of me.

I was four times at the Convent of the Bernardines, the Provisor having given
me leave at the request of the Abbess; there were some French Women there, of
whom one was of Paris, who was my Interpreter; there being some Sick in the
Convent, they were very much concerned least I should take the Infection.

The presence of a Physician, made them make use of the opportunity; and
several of them pretended to be Sick who ailed nothing, that they might have
more liberty. They expressed a great deal of Civility to me, and loaded me with
Biscuit, and wet and dry Comfits, with Lemonade, Malvesia, and all manner of
Fruit, which they sent me on Plates, and China Dishes, garnished with Roses,
Violets, Orange-Flowers, Jessamin-Flowers, and Tuberoses, without reckoning
Nosegays; and I presented them too, which they civilly received.

Leaving this Holy Place, I found several at the Consul's House who waited for
me, to go see some Sick; particularly, some from a certain Civilian, who was
reckoned worth 50000 Crowns, whose Wife was ever and anon troubled How their
women are habited and how they carry their children on their backs

How the Negros dance in a round

with a Suffocation of the Matrix. The Doctor of the place managed her as for a
Peripnewmony; by which, chiefly, I discovered his Ignorance.

As they have no great confidence in their own Physicians, they are very glad
when they can meet with one of France: The Lawyer did all he could to persuade
me to stay at the Great Canary, offering me his House, his Table, and many
other Advantages; but I was resolved not to break my Word with Monsieur
Dancourt, so I thanked the Spaniard for all his kindness, and ordered what I
thought was most proper for his Wife, and such things as might be found in the
Island, where they are very scarce.

He would have given me Money, which for the Honor of my Nation I refused; I
thought to have returned thither again next Morning, he having desired the
Consul I might, saying he would gratify me in another way, seeing I would not
take Money; but I had not time, the Sloop coming to take me Aboard on Saturday
Night.

I was almost Enchanted with this Island, and with much ado I parted from it;
if ever I leave France again, it shall be to live in the Great Canary. But I
can scarce prefer any thing to France it self for happiness; but before I leave
this Island, I must not forget to tell you, That it is 30 Leagues in compass,
and almost round. Extent of the Great Canary.


Saturday the 2d, toward Evening, the Wind blowing hard at North-North-East,
we Sailed, and slacking again about Three a Clock in the Morning, we Steered
our Course in sight of the Pic, a high Mountain of the Island of Teneriffe,
with a design to Anchor in the Road of Holy-Cross; our Pilots observed in this
Latitude, that the Needle varied to the North-East, three Degrees thirty
Minutes.

Sunday the 3d, being to the farthest North of the Great Canary, with a scanty
Wind at North-North-East, we had the Cape to the West all Night.

Monday the 4th, in the Morning, we arrived at Teneriffe, the richest of all
the Canary Islands; in sight of Holy-Cross, a little Town on the East Point of
the Island. One may Anchor there in 25 or 30 Fathom Water, however we did not
Anchor at all, and remained ready to Sail again all day, waiting the Sloop that
was sent ashore.

Tho the Governor of Holy-Cross permitted those who went in the Sloop to Land,
yet he acquainted the Governor-General (whose Residence is at Laguna, three
Leagues from the Sea) that there was some French who desired to come ashore to
be supplied with Provisions: The Answer was, To make them Prisoners if they
did. Perhaps the reason was, That they were afraid we might have some Aboard
that had the Plague, thinking we came from the Levant.

The Pic.
The Pic is one of the highest Mountains in the World; they say one may see it
40 Leagues off at Sea. As for us, we saw it but 12 or 15, by reason of the Fog,
which made it appear to us like a Cloud in the Point of a Diamond; it is always
covered with Snow, tho it never Snows below, nor ever Freezes.

The Island of Teneriffe.
As for Teneriffe, it is reckoned to be the highest Island in the Ocean, and the
best Peopled for its bigness, containing 15000 Inhabitants; it is this which
produces that excellent Wine of Malvesia, which passes for the best in the
World. This Wine is not known in these Islands, but since the Spaniards became
Masters of it; for they first brought the Plant from Candia; and now they
prefer this Wine to that of the Place from whence it derives its Original, and
there comes a greater quantity from thence than from Candia.

The Situation of the seven Canary Islands.
The Seven Canary Islands lie in a Line one by another, almost exactly from East
to West; they are very Mountainous, but well Peopled, and very Fertile; the
least is 60 Miles in compass.

Remark.
As I had formerly heard speak of a wonderful Tree in the Isle of Fer, whose
long and narrow Leaves are always green, and supplied all its Inhabitants with
Water, I was willing to inform my self about it; and I asked if it was so as I
was informed; that there falls so great a Dew on this Tree, that dropping
afterward, as a clear Water into Stone Basins, which they set a purpose to
receive it; it supplies both all the Men and Beasts of the Island, Providence
thus wonderfully supplying the want of fresh Water. They told me 'twas a mere
Fiction, yet some there were too, who said, there might be such a Tree in the
Island, but that it did not yield such a quantity.

Tuesday the 5th, we continued our Course to the Southward, in 27 Degrees 40
Minutes of Southern Latitude, and in 360 Degrees of Eastern Longitude; about
Six in the Evening, the South Point of the Great Canary lay East-North-East
from us, about 7 Leagues off.

Wednesday the 6th, it blew so hard at East, that we were extremely shattered
in our Masts and Rigging, and the Mainmast bowed so, that we expected it would
come by the Board; this Tempest ceased a quarter of an hour after, and we
enjoyed a Calm again.

Thursday the 7th, at Noon, being in 23 Degrees of Southern Latitude, and 28
Minutes of East Longitude, we passed the Tropic of Cancer.

Wednesday the 8th, we approached the Coast of Barbary, being, at Noon, in 20
Degrees 47 Minutes of South Latitude, the Wind blowing hard at East-North-East;
and observing 'twas impossible to gain Cape Blanc before Night, and that we
were four Leagues from Land, being in 28 Fathom Water, we presently tacked
about, Steering East-South-East. And Saturday the 9th, about Eight a Clock in
the Morning, we found our selves within a League of Land.

Cape Blanc.
We ranged the Coast as far as Cape Blanc, where we Anchored in 14 fathom Water
to the North-West, about a League from the Point of the Cape; which is,
according to our Elevation, in 20 Degrees 30 Minutes of South Latitude, and 359
Degrees 10 Minutes of West Latitude.

Why it is called Cape Blanc, or the Sea of Sand.
When the Portuguese first discovered this Cape, about the Year 1454. they
called it Cape Blanc, for that being Sandy and Barren, they saw not the least
Verdure; it is level like the Sea, whence they called it the Sea of Sand.

From Cape Cantin to this Cape, which comprehends 300 Leagues, one sees nothing
but a Sandy Plain, called by the Ancients the Desert of Lybia, and by the
Arabians Zaara; it is Inhabited only by Wild Beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Onces,
Leopards, and such like Creatures.

These Deserts reach to Mount A^las on the North, and to the Country of the
Negroes on the South; they are of so vast an extent from East to West, that
they cannot be passed on Horseback in fifty days. By this way, the Caravans of
Fex pass to Tombut, Melly, Borneo, and the other Kingdoms of the Negroes.

When a Storm rises in these Deserts, the Sand Buries Men and Camels, and often
the Stuffs, and filling up the Pits by the way, the Passengers Dye with Thirst;
as there is no beaten Path there, they make use of the Compass as at Sea.

There Is a sort of a Gulf in the very Point of Cape Blanc, which takes its Name
from the Island which it forms, which is called Arguin; this Gulf advances
above 15 Leagues into the Land, for which reason we lose the sight of it in
passing the Point.

The Portuguese had a Fort formerly in this Island, from whence they Traffick'd
with the Azoaghes, Arabs, or Moors, who exchange with them Gold, Gum-Arabick,
Ivory, and Ostridges Feathers, which are in great Plenty there, by reason of
the great number of these Birds. Observation on the Ostridges.
It Is said of this Creature, that its Memory is so bad, that it forgets where
'thas laid its Eggs, and often treads on them. I cannot easily believe what I am
told, that one of them will feed eight Men. They bring these Merchandises to
Hoden, which is four days Journey up Land, and where arrive the Carravans of
Tombut, Gualata, and other places of Inward Lybia, and of the Negroes Country.

Manners and Religion of the People.
These People observe the Law of Mahomet; don't stay long in a place, wandering
from one place to another along the Deserts, according as they find Pasture for
their Horses, Camels, Oxen, Sheep, and Goats; on the Milk of which they live.
They are divided by Tribes and Families; they acknowledge no other King but him
who surpasses the rest in Riches, and him they willingly Obey as their Captain.

How they Traffic.
Their Traffic with the Negroes consists in Horses and Camels; they receive
two, six, eight, ten Slaves, for one Horse, but for a Camel only two.

Fort of Arguin.
The Fort of Arguin was taken by the Dutch from the Portuguese, and again taken
from them in the War of 1672. by Monsieur Ducas, Captain of the Royal Company
of Africa; he had but 120 Men to this Expedition, and lost but three of them.
The Cowardice of the Dutch eased this Conquest very much, for nothing was more
easy than to prevent it; we had but six Guns, of which, the biggest was but an
Eight Pounder, nothing defended us; and, with all this, we wanted Water, it
being impossible to Drink of that, of one single Well in the Island, which
stinks.

Belongs at present to the French.
This Fort remained to us by the Treaty of Nimeguen, as did all the other Places
which the Company Occupies; notwithstanding this Treaty, the Dutch send several
Ships thither every Year; which is a manifest infraction.

The Captain of our Ship Landed there with 30 Men, thinking to have met the
Ship called the Town of Hambourgh, but it was Sailed away, we found only one
Bark in the Dock which was not finished, and which we burnt; and another little
Vessel, in which were some Moors and Dutch, who abandoning it, Swam for it.
'Twas found Loaded with Tortoises, which were very welcome to our Men in the
Sloop, whose Provisions were all spent; they are very large on this Coast, and
very plentiful, one alone will feed 30 Men; Remarks on the Tortoises.
they eat like Veal, and are Meat good enough; its Shell may be about 15 Foot
round.

The Plenty of Cape-Blanc.
Cape Blanc abounds in Fish, besides the common Fish, as Parguese, Vielles,
Gold-Fish, Junny, and Sea-Dogs, and others, of whose Names I am ignorant; our
Men caught some of them, and fed very happily on them for eight days, which we
carried on this Coast. As far as the Mouth of the River of Senegal, there are
some shattered Habitations of Moors, tho the Country be very Barren, and scarce
any thing lives there but Fish.

1682.
Saturday the 16th, we continued our Course to Goree, and past in sight of the
River Senegal; of which I shall speak hereafter.

Cape-Verde.
Tuesday the 19th, we discovered Cape-Verde, being in 14 Degrees 45 Minutes of
Southern Latitude North.

Its Discovery.
This Cape was thus Named by the Portuguese, who discovered it the same Year as
Cape-Blanc. They Named it Cape-Verde, because the great number of Trees they
saw there, of which several are always green. It Is high, and yields a pleasant
Prospect; on the top are two round Mountains, which, from their resemblance,
were called Breasts. It advances very far out into the Sea, and passes for the
greatest in the Ocean, Its Extent.
after Cape De-Bon-Esperance; there is a great concourse of Tides there, which
bear to the Southward.

Its Situation.
Its Situation is ill marked in the Card, which places it in 14 Degrees exact,
whereas it is in 14 and a half. After doubling the first Point (for there are
two) we see a little Island which is uninhabited; it is Named the Isle of Birds,
by reason of the great numbers seen there at its first Discovery.

When we had passed this Island, we doubled the other Point to discover Goree,
which lies behind the Cape, almost opposite to the Breasts. The Coast runs
inward to the North-West in a Creek, where is found the best Water of all this
Latitude; which is a great relief to the Ships.

Goree.
Being arrived at Goree, Wednesday the 20th of May 1682. and Anchoring in the
Road, we Saluted the Port with seven Guns, which returned the Salute, Gun for
Gun; the first was with Ball, in Honor to Monsieur Dancourt; when he went into
the Sloop, our Ship saluted him with five Guns, all the Ships in the Road did
the same; and when he was Landed, the Fort saluted him with seven more.

Monsieur Dancourt finds the Affairs of the Company in an ill State.
After showing the Letters of the Company, who had made him Director, he took
possession of his Employment; he found Affairs in a very ill posture, by the
conduct of two Persons, each of them pretending to the chief Command. The one
was a Frenchman, and Commandant of Goree for the Company; and the other their
Agent-General along the Coast. But as this is none of my business, I shall
meddle no farther.

The Isle of Goree.
The Island of Goree, was called so by the Hollanders, because it resembled an
Island of Zealand of the same Name. Its Extent.
It Is about a quarter of a League in compass, and runs long ways North and
South, about a League from the Land; it has, to the South, a Rock slopeing of
one side, and of the other is washed by the Sea. The whole Island, indeed, is
surrounded almost by Rocks, which hinders the entrance into it, except a little
Creek, by which Vessels may enter.

Discovered by the Portuguese.
As the Portugueses were the first who have made long Voyages on this Coast,
'twas first discovered by them, as well as all the rest of Africa, to the Sea,
Ocean, and Atlantic side; having fallen into the possession of the Dutch, they
built a Fort on the weakest side of the Mountain, for the Defense of the
Island, and of another wretched Fort, which was below, not able to defend it
self.

Monsieur D'Estrees makes himself Master of it.
Monsieur the Count d'Estrees, Vice Admiral of France, in 1678. in the Month of
November, seized on this Fort, which the Governor rendered to him, without
making any Defense; as they could not spare Men to Garrison them, they were both
razed. Messieurs of the Company, who Govern the Island at present, have a
little reestablished that below, by Buildings, which serve them for Magazines,
and by the raising an ordinary Wall on the Ruins of the Old Fort, only to avoid
being insulted by the Negroes.

Monsieur Dancourt presently employed himself in promoting the Trade, visiting
the Counters established along the Coasts, and in giving Orders to the
Commissaries; and afterward, in seeking the Amity of the Negro Kings and
Chiefs.

To this end, he began to visit the Country up and down for a matter of
fourscore Leagues; that is, from the Mouth of the Senegal, to that of the River
Gambia; which are the two Mouths of the River Niger. I accompanied him in all
his Journeys along the Coasts, when I informed my self of all that concerns the
Country, of their Religion, Manners, and Customs of the Africans of Cape-Verde.

We began the 6th of December with Senegal, whither we could not go by Sea,
because of a North Wind that was just contrary to us; notwithstanding the
Affairs of that place requiring the presence of Monsieur Dancourt, because of
the Death of the Governor, which happened a little before, he resolved to go
thither by Land, and to send the Fame, a Ship commanded by Captain D'Oyere, as
well to carry Merchandise, as to bring back those which were exchanged.

Observation on the way.
It Is easy to pass from Senegal to Goree, but not to go thither; and this Ship
having a contrary Wind, spent a Month in her passage, which was but 40 Leagues
in a straight Line; but she was forced to Work and Tack, which made it 500. We
gave her for lost, when we, at last, happily saw her arrived in the Road.

Our Journey by Land was not so tedious, but that 'twas still more painful, for
the Road furnishes Passengers with no sort of Necessaries; no, not so much as
Carriage. And in the whole Town of Rufis, which is but three Leagues from
hence, we could find but one Horse for Monsieur Dancourt, and six Asses; two of
which carried our Provisions.

Tho 'twas now December, yet the heat was excessive, which was very painful to
us; and we Traveled from Sunrise to Sunset, only stopping a little at Noon,
when we rested a while under a Tree, to Eat of some little Provision we had
brought with us. The great scarcity hereabouts.
At Night we lay in some Town, where we found Necessaries neither for our
selves, nor Mill for our Beasts, tho it be the ordinary Food of the Negroes,
who live often only on Roots for the want of Grain.

Our Hosts received us after their best manner, but their extreme Poverty made
their best but indifferent. Negroes Houses.
Their Houses are made of Straw, as are those of their very Kings; tho in some
places they are more commodious than in others. The first are about four foot
Diameter, the Roof is a sort of Dome, the outside of which is Straw, and the
inside Palms, the whole handsomely worked; the Dome, or Roof, is supported by
five or six Forks; the Wall is of Palm or Straw, neatly wove together.

They have neither Doors nor Windows to their Houses, only a little hole like
the Mouth of an Oven, so that one must creep on all four to enter into them;
though the heat must needs be excessive in such a place, yet they make fires in
them, which are always accompanied with a great Smoke. The Negroes love Smoke.
This inconveniency pleases them, for they love Smoke: Their Floor is Sand, into
which you sometimes sink up to the mid Leg.

They have some Houses, the passage into which is so very little, that one
would wonder how they could go in or out. I remember one day, a pretty tall
Gentleman and I having lain in one of them, tho he crept like a Serpent, yet
could not get out, and was forced to lie there, one half out and the other half
in, not able to stir backward or forward. I endeavored to help him, but to no
purpose, not daring to cut the Wall, was forced to call for help. Now the
Negros beds are made

The Negros houses



Their Beds.
Their Beds are yet less commodious than their Houses; they are made of a great
many Sticks about two inches thick, set at two fingers distance one from the
other, joined together by a Rope almost like a Hurdle; thick twisted Sticks (as
is all their Wood) fills betwixt every two, and seem only placed to break one's
sides. These Beds, as well as the Roofs of their Houses, are supported by
Forks; and thus they lie on them without any more to do, only the better sort
have a Mat, which serves them for a Quilt.

From what I have said, it is easy to conclude, That if this Country suffers
not its Inhabitants to be happy by reason of its Barrenness, Their Sloth.
they themselves too contribute to their Misery by their Sloth.

But to return to our Journey, which this digression has interrupted: After six
days fatigue, we came to a Town called Bieure, Bieure.
which stands at the Mouth of the River of Senegal. As there are as many
Customs as Countries, we observed that in this, the Men concern themselves with
nothing, The Women only manage the Trade.
it is the Women who manage all the Traffic; who, under pretense of carrying
the Merchandise, held a dishonest correspondence with our Seamen.

We left our Beasts in this place, and Monsieur Dancourt sent from thence to
the Habitation, to send us a Vessel to carry us the other five Leagues, which
yet remained, St. Lewis's Island.
to the Island of St. Lewis; where we arrived two hours after Midnight.

Its Situation.
This Island, situated in the middle of the River, five Leagues above the Mouth
of it, is about a League in compass. Messieurs of the Company have their
Magazines there, and a Commandant and Commissaries. It Is thither the Negroes
bring their Skins, Ivory, Slaves, and sometimes Ambergreese; as for
Gum-Arabick, it is brought to us by the Moors, as I shall say hereafter.

Commerce.
They give in Exchange to the Negroes, Linen, Cotton, Copper, Tin, Iron,
Aqua-Vitae, and some Glass Trifles; the Profit derived from this Commerce, is
Eight Hundred for One. The Skins, and Ivory, and Gum, are carried to France;
the Slaves are sent to the American Islands, to make Sugar.

Traffic of Slaves.
The best are bought for ten Pieces frank, and sold again for a hundred Crowns.
For five or six Pots of Aqua-Vitae, one may have a good lusty Slave; so that
they are bought cheaper than they are Transported, for their Transportation is
very chargeable.

The River of Senegal.
The River of Senegal is a branch of the Niger, coming out of this River about
600 Leagues above the Mouth of it, and runs through the Kingdom of Cantorsi,
and thence divides it self into several branches; of which, the chief are
Gambia, and Riorgande; of the last of which, I am wholly ignorant.

The Senegal separates the Azoaghes, Moors or Bazanez, from the Blacks; so that
of one side of the River are Moors, rather white than black; and of the other,
Men perfectly black. Different Manners of the People.
The first have no certain Abode, but wander from place to place, Camping where
they find Pasture for their Cattle; whereas the second, that is, the Negroes,
are fixed, and have their certain Towns and Habitations.

The first are free, and acknowledge no Superior or Head, but whom they please;
the last have Kings, who Tyranize over them, and make them Slaves. Their
different Genius.
The Moors are little, meagre, and of a bad mien, and a crafty subtle Genius;
the Negroes, of the contrary, are tall, thick, and well proportioned, but dull
and stupid. The Country Inhabited by the Moors, is a sandy waste, wherein no
green thing is to be seen; but that of the Negroes, is rich in Pasture and
Mill, and abounds with Trees ever green, but scarce bear any Fruit that is fit
to Eat.

Gum-Arabick.
From these Moors we have the Gum-Arabick, they gather it in the Deserts of the
Inward Lybia; it grows on the Trees as that that is gathered from Cherry and
Plumb-Trees; they come to sell it about a Month or six Weeks before the
overflow of the Niger.

They give them in Exchange, Blue Cloth, Linen of the same color, and a
little Iron; they will come a matter of five or six hundred Leagues to sell a
half Quintal of Gum, and some farther. They ride quite naked on their Camels,
Horses, and Oxen, on which they often bring their Merchandise. The most
considerable amongst them, wear a sort of a Cloak made of Furr Skins; the rest
have How the Mores ride on their Camells Horses and Oxen with their Merchandise.

only a wretched piece of a Skin that covers their nakedness. Food of the Moors.
They all live on Milk, in which they dissolve some Gum.

It Is the Custom, partly, to subsist them when they come to Traffic; and to
this end, to buy their Oxen of them, but they must Slaughter 'um themselves, or
they wont touch them, and they have some amongst them appointed for this Work.
Yet, tho they abound themselves in Cattle, they seldom eat of 'em, except when
likely to dye of Distempers or Age.

They are great Cheats.
It Is an incredible trouble to Trade with them; for in all their Dealings they
are either insolent or false. The Traffic being managed on the River, they
cannot play their Tricks so easily, for they Embark the Merchandise as they
receive it from them. It Is managed in the Months of May and June, thirty
Leagues above the Factory.

Their Insolence.
When all is over, they put a thousand affronts on you; when they catch a
Frenchman, or any other White, they will kill him to revenge a Quarrel of twenty
Years past. About two Months ago, they took a Mariner that understood Arabic,
whom one of the Captains of the Company had sent to Arguin, and demanded no
less than fifty Slaves in Exchange for him.

They dread Firearms.
Never was Nation more false and perfidious; they are very dextrous in the use
of Firearms, the effect of which they dread to that degree, that three Whites,
one day, hindered 400 of them from seizing a Vessel with which these came to
Traffic, a shot that fell amongst them having frightened them from the
Execution of their design.

'Twas understood afterward, that the greatest part of them were Moors of the
side of Mount Atlas, who came to Depose Cheiratick, one of the most Powerful
Negro Princes of these Countries; and of which I shall speak hereafter. They
retire into the Inland Parts as soon as ever the Niger begins to overflow.

The Kingdom of Senegal is very inconsiderable.
The Kingdom of Senegal was the chief of the Negroes Countries, and was formerly
very considerable; at present it is not so, tho they have a King truly Brave,
for, through want of Strength, he is become Tributary to another. Its Power
extends along the Waterside, Its Extent.
the space of 40 Leagues, without reckoning some little Seigniories near, which
are Tributary to it, and about ten or twelve Leagues up the Land.

Brac.
This King is called Brac, which is a Name of Dignity: Absolute as he is, he he
is exceeding miserable, often wanting Mill to Eat. He is so delighted with
Horses, that for the most part he will content himself with a Pipe of Tabaco,
Character of the King of Senegal.
and a little Aqua-Vitae, to spare the Mill to his Horses; he uses them in
Plundering the weakest of his Neighbors, and driving away their Oxen, in which
their Riches consist; and sometimes makes them Slaves, and sells them for
Aqua-Vitae.

How he spares his Aqua-Vitae.
When it grows low, he shuts up what is left in a Coffer, and gives the Key of
it to one of his Favorites, whom he sends thirty Leagues off, on some trifling
Message to his Wives, that he may not drink in the mean time; and so makes it
last as long as he can.

How he Tyranizes over his Subjects.
But whatever he does by his Neighbors, he makes his Subjects feel him, running
up and down his own Country, remaining two days in one Town, three in another,
obliging them to maintain himself and his whole Train, which is composed of
about 200 subtle Fellows, refined by their Conversation with the Whites, from
whom they only learn what is bad. When they have ruined the Villages, they make
Slaves of whom they please on the least pretense.

The Treachery of his Subjects in selling one another.
But if the Prince is Perfidious, his Subjects are no less, for they will sell one
another without regard to Proximity of Blood or Relation; so that the Father
shall sell his Son, and the Son his Father and Mother, as it happens. When they
have such a design on any Person, they will desire his help to carry their
Merchandise to the Factory, and when they have them there they sell them
privately, and deliver them when they don't understand the Language.

A particular instance of this kind.
Behold an Example of this kind, which happened some time ago, and confirms what
I have said. One of these Barbarians had formed a design against his own Son to
sell him, the Son perceived it, but dissembled the matter; understanding the
French Tongue, while his Father was absent a little, he comes to the Magazine,
declares he had a Slave, treats, and agrees for the Price, and delivers him up.
This pretended Slave was his Father, who, when he was going to be Iron'd,
rages, and cries out, He was his own Son who offered to sell him; the other
denies, and marches off.

But his guilt was not long a punishing; for returning home with his Goods, he
meets a chief Lord, who stripped him of all he had, made him a Slave, and sold
him to the Factory.

Cheyratick.
After the States of Brac, we meet those of Cheyratick; that is to say, the
thrice great, the Emperor. On this last depend ten little Kings, and other
little Sovereigns; his Empire extends it self of both sides of the River
Senegal, Extent of his Empire.
and contains near 300 Leagues of Country. His Lands bear Dates and Mill; and
yield good Pasture, in which great numbers of Beasts are nourished. His People
are called Fowls, they are not black, nor so white as the Moors, but are of a
middle color.

They are more Civilized than the other Negroes, and receive strangers very
kindly; and when any of our Mariners are ill used by their Captains, as it
often happens, they run to Cheyratick for shelter, who receives them very
kindly.

His Food.
His ordinary Food is Mill, Beef, and Dates, and drinks Milk, and never any Wine
or Aqua-Vitae* observing the Law of Mahomet more exactly than the other
Negroes. He is able to bring 50000 Men into the Field, but for want of
Provisions cannot subsist there long.

The Countries of the Fargotts and the Enguellands.
Passing beyond the States of Cheyratick, you come to the Countries of the
Faregotts and Enguelland, 3000 Leagues from our Habitation, we Traffic too
with them; they differ in nothing from the Fowls. As I did not go any higher,
my knowledge is bounded here, and I know nothing beyond it.

Concourse of the River Senegal.
After this River has rolled from Cantorsi, and diverse great Islands, it casts
it self into the Sea by two openings, in 15 Degrees 32 Minutes of South
Latitude. Between the Sea and the River, there is a sort of Dike, or Hill of
Sand, which in the widest part is not above a little Cannon-shot; this obstacle
occasions continuing its Course for six Leagues, before it rolls into the Sea,
tho their Waters run even. But as at length this Dike is pierced in two places,
three Leagues distant one from the other, through them, and it loses it self,
at last, in the Sea; between which an Island is formed.

At each of these Mouths, several Banks of Sand are gathered, which the River
drives down, and the Sea drives back, and makes a very dangerous passage for
Shipping. The continual motion of the Sea finding a resistance from these
Banks, causes it to rise to an incredible height, and strands or shatters the
Ships to pieces; and then there is no escape for the Equipage, for if they Swim
for it, Sort of Fish.
the Requiems are sure to devour them; else this passage is not dangerous, but
when the Tides are low, and not then when the Niger overflows.

Particular of the overflow of the Niger.
That which is singular in its Inundations is, That they still force new
Passages through the Dike into the Sea; it is about twenty Years since, that it
forced a passage over against that Island which is the Habitation of the
French; they were obliged to remove up higher. This Mouth is stopped now, making
its passage in other places; and they so fill one another up, that none ever
remain but the two last.

Several European Nations Traded formerly to this River; at present none but
the French.

Having spoken several times of the Inundations of the Niger, it will be proper
to observe when, and how this happens; yet without insisting on Physical
Causes, if happily they may be discovered by particular Circumstances. Behold
such as have appeared to me.

When, and how the overflow of the Niger happens.
The Heats are excessive in the Torrid Zone, for it does not Rain there at all,
or, at most, but very little, unless in the Months of July, August, and
September. To the South of the Equinoctial Line, the Rains fall earlier, and in
greater abundance, during that time, and are accompanied with raging Storms,
and followed with so great a Calm, and such excessive Heats, that it is as much
as one can do to fetch ones breath. Two or three hours after, the Tempest
rallies, and so alternately during the three Months. This causes violent
Distempers, Fevers, Cholorae-Morbus, Ulcers in the Legs, Worms of four or five
Foot long in the extremities, and frequent Convulsions, followed by Paralyses
and Death.

All that is said of the Causes of the Inundation of the River Nile, is well
known of all, and therefore I shall not repeat it here. That of the Niger must
have the same Cause, which I believe is, That the Sun in repassing the Line of
Cancer, which in France makes the Summer Solstice, and here the Winter, amasses
the Vapors, The Cause.
which dissolve afterward in heavy and continual Rains; and, probably, cause
these overflowings.

These Rains commence in Aethiopia, in April, continue May and June. Here it is
about the 15th of July, they increase for forty days, and decrease for as many.
This Inundation, which enriches the Country, is not general, nor extends beyond
the Neighborhood of the River. At this time, the Bed of the River is not
known; its Channel neither being deep enough to contain its Waters; nor having
Current enough to sweep them into the Sea, they drowned the Valleys and the
lower Grounds, and cover all.

It Is dangerous at these times to Sail on these Rivers, and chiefly on the
River of Senegal, unless you understand the Channel very well; for when the
Waters come to retire, a Vessel may be left on an Eminence, or in a deep place,
from whence it cannot be drawn out.

It Is about 15 Years since a thing happened that confirms the truth of what I
say: An attempt to Sail from Senegal to Gambia.
Messieurs of the Company, willing to take the advantage of the Inundation,
sent Barks to discover the Country, about the place of the separation of these
Arms of the Niger; they were willing to try if it was practicable to pass from
the River of Senegal to that of Gambia; the Trade of which, the English, who
are Masters of the Mouth of it, hinder others from, by the means of a Fort
which they have there. And as there it no attempting this Discovery but at this
time, when, by the advantage of the Inundation, you pass over Rocks that are
dry at other times, they Manned their Barks with 30 Men, who passed almost 400
Leagues from our Habitation, but they encountered so many difficulties, that
but five returned; having once lost the Bed of the River, their Bark, amongst
others, sat dry on some Trees, but happily, 'twas not far from the Chanel; so
they made a shift to hale it into it again.

After Monsieur Dancourt had dispatched in these Quarters, what he judged was
most for the advantage of the Company, finding the Barhure, or Entrance, was
free to pass, by reason of a gentle Easterly gale that blew then, he passed it
in a Bark designed for that use, which put us Aboard the Ship called the Fame,
which waited for us in the Road, being willing to avoid the fatigue of a Land
Journey.

1683.
The 10th of June 1683. we weighed Anchor, and Sall'd for Goree; we Coasted it
all along, and the prospect was very Charming, of long extended Groves of Trees
ever green. After he had run along all the Coast, and given his Orders in all
the Coutoirs, we returned to our Course which we had held, and spent eight days
in coming back. Mark what I have observed of these places in the little time I
was there.

What People they are who Inhabit the Coast* from the Mouth of the Senegal, as
far as Gambia.
The People who Inhabit the Coast, from the Mouth of the Senegal to the River of
Gambia, are divided into three, namely, the Geloffes, the Sereres, and the
Barbesins; they are Governed by several little Kinglings, but very Absolute in
their several Governments. The most considerable of them all, is the King of
Amel, Sovereign of the Geloffes; the Name of Amel is not appropriated to him,
it is a Name of Dignity. As all their Governments are much alike, (as are the
People, and the Country) I shall by an Account of this one, give you an Account
of all the rest.

The Geloffes.
The Geloffes Inhabit from the Mouth of Senegal, going South, within six or
seven Leagues of Cape-Verde; this makes from North to South 40 Leagues of
Coast, and from East to West 100 up the Land.

The Sereres.
The Country of the Sereres has for its King him whom we Name Portugady, from a
Town of that Name, which belongs to him. Jain is the Name of his Dignity, it
includes ten or twelve Leagues of Coast, and almost 100 up the Country.

The Barbecins.
The Kingdom of the Barbecins, otherwise of Jovialle, (for the same reason I
alleged concerning that of Sereres) is Governed by a King whose Name I have
forgot; he has no more Country than the precedent, with whom he is often at War.

Besides these three Nations, there is another, who are a sort of Portuguese; a
Nation who name themselves so, because they were formerly subject to them, and
are descended from those who first inhabited this Coast, after the discovery of
it. From the Negresses, whom they married, were born the Mulato's, from whom
are descended a more swarthy Race: They may also be Fugitives too of Cape-Verd,
or Cacheau, another Colony of this Nation, on one of the Branches of the River
of Gambia, distant thence three days journey. As they have followed the
Religion of their old Masters, they are partly Jews and partly Catholics; they
wear a Cope like our Chaunters. No one is greater than another, but at the same
time they are false and malicious, having all the Vices of the Portugueses,
without any of their Virtues.

Nature of the Soil.
Almost all these Places are sandy and barren; the Heats are more violent there
in January, than in July and August in France. It Rains there in the manner as
I have said already, speaking of Senegal.

At what time they Cultivate their Grounds.
The Country is Peopled, and abounds with Trees: They begin to Cultivate their
Grounds at the end of June, and sow a little after the Rains; they gather in
their Harvest in September; so that in three Months time they manure, sow, and
reap. This shows the good nature of the Soil, and if better improved by the
Inhabitants, who are very lazy, that it would produce Grain in abundance: I
mean, their Mill.

How they Cultivate their Grounds.
Their manner of Cultivating is pleasant, they go four or five together into the
Field, which they call Cougan, or Courgar, and with a sort of a round Shovel of
Iron with a Wood head, they break up the Earth, which they cast before them,
not entering the Sword of the Ground above three or four Fingers deep, still
with the Pipe in their Mouths, and talking two Hours for one they work. And
when the Ground is thus cultivated, they sow it as they do Pease in France,
without taking care to lay up any Grain; The little Care they take to live.
and are so excessive careless, that they don't gather half what is necessary
for them, and then they live on a black insipid Root which they dry, and on
another called Gernot, that tastes like a Hazel Nut: If their Harvest chances
to fail, they die of hunger.

A Cheat of one of their Priests, or Marabouse.
It Is not above five Years since such a thing happened, seduced by the Promises
of a Marabou, the Name of their Priests. He was of those Azoages, or Arabs, of
whom I have spoken: Under a pretense of Religion, he made himself Master of the
whole Country, from Chegratick to the Sereres; telling them he was raised up by
Heaven to scourge the Tyranny of their Kings; he offered to prove his Mission
by Miracles, and particularly by that of making their Grounds bring fourth more
abundantly, and that without any Labor of theirs.

Their Laziness was sufficiently charmed with such a Promise, they all side
with this Impostor, particularly those of the Kingdom of Damel; It causes a
Revolt.
their King was deposed, and their Neighbors plundered in this Revolt. They
lived still in hopes of the Miracle, and past two Years expecting it, but to no
purpose, so that they eat one another for want of Food, and were obliged to
give themselves up for Slaves: Time at last disabus'd them, and they drove away
the Tyrant and Impostor, and Damel was restored. They entertain no Marabouse
ever since; and if they catch any, they make them Slaves.

Besides, they have white and black Beans very like French Beans, and Melons
full of an insipid Water. They make use of Corn in making their Couscouse, as
they call in Arabic; or Laguerre, in their own Language, which is their most
common Food. The Fruit which we call Bananes, and in the Canaries, the Apple of
Adam, is common amongst them; they rear Oxen, and Cows, and Goats; and he who
has the largest Stock is the most esteemed of. In what their Riches consists.
Their Beeves are no larger than a Calf of eight or nine Months in France. I
believe the drought is the cause; for along the River of Senegal, they are as
large as in Europe.

How many sorts of Palm Trees.
There Is great numbers of Palm Trees, of which I have observed three sorts; one
is like the Date-Tree; the second like that which you may have seen in France;
and the third is a sort of Latiner; as to that which bears the Coco, there is
none of it here. How the Negros gather the wine from the Palm trees

How they mount the Palm trees

How the Negros make incisions to get the Palm wine

How they are habited



How they get the Wine out of the Palm Trees.
Through the Incisions which the Negroes make in the Palm Trees, there distills a
Liquor of a Pearl Color, which is called Palm-Wine; it is sweet and pleasant to
drink the first day, but it will intoxicate; and afterward it loses its
sweetness, sowering every day more and more; though the older it is, it still the
more affects the Head. One of these Trees may yield about three Pints of this
Liquor. They commonly regal Strangers with it, and the most considerable
Persons are never without it: this same Tree produces a sort of little Coco's,
from which they draw the Punick Oil, of the smell of Violets, of the taste of
Olives, and the color of Saffron. It enters into the Composition of Musselin
Oil, and Alexandrin Nicolas. These Trees pay Custom to the Alzair, or Lord of
the Town.

As the Palm is high and without Branches, and that it is necessary to make
Incisions in two or three places below the leafy tuft, Their way of mounting
them.
(which is the glory of the Tree,) they climb up after this manner; they have a
sort of a Hoop made of Brass, which may be tied or loosened as one will, into
which they enter; they as 'twere sit upon it, and placing their Feet against the
Tree, supported behind by this Hoop, as firmly as if they were on the Ground,
they reach the top, make their Incisions, and fasten the Basses to receive the
Liquor which distills; 'twould frighten one almost to see them so high, and
supported by so slight a thing.

Of the several sorts of Animals there.
All along the Coast, there is a prodigious variety of Animals, of which I don't
pretend to describe all the several sorts, being little versed in this sort of
Learning, I shall only speak of those I know, of which one may see a great
number in Europe, by the care which diverse Princes have taken to have them
transported, as they are seen there in their natural wildness, before they are
tamed; what I am about to say of them, will perhaps give a more particular Idea
of them.

The greatest numbers of these fierce Creatures are seen about Ponds and Pits
which the Rains have filled; The Places where they are commonly seen.
Morning and Evening they come thither in droves, as do the tamer sorts: There
you may see Elephants, Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Onces, Wolves, Tiger-Cats,
Civit-Cats, Foxes, wild Goats, etc.

Of the Elephant.
That which is remarked of the Elephant is, that he is not to be attacked in a
place where he may freely turn himself, else he throws all down with his Trunk,
and treads them to death. I don't know at what time the Female brings forth her
young, but she has often three at a time: He lives on Grass and Leaves, which
he conveys to his Mouth with his trunk; they often pass the Night in Towns, and
so little fear frequented Places, that instead of avoiding the Negroes Houses,
they will go directly to them, and toss them out of their way like Nutshels.

Of the Lion.
The Lion seeks his Prey with Art, he never sets directly upon it, but fetches a
compass, creeping along on the Ground; and when he is within reach leaps
upon it; he is so mild and manageable when young, that we have had of them as
tame and familiar as Dogs.

The Tiger.
The Tiger is more fierce than the Lion, and is much of the same height and
length with the Greyhound, he sets indifferently on Men or Beasts; the Negroes
kill a great many of them with their Zagaies and their Arrows to get their
Skins, but though wounded near so much, they still defend themselves, and seldom
fail of killing some before they fall.

The Leopard.
The Leopard is fierce and active; unless he meets a Man in a narrow place where
he cannot avoid him, he will not set upon him; but if does, he flies upon him,
fastens his tallons in his Face, and tears away as much Flesh as they can
grasp, and so kills him. He is a mortal Enemy of Dogs, and devours them
wherever he meets them.

The Once.
The Once, which is said to be fiercer than the Tiger, is in my Opinion the same
Species, or at least that which we call a Panther; his Skin is more beautiful
than a Tiger's, though he is spotted alike.

The Tiger-Cat.
The Tiger-Cat is so named by reason of his white and black Spots. He is shaped
like our Cats, only four times as big; he is of a devouring nature, and eats
Apes, Rats, and other Animals.

The Civit-Cat.
The Civit-Cat has the Head and Snout of a Fox; he is large and spotted like the
other, and very wild; every two days they take the Civit from him, which is a
certain Muscosity, or clammy Sweat which he has under his Tail in a hollow
place.

I have seen no Rinoceros's, though there are some here.

Apes, how many sorts.
There are several sorts of Apes, as the Munky, with a long tail, and the
Baboon, who has none at all: I have not seen of this last sort; as for the
first they abound every where: Of these there are three sorts, of which two are
very low, and do little mischief. Thoughts of the Negroes.
Of this little sort, there are some they call Weepers, having a lamentable sort
of a cry. Of the other sort, there are some almost as big as Munkeys, not only
their Hands and Feet resemble a Man's, but their very Actions; so that the
Negroes say of them, that they can speak if they will, but that they will not for
fear of being forced to work. They know that we take delight in them, though they
are so mischievous; which I believe gave occasion to the Negroes of Senegal, to
bring us Rats in Cages; as if we took delight in none but mischievous
Creatures, saying, that as our Humor rerembled theirs, 'twas not much to be
wondered that we loved them.

It Is incredible what waste they make when the Mill and other Grain which they
live on is ripe; Their waste and cunning.
they assemble 40 or 50 together, and then go to the Cougan; one of them stands
Centry on a Tree out of the Field, and hearkens and looks about on all sides,
while the others are gathering the Harvest; as soon as ever he perceives any
one, he cries out as loud as ever he can, to give notice to the rest; who
presently at the Signal, fly with their Prey, leaping from one Tree to another
with strange Agility; the Female, which carries her young ones against her
Belly, leaps too as the rest, and as if she carried nothing.

Deer in abundance here.
They eat a great deal of Veneson here, and Boars are common; but have no taste
like ours, and their Flesh is white like Pork. The Wild-Goat, the Kid, and the
Hare are found here in great store.

The Stag.
I have seen none here like those in France; but some others, who have Horns
like the Capriorn; on the Mountains in Swisserland, only they are strait.

Several sorts of Birds.
A great many sorts of Birds are seen here, that are not known in Europe, of
which a great many live only on Fish; among the rest, there is one named the
Great Throat, it is twice as big as a Swan, having a Beak of a Cubit long, and a
Skin hanging below, that makes the Throat look like a Sack. It swallows whole
Fishes as big as ordinary Carps. The Cormorants and the Vultures are the same
as in Europe; of the last there are some as big as Eagles, that devour young
Children when they can meet 'em alone.

I have seen strange Birds, and of such various Colors, as I am not able to
describe: Nightingals.
the Nightingals don't sing there so agreeably as in Europe.

I have already spoke of the Ostridge, of which some are of a prodigious size;
those that fly are delicate Meat, and several Parts of them are of several
tastes; they are as thick as a Swan, their Feathers gray and black. The wild
Geese are very good; but the Teal above all, are of incomparable relish. On the
River Senegal the gray exceed the rest in goodness.

The Partridge perches on the Trees there like other Birds; as do the Hens
which the Portuguese call Pintades: these Hens are speckled white and gray,
having a little red Crest above the Ears; they are larger than ours; and I look
upon them to be a sort of a Partridge.

Parrots.
The Parrots there are of two sorts, the one little, and all green; the other
bigger, have a gray Head, a yellow Belly, green Wings, and the Back partly
yellow, partly gray: these never talk, but the small ones have a sweet clear
voice, and learn whatever they are taught.

Observation on the industrious Care of a little Bird.
Of all these several sorts of Birds, I have seen none so industrious and
careful, as a certain little one that builds his Nest in the Palm Tree after a
singular manner, and by a mavelous instinct, secures it from the Serpents
that creep up the Trees; they build at the very extremity of the slightest
Branch, to which they fasten a Stalk of a Rush or Straw, the strongest they are
able to carry, and about a Foot and a half long, and at the end which hangs
down in the Air they build their Nests, leaving an Entrance at the top a little
of one side: It looks like a Ball hanging in the Air. The Branch to which it is
fastened is so weak, that it can bear nothing that would approach to hurt it,
and so they are out of fear.

The Sea is very Fishy all along the Coast, and almost all sorts are there; of
which the most devouring have broad and long teeth, in two or three several
rows; The abundance of Fish.
those which they most commonly eat are Parquese, the Gold-Fish, Vieiles,
Tunny, Mullet and Racoas, of the shape of a Salmon, Negers, Sales, Sardes, and
a multitude of Sardines, that fill the Sea at certain times.

The Requiem.
The Requiem, the Monster of the Sea, that is shaped like a Sea-Dog, is in length
from three or four Foot to eight: She parts with her Young alive, and has the
Matrix like our Dogs, and the rest like a Fish: this is the most dangerous of
all, and eats whatever comes in its way; it is dangerous swimming near the Place
where they are, for there is no scaping.

Marsouin or Sea-Pig.
The Mursouin, or Sea-Pig, is of the bigness of the Requiem, and good to eat; it
will not meddle with a Man: It has Fat, but of an ill taste; its Ribs and Entrails
are like those of a Hog, except that they have two Stomachs, the one at the end
of the Osophage, the other adhering to one side, almost as big as the first;
and to this last there is a little opening, which performs the Communication
from one to the other: It Is filled with little Cells, like those in the Wax
before the Honey is separated from it; the Duodenum, if I remember right, has
its rise in this last; I had not time to examine it thoroughly, because the
Seamen had quite mangled it.

The Whales.
The Whales, as vast as they are in length and thickness, so that they are often
as big as a Vessel of 26 tun, yet don't overset any Ships, as is commonly
reported of them, unless it be little Barks or Sloops.

Souffleur.
The Souffleur almost like a Whale, but much less, casts Water like it, but
threw one Passage only, which is above his Snout, whereas the other has two
there.

Observation on a Fish.
There is another, the Name of which I don't know, that has a Bone four Foot
long in his upper Jaw, traversed on the sides with others that are less, but
very sharp, ranged like the Steps of a Ladder within, which he uses to catch
others withal.

Spronton.
There is one which the Seamen call Spronton, that has a great Bone in the same
place that the precedent has, with this difference from the other, that it is
strait, and sharp pointed; I believe it is the same with that which we call
Naruval: The Naruval.
This Bone of which I speak, resembles the pretended Horn of the fansied
Unicorn: He can pierce a Ship with it, so as it shall take in Water, if it does
not happen, that in drawing the Bone out again he breaks it; in which case he
stops the Hole he has made.

The Succer
The Succer, so called from his fastening himself, as he is of the bigness of a
Soal; when he fastens himself to the Helm he retards the Ship, but does not
stop it, as is falsely reported of the Remora.

The Amphibies are not common on these Coasts, nor are the Crocadile, the
Seahorse, the Sea-Calf, the Lemantine, or the Tortoise often seen here, unless
at the Mouth of the River of Senegal and Gambia.

Crocodiles.
In the Marshes and Ponds are found little Crocodiles of about five Foot, of
which some are Venomous, and some not. There are some that are perfect
Serpents; they retire thither where there are most Ants, because these little
Creatures make them a sort of Forts, in raising from space to space little
Hillocks of Earth, of ten, fifteen, and twenty Foot high, hollow below like an
Oven, and so disposed, that at a distance one would fancy them to be a Village.

The Crocodiles of Gambia.
In Gambia there are Crocodiles of thirty Foot long, and thick in proportion, so
as that they will swallow a Buck whole; they are very dangerous; their Tail is as
long as all the rest of their Body; their Skin is so hard, that a Zagage will
scarce pierce it. There are some of them that live on Fish, and others that
devour Men; and in order to surprise them, they will keep themselves at some
distance in the places frequented, and when they get near those who swim, or
are in Cannoos, or come near large Oxen swimming, they clasp them with their
Tails, and eat them; they move only the upper Jaw, the lower not stirring; they
do little mischief out of the Water; when the Negroes kill them they eat them;
they leave their Eggs on the Land, and cover them with Sand; as soon as they
are hatched they return into the Waters, or the Woods.

Sea Horse.
The Seahorse, such as is seen in the Niger, is as big as an Ass, and is shaped
like a Horse; his Skin is as hard, and without Hair; he lives on the Land as
well as in the Water, out of which he does not go but to feed. He ruins the
Mill and Rice, for he destroys ten times more than he eats; he is dangerous to
the Negroes Canoos, which he is apt to overturn, yet without hurting the Men;
he has two great Teeth that serve the same use that Ivory does.

Sea-Ox.
The Sea-Ox, that lives on the Land as well as in the Water, resembles a Calf of
six Months old.

Lamantin, a sort of Fish.
There are more Lamantin's in the River of Senegal than in that of Gambia: he is
like the Marsovin for Bigness, for Flesh, and Fat. When he is out of the Water
he makes use of his Fins instead of Feet. This is all the knowledge I could get
of this kind. I now proceed to speak of the Manners and Genius of the Negroes.

Character of the Negroes.
The Negroes are all well made, and proportinably tall: You see none lame nor
crooked amongst them, unless by accident; they are stupid and without address,
even in the least things; great Liars, but greater Thieves; thievery is the
only thing they are dextrous in, and are such Masters at it, that they will steal
from us before our Faces, without our perceiving them, drawing with one Foot to
them, what they would be at, and taking it up behind.

Their deceit in Traffic.
When any Mountaineers (for so they call those who live up Land) come to
traffic with us, there is no sort of Cheat which the Negroes of the Coast
don't put upon 'em; for under the pretense of helping them to carry their
Goods, and serving them as Interpreters, they retain half from them of what we
pay them, as though they had a real Interest in the Goods.

The severity with which their Kings punish those who steal in the Night, and
such as are taken in the Fact, cannot cure them of this Distemper,
notwithstanding the greatness of it; which is no less than to be Slaves to
those whom they have robbed. They have no fear of Punishment.


Whoever's obliged to make use of the Negroes for Interpreters, are very
unhappy, and exposed to all their Knavery; they scarce interpret a word
honestly, and in the sense it is spoke, How Knavish they are.
and always contrive it to our disadvantage; which often makes our Markets
litigious.

They are troublesome, intemperate, and brutal.
They are every way insupportable, but chiefly when they think themselves
necessary in any Affair: their Intemperance is excessive, still swallowing Aqua
Vitae, for Palm-Wine is not plentiful enough amongst them to be always at hand.
Their Drunkenness is accompanied with a total depravation of Reason, and a
furious Brutality.

Their Ignorance.
They don't know what belongs to Restitution, and have no shadow of Civility:
their Ignorance is so great as not to know that twice two makes four, or their
Age, or the Day of the Week; for which they have no Names.

Their Maraboux, who have some little tincture of Arabic, write their
Griz-Griz in that Tongue: I shall explain this Word hereafter.

Their good Quality.
These People have but one good Quality, which is Hospitality; for they wont let
a Stranger of their Nation pass without making him eat and drink, and that
sometimes for several Days. Having a mighty value sor their Aqua-Vitae, when
they would drink of it, they do it privately, and out of the sight of their
Guest, that they may not be obliged to give them share; they make the
Mountaneers pay for their Hospitality toward them, by cheating them of the
Aqua-Vitae they receive in exchange for their Goods, and generally send them
away with half what they brought.

Their Poverty.
They are all extremely poor, having no other Riches but a few Oxen, the richest
may have forty or fifty, or three or four Horses, with as many Slaves; but they
are extraordinary, when they have any Bracelets of Gold, to the value perhaps
of eleven or twelve Pistols each.

Their great love of Praise.
Though they have neither Wit nor Sense, they love Praise to that degree, that
they have a sort of People called Guiriotz, who have nothing else to do but to
perform this Piece of Service; the Guiriotz carry a sort of a Drum, of four or
five Foot long, made of the trunk of a hollowed Tree, which they beat with
their Hands or with small Sticks; they have Timbrels too of the Morisco
Fashion, which resemble our Ball Baskets, crossed with little Strings, which they
touch with one Hand, while they strike with the other.

Their Instruments.
I observed they made use of another Instrument that is sufficiently harmonious,
if they knew how to play on it; it sounds like a Harp, and consists of a Range
of several Calebasses or Strings of different sizes, ranked under stops, and
disposed in a tuneable order, like those of the Harpsicord.

I have seen another of their Instruments that would be proper in the Chamber
of a sick Person: Another Instrument
It Is a sort of a Lute, made of a piece of hollowed Wood, covered with Leather,
with two or three Strings of Hair. It Is covered on the Stops with little Plates
of Iron, and adorned with little Bells like a Tabor.

The Guiriot's, whose Employment is to sing Praises.
The Guiriots tune these several Instruments to their own wretched Voices, and
so sing the Panigericks of the most considerable Persons: Which commonly run
thus; that they are great Lords, Rich Powerful as the Whites, who are the chief
Slaves of the King; and a great deal of this kind of stuff.

These are transported with these Praises, and recompense them largely; nay,
they go so far as to strip themselves of their very Clothes to reward them for
them, though never so groundless and extravagant. And indeed, when they don't
reward these Fellows, they are for taking their Revenge, Their Revenge if not
rewarded.
crying them down again, and vilifying them up and down as much as they had
extolled them before; which is looked upon as the greatest Affront imaginable.

It Is their highest Honor to have their Praises sung by the King's Guriot, and
he is sure to be well rewarded for it, for they will give him no less perhaps How
their Lords and conciderable persons are accouterd.

than two or three Bullocks; and, in a word, the best part of what they have.

These Guiriots employ themselves sometimes in singing our Praises too, but
they find but little Encouragement for it; leaving the Negroes to enjoy and pay
for this sort of Happiness: they praise us in these terms, that we are Great,
Rich, and Lords of the Sea.

The Habit of the Blacks.
The Habit of the Blacks is very plain, the Poor have only a Cotton Rag, about
half a quarter of a Yard wide, to cover their Nakedness: It Is fastened with a
String that serves them for a Girdle; they let the two Ends of the Cloth hang
down behind and before, which they reckon very Honorable, and a great Ornament.

Habit of the most considerable.
The Lords and considerable Persons are better habited, they have a Cotton Frock
made like the Cordelier's Robes, with long and large Sleeves; they are not
platted in the Neck, having only a hole for the Head to pass through, like the
Shirts of the Europeans; they wear them of all Colors, some Blue, some Yellow,
some Fillimot, etc.

Since these Jackets reach but half way down the Thigh, they wear withal a sort
of Breeches of the same, which reach from the Waist to the Knee: these Breeches
are so large, that they take up no less than five Else of Linen; they resemble
a Woman's Petticoat that is gathered at the bottom, and in which only two holes
were left on the fides to put the Legs through; the largest are the most
fashionable.

They wear on their Heads a sort of Bonnets that are straight at the Entrance,
but wide at the other End; almost like the Cowls of the Capuchins of the
Jacobins. The common Sort go barefoot, but the People of Quality wear Sandals
made of a piece of Leather beneath, in the form of a Sole, and fastened at top
with a thong, which ties them to the Foot, like the Sandals of the Ancients.

Their Hair, though short, is very well platted; they set it out with
Gris-Gris's of Silver, Leather, Coral, Copper, etc. They wear Rings at their
Ears of Tin, Silver, and Copper; but they who are of the Race of Slaves, are
not allowed to wear their Hair.

How the Women and Maids are habited.
The Girls and Women are naked from the Waist upwards, unless the cold obliges
them to wrap themselves up; they cover the other part of their Body with a
Paigne; that is, a Cotton Cloth stripped after their Fashion, and of the bigness
of a little Towel that reaches down to the mid-leg: their Hair too is tressed
and set out with Coral and other little Ornaments: their Coifs make a topping
on their Heads of half a Foot high: the higher they are, the more they are
esteemed.

The Boys and Girls go quite naked.
The Girls and Boys go quite naked to the Age of eleven or twelve. The Women and
Men adorn their Arms and Legs with Corral, and Bracelets of Gold, Silver, Tin,
and Copper, according to their Ability.

The Cotton with which these People Cloth themselves, would be very plentiful
amongst them, if they bestowed that Pains, on it which they should; but they
content themselves with what is just enough, and sometimes with less: the Women
spin the Cotton, and the Men make the Cloth, which is not above five Fingers
breadth in the Piece, for want of necessary Utensils to make it wider; for
otherwise they are as good Weavers as in France; but forced to join ten or
twelve Pieces together, to have a Paigne of an Ell wide.

Their Food called Sanglet and Coscouse.
Mill is the ordinary Food of the Western Negroes; the Women who make it ready,
make Sanglet or Coscouse of it: Which are their terms to signify two sorts of
Meats.

How the Women prepare the Sanglet.
They begin at break of Day to make their Sanglets, for it requires full six
Hours to make it; they go two or three together to prepare it, pound it in
wooden Mortars that are high and deep, not having any Mills for that purpose:
When Mill has quitted its Husk, they winnow it with Fans made of Palm-Leaves,
to separate it from the Chaff: then they boil it with Milk, or Butter, or a
Bouillon of Flesh, or dried Fish, or with Water.

How they make the Coscouse.
The Coscouse, which is their best Victuals, is made too of Mill beaten very
fine, which they fan as before; when it is clean, they put a little into a very
narrow Bowl, and sprinkle a little Water on it; after which they knead and turn
it, then sprinkle a little more Water, then knead it again, which they repeat
till they have reduced this Mass into little Balls; afterward they dry them,
and then put them into an Earthen Pot full of holes, on another in which they
boil Meat seasoned with Spice and Palm Oil: this Ragou is very fine well
prepared, and the Sand well dressed out, which is seldom done.

Their Provision for the War.
When they go to War, they carry a little Sack of a Foot long, and the thickness
of one's Arm, full of Coscouse thus dressed. As the Women dress it every day,
they take no small Pains. And if the Wives of Europe were to take the same Care
of their Husbands, they would think they were very hardly used.

Their Drink.
They drink Palm-Wine, which is not very plentiful, and stinking Water of the
Pits; and often of the Salt Water of the Sea, where it has strained through;
they drink Milk too when they have it.

As Ambition is a Vice or a Passion unknown to those People, they little mind
the building of Cities, or Castles, or Houses of State and Grandeur; nor have
they Materials for the doing of it, if they take the Pains: they live but in
Villages, where the Houses are such as I have already described, which differ
according to the Quality and Ability of the Person. They who live near the
Palm Trees inhabit in the best, though they too have neither Windows nor Doors.

They have several Houses.
The House of a great Lord shall consist sometimes of thirty Pavillions, which
they call Combettes, and sometimes of forty or fifty: An ordinary Persons
shall not have above two or three: the King's has above a hundred, though covered
with Straw like the rest.

Those of Persons of Quality are enclosed with Palasades of Straw or Thorns,
Houses of the Great.
supported from space to space with States; the Combettes communicate all one
within another, by ways disposed in the form of a Labyrinth: Round the House,
according to the capacity of the Owner, are seen beautiful Trees, but in
another Order than Nature has placed them.

The House of King Damel.
The Palace of King Damel exceeds all the rest; before you come to the Gate of
the Palasades, which makes the first Enclosure, you see a spacious Field, where
his Horses are managed, of which he has no great Number: Without, by the side
of this Palasade, are the Appartments of the great Lords. From this Place you
go into the Palace by a large Avery, it is adorned with a great number of
Trees, which we called Calbassiers, because their Fruit resembles a Calbasse.

Persons who are employed nearest the King, have their Appartments by the side
of this Avenue; and their nearness to, or distance from the Combette Royal,
shows their Degree. Each of their Appartments being also enclosed with
Palasades, you must pass a great many Courts before you come to the King's; few
Persons daring go into his Appartment.

All his Wives have their distinct Lodgings, The Appartments of the Kings Wives.
and each five or six Slaves to wait on them. The King may lie with which he
pleases, without creating a Jealousy in any of them: there is one commonly
whom he loves above all the the rest; and when ever he is weary of her, he
sends her to some Village with her Slaves, and gives her sufficient Lands for
her maintenance; to her succeeds another. Of thirty which he keeps one half are
in the Country.

The Religion of the Negroes.
The Negroes from this Coast to Gambia, observe the Law of Mahomet; but in the
Parts toward Siera, Liona, and the Golden Coast, they have for the most part
no Religion at all; or, at least, worship the first Thing they meet in a
Morning. Formerly they were Idolaters, worshipping the Devil, to whom they
sacrificed Bullocks; and though they eat Flesh, yet they believe a transmigration
of Souls.

Their Pagan Opinions.
And there are some of them who would not have certain Lizards killed, that run
about their Houses, saying, It Is the Soul of their Fathers or their Mothers,
that come to make merry with them; which they call Folgar.

From whom they derive their Religion.
They derive their Religion from the Arabian Azoughes, of whom I have already
told you, the ordinary People have very little, as having but small knowledge
of it; the great ones are more Religious, having commonly a Moorish Maraboux to
live with them, who have a great Ascendant over them: At what times they say
their daily Prayers.
they say their Sala or Prayers three times a Day, Morning at Sunrise, about
Noon, and in the Evening, some in the Afternoon; the ordinary People pray
little, nor do not trouble themselves with the building of Mosques.

Mosques of the King and the great Ones.
The King and the Grandees have Mosques; they are covered with Straw like their
other Houses. They first stand a long while in them, looking toward the
Sunrising, then they advance two steps forwards, muttering some words to
themselves; Their Exercises and Ceremonies in their Mosques.
then prostrate themselves all along on the Ground, with their Faces to the
Earth; to raise themselves on their Knees, make a Circle round them on the
Ground, and twice or thrice about their Heads: they afterward kiss the Earth
at several bowings, putting Sand on their Foreheads with both their Hands; and
repeat the same Ceremony again for the space of half an Hour.

Their ridiculous Prayers.
One prays that he may have no Enemies, but such as he may be able to defeat;
that their Deity would do them no harm; another, that he would give them
handsome Wives, and plenty of Mill, and so forth. Nothing being able to divert
them while they are at Prayers; nay, though they saw their very Houses a fire.

They believe Predestination.
They believe Predestination, and when any Misery befalls them, they say it comes
from their God; so that if one Negro is killed by another, he says, that their
God has killed him: Yet for all that, they seize the Homicide if they can, and
cause him to be sold for a Slave.

Their Superstition.
They are so Superstitious, that they imagine, the having a certain Spells about
them, they cannot be touched by any wild Beasts that approach them; and while
they are thus defended by Enchantment, they believe nothing can cause their
Death nor draw them into Misfortunes.

Their Gris-Gris, or Relics.
They have a certain Character, which they call Gris-Gris: they are Billets, the
Characters of which are Arabic, intermixed with Necromantick Figures, which
the Maraboux sell them. Some, as they imagine, preserve them from being
wounded, enable them to swim well, and procure them good success in Fishing;
others to have a good many Wives and Children* to prevent their being made
Captives; and for whatever they love or fear.

Their Confidence in them.
They have so strong a Confidence in them, that there are some of them that
would stand the shot of an Arrow without fear: they are ^^ir^ss'd with them,
having them on all parts of their Bodies, that often a Zagaye will scarce enter
them. The great Lords above all others, have their Vests and Bonnets covered
with them, and are so loaded with them, that they are often forced to take
Horse, as not being able to go a foot: they likewise put some of them on their
Horses to make them the more lively, and hinder them from being wounded.

How they are made.
These Gris-Gris's are lapt up in Linnem, handsomely folded, and covered above
with red Leather neatly dressed: there are some no above an Inch thick, worked
with the point of a Diamond; of which they make Necklaces, into which the
Maraboux often put nothing at all, as I have found upon opening of some our
Slaves had: they have of them before and behind over against their Stomachs,
large ones, and about two Inches thick* they make some of them of a Horses
Tail, or the Horns of a Deer, or a wild Bull, covered with red Cloth; they set
two of these last on the forepart of their Caps: thus equipped they have a
horrible Air, and exceeding fierce, and engage one another with the utmost
Confidence in their Combats, but not in those with us, and against our Muskets;
so that it is a saying amongst them, That there is no Gris-Gris against the
Pouse; for they call the Musket so.

The Maraboux ruin them with these Gris-Gris's; for there are some of them
that cost them three Slaves; others four or five Oxen, according to the Virtue
they ascribe to them. The Opinion the Negroes have of these Gris-Gris, has made
some of our ignorant French believe there are a great many Conjurers amongst
them; there are certain times when these pretended Sorcerers make a thousand
Grimaces, singing and roaring: as they say, when the Devil beats them.

When they think any Person is insulted by the Devil, if it be a Woman, they
put her into Men's Apparel, with a Zagage in her Hands, and leads her singing
with a dismal Voice; and by this Ceremony they believe they drive him away. I
have often observed that these supposed Sorcerer^ are mere Cheats; for when we
take a Cudgel and beat the possessed Person, we find it has the same Effect,
and that the Devil returns no more.

Ramadan, or Lent.
During their Ramadan, which is the Lent of Mahomet, and which lasts the whole
Month of September, they use the Ceremony of Circumcision, which they don't
perform till the Child's eleven or twelve Year old: a Maraboux cuts the
Foreskin, which the Person Circumcised eats; who must not complain whatever
Pain he feels, whilst it is a cutting; nay, they often laugh while they are
searing them with a red-hot Iron to stop the Blood.

Folgar, or their Feasts of Joy.
As long as the Ramadan lasts they have their Folgar, or Feasts of Joy every
Night; but, during the whole Day, they neither eat, nor drink, nor so much as
smoke; nay, some of them will not even spit; but, when once the Sun is set, they
make a vast noise with their Drums, and continue eating and drinking till
Sunrise.

Their Inclination to many Wives.
Though according to the Alcoran it is not lawful to have above four Wives, yet
they take as many as they can maintain. As soon as they meet with a young Woman
they like, they demand her of her Father; if he Consents to it, they agree on
the Price; her Quality or Beauty raises her value. Her Dowry are so many Oxen,
which turns to the Profit of the Father; which never exceeds five. This
Agreement ended, they bed without any more Ceremony. If they give her for a
Maid, they lay a white Cloth on the Bed in which they are to lie, on which, if
Blood be found, she is allowed to have been a Virgin.

Ceremony on this occasion.
Then they produce this Cloth publicly in the Village, accompanied with several
Guiriot's, who sing the Praises of the Woman, and the Happiness of the Husband.
But, if she proves otherwise than she was given for, the Father is obliged to
take her again, if the Husband requires it, and to restore him his Oxen. But
this rarely happens; for by an unlawful knowledge before Marriage, they are
assured what she is: But, if she is returned again, she is not the more
despised; for, though she be not a Wife for one, yet she may be a Concubine for
another; so the Father still gets more and more by her: So by this accursed
Gain, he might as innocently murder his Daughter. If afterward the Husband
grows weary of his Wife, he puts her away, and is quit of her, losing his
Dowry: And she may part from him too, restoring her Oxen.

When the King would gratify any great Lord, he gives him one of his Wives;
but he cannot turn her off, though the King may take her again when he pleases.

The Funerals of the Negroes.
The Funerals of the Negroes are performed with great State and Ceremony. A
Marabou washes the Corpse of the Dead, and adorns it with the finest Calicoe he
had in his life. All the Relations and Neighbors come to bewail him, and ask
him a great many ridiculous Questions; If he was not well with them? What harm
they did him? If he had not Riches enough? If he had not handsome Wives enough?
and the like: And, seeing he makes no Answer, they depart, and make room for
others, who repeat the same Questions, while the Guiriot's incessantly sing his
Praises.

And because it is the Custom to make much of all those who come to compliment
the Dead, they kill Oxen, and sell his Slaves, that they may have Aqua-Vitae to
be merry withal. When the Assistants are well satisfied, they bury the Dead in
the House where he died, of which they open the Dome. Afterward, when the
Corpse is in the Ground, the Mourners re-double their Cries, and four Persons
making a Square, with four Callicoes which they hold, hide him so as he cannot
be seen.

The Marabou comes afterward, and speaks some Words in the Ears of the Dead,
and covers him with a Calico; and afterward they put the Dome in its place; on
which they hang some Clothes, white, red, or any other Color they fancy. Hard
by they set up a Pole, on which they hang the Bow, the Quiver, and the Zagages
of the defunct. They set him a Pot of Coscouse, and another of Water, which is
his Provision for one Year; for they fancy he eats after he is dead.

In some Places they compass the House with Thorns, or a deep Ditch, to secure
the Corpse from wild Beasts; who, notwithstanding, sometimes devour it. This
being finished, the Mourners still continue their Cries eight Days longer.

When it is a Boy that is dead, the Women and the Maids sing, and the Boys run
with all their force one at another, with their naked Sabres in their Hands,
clashing as they meet, and striking one another's Sabres; with a great many
other Actions, that would be tedious to mention.

Of their Artisans.
The Negroes have few Artisans amongst them, the most common are Smiths,
Weavers, and Potters; the first make Knives, Slaves Fetters, and Bracelets of
Gold, Silver, Copper, and Iron, and Ornaments for Knives and Sabres, and covers
for Gris-Gris's, and the Handles of their Sabres. They have no Farriors,
because they never shoe their Horses.

Their way at the Forge.
When they are at the Forge, they are always two or three together, under the
shadow of a tree, sitting on the side of the Forge, the Pipe in their Mouths.
They use so little Fire at it, that you could searce boil an Egg over it; they
light it with a Bellows made of two Skins, which they press to make it blow,
and resembles a Bladder filled with Wind. Their Anvil is almost like the Stone
which the Mower makes use of to sharpen his Scythe with; when they beat upon
it, it is so sunk in the Sand at the third or fourth blow, that they must raise
it again, which spends most of their time, to little purpose.

Their Kttchen Vtensils.
Their Weavers are little employed, wearing but few Clothes, as I have already
said.

The Potters make but one sort of Pots; the greater of which serve for Kettles,
and the lesser for Pipes; the bowl of which only is made of Clay, the shank of
it being a little hollow Stick, fastened to the earthen Head.

They are generally idle, and spend most of their time in unnecssary Discourse;
and if Necessaries be wanting, they are not much concerned, but rub on, unless
they go and live on a Neighbor.

The management of the House gives the Wife very little trouble, except it be
the eating part; for the Kitchen Furniture of the greatest Lords consists only
of some Earthen Pots, a few Wooden Vessels, and Calkasses half broken, which
they make use of instead of Cups.

How their Children are Nursed.
Their Children, though young, don't incumber them much, for they leave them naked
on the Sand, where they creep all day long: those who are very young indeed,
they carry always on their Backs, with their Legs against their Sides, drawing
their Feet before, and binding them behind with a Calico Cloth, with which they
gird themselves withal.

Whatever they are a doing their little Ones are always tied up behind them,
even when they are pounding their Mill; whence it is, that they have all great
Bellies and flat Noses, for the Mother bowing and raising her Body as she
beats, makes them strike their Noses against her Back; which the Children
endeavoring to avoid (which notwithstanding they hardly can) holding
themselves back, they advance their Bellies: I believe this is the only Reason
that the Negroes are flat Nosed.

They value Beauty as much as we, and particularly in the Eyes, Mouth, Lips,
and Nose: Allowing for their blackness, there are Negresses as handsome as any
of our European Ladies. And are more witty than the Men, but very subtle, and
smooth tongued. The Caresses of white Men please them wonderfully. But, in the
mean time, these Dames being very Mercenary, they will not grant them Favors
for nothing, although their Husbands consent to their Debaucheries.

But it is not so amongst one another; for if one lies with another's Wife, they
will kill him if they can with their Sabres, or their Knives; or, if it be with
their Concubines, they will have their Revenge.

How the Women dance and sing.
The Women are always smoking; they are very merry, and above all things love
Dancing in the Evenings, and at the New Moons: They dance in a-round, clapping
their Hands without stirring, except it be those in the middle, and sing the
first thing that comes into their Mouth's, Sense or Nonsense. These last in
dancing hold one Hand on their Heads, and the other behind, advancing the upper
part of their Bodies, and clapping their Feet on the Earth: their Postures are
lascivious and infamous, and chiefly when Boys dance with them; a Cablasse or a
Kettle serves them for Music; for some sort of Noise they must have.

The Exercises of the Men.
The Men exercise themselves in Wrestling, and in approaching one another use
ridiculous Postures; in holding out the Finger, the Fist, or the Foot at one
another. On this Occasion there is always one who acts the Guiriot, and who
makes some sort of Music to encourage them. Being naked, they hardly come to
the Ground without being hurt. And when one receives a fall, the Guiriot extols
him who gives it, encouraging him to more Victories over his Adversary, who
flees from him.

Their Fishing.
The greatest part who live by the Waterside are Fishers; they train up their
Children early to this Art; and make use of Canoo's; Their Canoo's.
they are little Boats, made of the hollow Trunk of a Tree, and all of a piece;
of which the largest may contain ten or twelve Men, being about 30 Foot long,
and about a Foot and a half wide. These Canoo's both sail and row. When the
Wind is high, and the Water rough, the Canoo often overturns, but they little
mind it, for they are good swimmers, and it does not sink to the bottom, so
they easily set it right again in the Water, and then get into it as if nothing
had happened: But row in them with such speed, that the lightest of our Sloops
cannot overtake them.

Their way of Fishing.
When they go a Fishing, commonly they don't go above two in a Canoo. They
launch out as good as six Leagues into the Sea, and for the most part fish with
a Line; but as there are great Fishes which will not bite at a Bait, they strike
them with Irons pointed like the Head of an Arrow, or with long Sticks sharpened
at the end, and of the length of a Halp-Pike, with a Cord fastened to it, with
which they draw them to Land, after wounding them.

Their neglect to preserve their Fish.
They dry the little Fish like Sardins, and they open the great ones, as they do
Cod. As they don't salt them, they commonly stink before they dry; but it is
then they reckon them most delicious, for they don't love fresh Fish. They sell
it to those who live up land; and would from them make great advantage of it,
if they would take the Pains of carrying it to the Towns; but the others being as
lazy to fetch it, as they are to carry it, betwixt them both the Fish stinks,
and becomes useless.

Their Markets.
Besides their Trade with us, they keep particular Markets for themselves, but
trivial, that I have admired to see them come six or seven Leagues with a
little Cotton, some Callicoes, Beans, Gourds, Palm, Pallets, etc. Another time
I saw a Man come six Leagues to bring a Bar of Iron half of a Foot long.

Not but that sometimes one meets there with Goods of greater value, as Rings
of Gold, and Gold Earrings, named by them Dougaret, of the same Metal, but
it is in so small a quantity, that in the whole Market you shall not find to the
value of fifty Pistols. Formerly they dealt wholly by the way of exchanging one
thing for another, but since their Commerce with the Europeans, instead of
Money they Trade with Rastade, and little Glass Baubles, and Iron Bars. The
best Things they bring us in these Markets, (which they keep at the end of some
Town) is Elephants Teeth, Bullocks Hides, and some Slaves, which they come to
Goree to sell; and for which Messiears of the Company give them Iron,
Aqua-Vitae, Rassade, etc. by which they make a considerable Gain.

Their Government Hereditary.
The Government there is Hereditary and Monarchical, yet it is not the Sons of
the King who succeed, but his Nephews, his Sisters Sons. This Custom, which may
seem a little odd, is grounded on this Reason, That it is not certain that the
Children the Prince has by his Wives are really his; whereas it being
undeniable, that the Children of his Sisters are certainly hers; and so it
follows, that they are rather of the Blood Royal than his own.

When the Prince comes to the Throne, every Body strives to Congratulate him,
because he has carried it from his Brothers; of whom there being commonly many,
the Empire always becomes contested, and falls to him that has the greatest
Force and the best Success.

How the King is approached.
The King is approached with Difficulty and Reverence; and few are admitted into
the Heart of his Court. When any great Lord, though he be his Relation, would
have Audience of him, he pulls off his Frock at his entrance into the Court,
being quite naked from the Waist upwards; when he draws near the place where
the King is, he throws himself on his Knees, afterward bows his Head, and with
his both Hands strews Sand on his Face and Head, then rises, and repeats the
same Ceremony often at such a distance, till he comes within two steps of the
King: Being there, he stops, and declares the Motives he had for demanding
Audience: His Compliment ended, which is made on the Knee, he rises without
daring to look at the King, resting his Hands on his Knees, and from time to
time sling Sand on his Forehead.

The Prince, who carries it very high to his Subjects, makes a show as if he
scarce heard him, and so diverts himself with something else; yet, however, at
last, he vouchsafes him a short Answer, with excessive Gravity. And then the
Suppliant rejoyns the Courtiers who are found there.

How Absolute and Respected he is.
I don't believe there are any Kings in the World more Absolute, and more
Respected than the Negroes, which proceeds from their Severity; for on the
least Offense of the Subject, an Order is sent to behead him; all his Goods are
confifcated, and his whole Family enslaved. The middle sort are happier than
the Great, being subject only to Captivity on these Occasions.

Who are well received by the King.
The Azoaghes, the Maraboux, and the French, have much more Liberty than the
Negroes; and we a great deal more than these. When the Europeans approach him,
they salute him with Reverence; and he presents them his Hand to lay it on
theirs. At this time he either sits or lies after the Fashion of the Negroes,
on a Bed, spread with a Quilt, covered with red Leather, How much he loves
Presents.
with a Pipe in his Mouth; he makes them sit down by him, and asks what they
have brought along with them.

As we never have these Audiences but when we have some Favor to request of
him, What Presents are brought him.
or to complain of his Officers, or of some Injuries offered the Whites, we
never come without Presents; which commonly consists in ten or twelve Pots of
Aqua-Vitae, a little Sugar, some Garlic, five or six Else of Linen, and some
bits of Coral.

Remark on the Reception of Envoys.
When an Envoy has any thing about him that pleases the King, as Coat,
Stockings, Shoes, Sword, or Hat; he desires to try them, and then makes them
his own; he did thus a little after our arrival to an Envoy of Monsieur
Dancourt; from whom he took a Brocard Waistcoat, his Stockings, Hat, and
Shoes; so that he had been forced to return naked, if by chance he had not
carried other Clothes with him, that were of a lesser value than the other.

While the Aqua-Vitae lasts, he is never sober; so that their's no expecting an
Answer, till it is all out; when he is sober he dismisses the Envoy, giving him
two or three Slaves, The Presents of the King of the Negroes.
which he sends to his Guards to take away at the first Village. Miserable are
they who fall under their Hands at that time, for they never stand to choose,
but the first at hand serves the present Occasion.

Whatever Care one takes to supply ones self with Provisions when one comes to
solicit any thing at this Court; yet you run the risk of starving; for the
King demands them; and eats above one half himself; and in return, he gives you
a Kid, or a quarter of a Cammel, which is very ill Food, a little Coscouse, and
some Palm-wine.

Remarks on the Injustice of the Negro Kings.
While I was in this Country, a pleasant thing happened; which shows the Power
that Presents have over these Kings, and what little Regard they have to
Justice: Two little Tributary Kings to Damel, were at strife concerning the
Succession to a little poor Sovereignty; they were Brother and Son to the late
Prince, and bottomed their Pretensions on diverse Reasons, too tedious, and too
inconsiderable to be mentioned here. They proposed to end their Difference by
force, or the King's decision; the King having forbid the first, they were
forced to stand to his Judgment.

On the Day appointed for giving Judgment in their Difference, the two Parties
met in the great Place before the Court, accompanied with great Numbers, that
seemed to form two Battalions, about thirty Yards distant from one another;
they were armed with Darts, Bows, Zagages, Javelins, and Morisco Knives; the
King followed by six hundred Men, accoutred with their Gris-Gris's, appeared
mounted on a fine Barbary Horse, and so placed himself betwixt the two Rivals.

Though they all spoke the same Language, yet they made use of Interpreters, who
told the King again what they heard. The Son of the deceased ended his
Discourse, in remonstrating to him, That seeing it had pleased GOD to bestow
the Sovereignty in dispute on his Father, the Right of it now belonged to him,
which he hoped his Majesty would confirm to him. The King having heard him
attentively, said to him with an Air full of Gravity, GOD has given it you, and
I give it you again after him.

Such an Answer presently dispersed the Party of the Uncle, who retired all
alone. The Guiriot's with their Instruments and their Drums, celebrated the
Praises of the Victorious, saying to him, You best deserved it, the King has
done you Justice; for you are more Handsome, more Rich, and more Valiant than he.

While this poor Prince thought to enjoy his Happiness, he was surprised to see
himself stripped next morning of this* Sovereignty, with which he was newly
Invested; for his Uncle losing no time, made such a noble Present to the King,
that he forgot that of his Nephew, and dispossessed him in the Morning of that
which he had given him the Night before, Installing the other in his Place.
This change of Fortune made the Guiriots change their Note, and now bestowed
all their Praises on him whom they despised before: Such is the Perfidiousness
both of Prince and Subject.

What is the Conduct of the King when he goes a Progress.
To return to what concerns the King in particular; when he goes a Progress he
has no need of Vivandiers, for he is provided for, by the several Villages,
through which he passes. They serve him up sometimes 50 wooden Dishes of
Causcouse, seasoned after several ways; he receives those which agree with his
Palate, and gives the rest to his Attendants, who are frequently as hungry
after Dinner as before; for you must know, they have all great Stomachs.

The Negroes manner of eating.
They all eat very nastily, lying along on the Ground, taking it up by handfuls;
making no use either of Napkins or Plates. No Body eats with the King but the
Grand Marabou, or one of the most accomplished Lords, and very often he eats
alone.

He will by no means suffer the Thoubabes (for so he calls us) to see him at
Meals; I believe he conceals himself from us, as believing we eat better, and
with more Decency than his Custom will allow; or rather, that he is ashamed of
his Poverty. Amongst the meaner sort, all of a Family eat together: Their first
Dish is Couscouse, and when they have done with that, they fall aboard the
Flesh, which they tear in Pieces with their Fingers, making no use at all of
their Knives; and after they have gnawed it, they put it into the Dish again
for the next. They use only their Right Hand in eating; which is always at Noon
and Night; for they reserve the Left Hand wholly for Labor, and on that
account they esteem it an Indecency to eat with it.

The Officers of King Damel.
The King has several Ministers of State under him, who assist him in the
Government, and in the Exercise of Justice. Condy, who is a Tributary
Sovereign, is after the manner of our Constable, and is General of his Forces,
the Grand Geraff is the chief Justice throughout all the Dominions of King
Damel; he goes the Circuits from time to time to execute Justice, and hear the
Complaints of the People; and he generally does Justice out of hand, for he
punishes a Thief with Slavery. It being a rarity for a Man of a mean Condition
to be inflicted with the Punishment of Death.

The King's Alzari Exercises the same Employ as the Geraff, but his Power is
more limited: He has under him Alkaties or Alkairs of great Villages, that are
as particular Lords of them.

When a Negro is accused of any Crime, of which he cannot easily be convicted,
in order to his Justification, they oblige him to lick a red-hot Iron three
times: If it burns him, he is reputed guilty; if not, he and his Accuser leaves
the Court, and the Process falls without Costs.

How and for what the Negro Kings make upon one anocher.
The Negro Kings go to War with one another on every small Pretext. And when any
such Occasion happens, the Condy assembles all the great Lords, and the rest of
the Subjects; of which he composes his Cavalry and his Infantry. They seldom
have a Body of above 12 or 1500 Men, so that their War is only a sort of
Skirmishing Excursion. In all the Kingdom of Damel you can scarce raise 200
Horse: The Men of Quality in the Army, especially the Horse, are loaded with
Gris-Gris, as I have already observed; so that when they are once dismounted,
they are not able to march four paces on foot.

The Arms of the Horse.
Their Horse are armed with Zagayes, which is a sort of a Dart, long and large,
with three or four Spears, bigger than those of Arrows, and have several small
Hooks, that tears open the wound when they draw it. They can cast these Zagayes
a great way, and go very rarely without them: Besides these they have a
Cimeter, and a Morisco Knife, about half a Yard long, and two Inches wide: They
guard the Blows with a round Buckler made of thick Leather; and though they are
encumbred with so many Utensils, yet they have their Hands and Arms at liberty,
and can fight smartly.

The Arms of the Foot.
The Foot are armed with a Cimeter, a Javelin, and a Quiver filled with fifty or
sixty poisoned Arrows, that wound mortally, if they are not immediately seer'd
with hot Irons.

The Teeth of their Iron-headed Arrow produces another miserable effect; for
they cannot be drawn back, without making the Wound more dangerous than before.

Their Bow is made of a Cane, resembling that which we call a Bamboo. That
which they make use of for the String, is another sort of Wood, very curiously
fitted up for that purpose. They are so dextrous in shooting out of Bows, that
at fifty Yards distance they will hit a Mark, the breadth of a Crown piece. They
march without any order of Discipline, even in the Enemies Country. The
Guiriot's excite them to Battle by the sound of their Instruments.

As soon as they are within shot, the Infantry discharge their Arrows, and the
Horse cast their Javelins. This discharge is followed with blows of Zagayes.
They spare their Enemies as much as possible, that they may make the more
Slaves; from which their Persons of Quality are not exempted. And as they are
naked and expert in the using their Bows, etc. their Wars are always very
Bloody. They are very resolute, and had rather lose their Lives, that be guilty
of the least Cowardice. The despite that is showed to a Coward amongst them,
and the fear of losing their Liberty, does very much augment their Courage.

Their way making Peace.
Their first shock being over, they often renew it again for two or three Days
together; afterward send a Marabou of each side to treat of a Peace. When they
have agreed on the Conditions, they swear upon the Alcoran, and by Mahomet, to
the observing them; though they know very little of the one or the other. The
Prisoners on either side receive no Benefit of the Treaty, but continue Slaves
as if the War was eternal.

See here the best Account I could give of these Countries, if I can discover
any Thing farther, before my return into Europe, I shall give you an exact
Account thereof, in Compliance with the Desires of my Friends, who enjoined me
to communicate my Observations to them. My little knowledge of Writing, and my
indifferent Style, will soon let them see, I am not capable of transmitting to
them these Relations. All that they must attribute to me, is Fidelity and Truth
in them, which I prefer before all the Romantic amusing Accounts in the World.

FINIS.
THE Bookseller's Advertisement TO THE READER.
A Particular Person that is very knowing, having traveled the Coasts of
Africa, and seen the Author of this Voyage at Gozee, has sent me these
following Relations: I thought my self obliged to publish them, for the Benefit
of the Public, and affix them to this; withal, acquainting you, that they are
not the Remarks of the Sieur le Maire.

Relations of the Islands and adjacent Places of the Rivers of Bresalina,
Gambia, Zamenee, St. Domingo, Geve, etc.
THE Kingdom of the Barbasines who are almost all Mohammedan Negroes) is of
small extent, The Kingdom of the Barbasine.
having not above six or seven Leagues of Coast: It joins with that of the
Joloffes, beginning at a Village called Jovalle, situated on the Seacoasts,
and inhabited by some Mulatters and Portuguese. There is another small Village
which they call Coringua, which is nearer to Cape Verde, and a Dependant of
Jovalle, where commonly they drive the greatest Trade.

About six or seven Leagues higher you meet with the River Bresalma, The River
Bresalma.
whose Mouth is very large, but choked up with Sand-Beds, that nothing but
Canoo's, Shalops, and little Barks can go into the River: The Trade of this
Kingdom is very inconsiderable, the Country affording no valuable Commodities;
yet the Portuguese buy Salt and Provisions here.

The River of Gambia.
On the same Coast, two Leagues higher, is the River Gambia, which has two
Channels for Vessels, one to the North, and another to the South, where Ships
of four hundred Tun may easily enter. You must first sound the Passage with a
Sloop, for fear of striking upon the Sands: Being passed, you meet bending
toward the North, the Kingdom of Baria; The Kingdom of Baria.
whose King lives a quarter of a League from the Sea. The Inhabitants are
called Maudingues, and are for the most part Mahometans.

The Isle of Dogs.
The Isle of Dogs, to which you may go dry-foot at low Water, is directly
opposite, in the River. The French did formerly inhabit it, but they had their
Throats cut by the Negroes. Since which it has been wholly deserted, being of
no Consequence.

The Flouppes Negroes, of whom I shall speak hereafter, are directly at the
Entrance of the South Side.

Albroda.
Six Leagues farther up the River to the North is the Town called Albroda,
where, before the War, the French had an Establishment: But the English have
one now, at a Village called Zeelfray, about a League higher on the same Shore.

They have also a Regular Fort in the Island over against it; which is not
above half a quarter of a League about, built on a gravelly Rock.

This Fort has above fifty Pieces of Cannon mounted, which are of no great use
for want of Men to manage them: They are forced to fetch all their Water and
Wood from the main Land. These are they who have the best share of all the
Trade that is driven on this River; which chiefly consists in Negroe Slaves,
Ivory, and Wax. It is Navigable above two hundred Leagues.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE River ZAMENEE.
THE River Zamenee is inhabited by several sorts of Negroes, those at its Mouth
toward the North call themselves Floupes, a People extremely Savage, with whom
no Nation has any Commerce. They are all Pagans; having every one his God
according to his particular Inclinations; Idolatry of the Negroes.
one worships a Bullocks Horn, another a Beast, or a Tree, to whom they offer
Sacrifice according to their own manner.

Their Habits.
Their Dress is like those of Cape Verd, and the Inhabitants of the River
Gambia, which consists in a Piece of Cotton Cloth, striped after the manner of
the Country, which barely covers their nakedness.

Have no Kings.
They have no succession of Kings, the most Absolute and most Powerful amongst
them Commands.

They understand Cultivation very well, and make very good Improvements of
their Lands, which they sow with Mill and Rice. Their Riches.
Their Riches consists in Bullocks, Cows, Goats; of which some of them have
great quantities. They possess the Coast all along as far as the River Gambia,
and about six Leagues into the Land. Their Towns are well Peopled, and about a
quarter of a League distant one from another.

The Cruelties of the Negroes or Flouppes.
The Negroes or Filouppes that inhabit the South Entrance of this River, are
exceeding barbarous and cruel; for when they can catch any white Men they give
'em no quarter; and some say they eat them.

These are in possession of the Country all along the Coast to a Town called
Boulol, which stands at the Mouth of the River of St. Domingo. This Coast is
much better Peopled than that of Gambia: The Villages are about two Leagues
distant one from another, and about half a League from the Sea.

About seven or eight Leagues farther, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea makes
a little River, which leads to the Town of Jam, where the Portuguese make great
Quantities of Wax, which they traffic with by Land to Gambia and Cacheaux.

The adjacent Countries are inhabited by Negroes who are called Bagnons; and
these have a King that lives twelve or thirteen Leagues from the Sea.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE River St. Domingo.
The River of St. Domingo.
THE River of St. Domingo runs from East to West, winding a matter of two
hundred Leagues. It Is also inhabited by different sorts of Negroes, and by the
Portuguese, who have several Towns there.

At the North Entrance of it there is small Fort belonging to the Portuguese,
mounted with four Guns, and commanded by Sergeant and four Soldiers.

Four Leagues higher on the same Shore, near the Village of Boulet, is the
little River of Linguim, which runs a matter of nine or ten Leagues under
Ground, and then loses it self. It is possessed and cultivated by the Bagnon
Negroes, who are all Idolaters, and very much dreaded by their Neighbors.

The Village of Quongain is directly at its Entrance, where abundance of
Portuguese and Gourmets inhabit, who make great store of Wax there.

The River Boguinda.
The River Boguinda is on the same Coast, about three Leagues higher than the
Tide comes: It spreads it self twelve or fifteen Leagues into the Land,
inhabited by the same sort of People, who, as I have told you before, traffic
altogether with Wax. It Is the ordinary Passage from Cacheau to Jam.

The Wood of Matteformose.
On the Entrance of the River of St. Domingo to the South, is a large Wood
called Matteformose; and a Village inhabited by the Flouppes, much more
civilized than those I have mentioned before: With whom a Trade is maintained
for Slaves and Provisions, but chiefly for great Quantities of Rice.

Going up the River about two Leagues, you meet with a small Rivolet, which is
not Navigable, but separates the Flouppes from the Papels.

The Papels Sacrifice.
The Papels are Pagan Negroes, all Idolaters, as the former. They have a King
who dwells five or six Leagues from them: When any considerable Person dies,
they sacrifice Bullocks, Cows, Kids, and Capon to their Gods, which are for the
most part one or more Trees, the Horn of an Ox, etc.

The Town of Cacheau.
In the same Road, about four Leagues higher, you find the Town of Cacheau; now
in the Hands of the Portuguese, who have three Forts there; the chief of which
may have about ten or twelve Guns, and the other two, three, or four each. A
Captain-Major has the Government of it, who has a dependence on the Governor of
Cape Verd, they are every Year recruited with thirty or forty Portnguese
Soldiers, who are generally banished Criminals; they supplying the Places of
those who die for want of wholesome Diet, by necessity, or by an over addicting
themselves to Women. It Is designed them a Place of Exile, though they often find
it happy enough. There may be about three hundred Inhabitants in the Town, who
are for the most part Mullato's; the other may have Wives or Concubines.

There is in the Town a Receiver of the King's Customs; for the Ships that come
to traffic there pay ten per Cent. for coming in and going out. There is a
Grefferi or Writer, who holds the Place both of Public Notary and Sheriff:
it is the Governor who administers Justice. There is a Parochial Church, a
Curate, and a Visitator, who is in the Nature of the great Vicar of France; for
he always makes Visitations on behalf the Bishop of St. James.

There is also a Convent of Capuchins, where there are seldom more than three
or four Religious.

The Inhabitants of the Town have little Boats and Barks, in which they trade
on the Rivers of Nonne, Pougues, Serlione, and to the Islands of the Bezagots,
where they have a great Commerce with Wax, Slaves, and some small pieces of
Ivory.

The Town of Farim.
The Portuguese have yet another Town, a great way higher up the River, about
one hundred and fifty Leagues from Cacheau, called Farim, pallasodo'd round;
but the Inhabitants are not so numerous as at Cacheau; though the greatest part
of them, have Somer-Houses here, where their Gourmet's make Calico's, and some
small quantities of Wax. There is also a Curate, and a Captain-Major* who is
dependant on the Town of Cacheau. The Negroes that inhabit the adjacent
Countries are called Maudingues: All the Villages from Cacheau to Farim are
Peopled by the Gourmets of the Portuguese, who gather Cotton, etc.

The Three Islands.
Going Southward out of the River of St. Domingo, you meet several Islands, the
first is called the Three Islands, which effectively has that Figure. Possessed
by the Gourmots or Negroes, who have freed themselves from the Slavery of the
Portuguese; and most of them, though they are baptized, have renounced the
Catholic Faith. They cultivate this Island, which produces great store of
Cotton, of which they make their Cloth. They have Cannoo's to serve them in
their Traffic with the Negroes ofthe Continent. The Place which they pass is
called the Bott. They are very careful not to let any Vessels or Barks approach
their Island.

The Isle of Bussi.
Over Against it is the Island of Bussi, in Possession of the Papels, who have a
King not very Absolute. The Sea is so shallow there, that one may pass to it
without being up to the mid-leg.

Their Treachery.
It Is dangerous trading with them, till their ways are thoroughly known; for
their strange mistrust, makes them believe there is no Sincerity in us. I know
that several English and Dutch, have been there massacred for endeavoring to
trade with them. They abound in Provisions, as Oxen, Foul, Fish, Mill, etc. but
they are of a very indifferent relish. Their Island is about ten Leagues in
Circuit, and has two Ports, the one to the East, which is called Old Port; the
other to the South, which called White-stone Harbor.

The Village of Cazelut.
Right over against it, is the Village of Cazelut, and many small Islands, which
are not inhabited. Very near it you find the Island of Bisseaux, about two
Leagues distant. A Vessel of three hundred Tun may pass betwixt them both, if
the Channel be well known. It Is about forty Leagues in compass; the Papel
Negroes that inhabit it are almost all Pagans. There are in this Island nine
Kings; which one is superior to the other eight; which properly are no more
than Deputy Governors.

Their Cruelty when any of their Kings die.
When any of the King's die, they take care to strangle above thirty Persons,
chiefly the young Girls, and those Slaves that have been the most faithful to
the Deceased, whom they bury along with them. They put with him into his Tomb
all his Riches, as his Gold, Silver, Amber Gris, Stuffs, etc.

When they choose another it is after this manner; How they elect their Kings.
they are only the Gearges that make Pretensions, which are, as I may say, the
Dukes and Peers of France. They gather together in a Ring, in the middle of
which is the Tomb of the deceased King, made of Reeds and very light Wood,
which is sustained in the Air by several Negroes, who in dancing toss it up,
and he on whom it falls, they choose for their King in the room of the Deceased:
they often sacrifice to their Gods, Bullocks, Capons, Kids, etc. There are
several good Harbors in this Island, the best of which is called
Port-Risseaux, where Ships of sixty Guns may ride at Anchor in safety. The
King's Palace is within half a League of it: there is one Parish, and a Convent
of Capuchins; several of the Portuguese are married to the Negresses of the
Country.

There are several of those Heathens Sons have received Baptism, and embraced
the Catholic Doctrine. The King has his Guards, his Army, and several Women of
all Ages. He has a-about fifty Cannoo's of War manned with about thirty Men
each. For their Arms they have only a Cimiter hanging on their Shoulders by a
short Belt. And are Clothed only with the Skin of a Kid, which hangs loose
behind, and is fastened before betwixt their Legs, to hide their Nudities. They
go to War agaiust the Biaffares, who inhabited the Continent, twice or thrice a
Year.

Their Arms and Habit.
The Portuguese formerly built a Fort there, mounted with eight Guns, to hinder
Strangers from coming to that Isle, that they might engross it all to
themselves: But the Negroes will not suffer it, for they are all Sticklers for
the Liberties of their Country, which occasions a welcome to all manner of
Strangers, that come to traffic in their Ports, who may Negotiate in the
Island with all imaginable Security, without dreading any Insult, if you offer
none. When you arrive at their Ports, you are not suffered to land till the
King has a sacrifis'd a Bullock; which done, you have liberty to disembark.

Just over against the Port is an Island called Sortiere, full of Trees, where
the Negroes make their grand Sacrifices every Year, in which the King himself
assists. Vessels anchor very safely there.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE River GEVA.
The River Geva.
THE River of Geva winds it self about 70 Leagues into the Continent, from
North-East to South-West. All the Villages of either side (which are about a
League from the Sea) are inhabited by the Biaffares. At the Entrance of the
River, toward the North, is a Village called Gouffode, about a League from the
Harbor: there it is where Bullocks and Poultry are to be sold; and they also
traffic for some Slaves.

On the same River, abous five Leagues higher, is the Town of Geva; the
greatest part is possessed by the Portuguese and Gournets, which is encompassed
with Pallasadoes.

They have a Parish Church, a Curate, and a Captain who commands them, and is
dependent on the Governor of Cacheau: The adjacent Places are inhabited by the
Negro Biaffares; most of the Portuguese have Barks in the Port, in which they
trade to Serlienne, with a sort of Fruit called Cocters, which both in shape
and taste resembles the Marous of India; they are both white and red, for which
they drive a great trade, especially with the Biaffares and Mandingues. They
also send their Barks to trade with the Bizagot Negroes on the River Nounne for
Elephants Teeth, etc. Indigo in the Leaf, which they die their Clothes with.

The Barks can go no higher than Goree; but their Cannoo's will go up several
little Rivers of small note. Just over against the Port you meet with several
little Islands, especially that of Boulam; The Isle of Boulam.
well stocked with Trees, and about six Leagues in compass, lying just at the
Entrance of the River Riogrando, but not inhabited. The other Islands are so
inconsiderable, I do not think it worth while to mention them. I shall say
nothing of Cape-Verd, Senegal, or the Canary Islands, understanding that the
Sieur le Maire, with the Assistance of Monsieur D' Ancourt has said more than I
am capable of saying.

FINIS.

