A COMMENTARY Upon the BOOK of the REVELATION.

WHEREIN The Text is explained, the Series of the several Prophecies contained
in that Book, deduced according to their order and dependence upon each other;
the periods and succession of times, at, or about which, these Prophecies, that
are already fulfilled, began to be, and were more fully accomplished, fixed and
applied according to History; And those that are yet to be fulfilled, modestly,
and so far as is warrantable, enquired into.

Together with Some practical Observations, and several Digressions, necessary
for vindicating, clearing, and confirming many weighty and important Truths.

Delivered in several Lectures, by that learned, laborious, and faithful
Servant of Jesus Christ, JAMES DVRHAM, Late Minister of the Gospel in Glasgow.

To which is affixed a brief Summary of the whole Book, with a twofold Index,
one of the several Digressions, another of the chief and principal purposes
and words contained in this Treatise.

2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works.

Revel. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein: for the time is at
hand.

Revel. 22.7. Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keeps the sayings of
the Prophecy of this Book.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, Anno Dom. 1658.

To the Judicious and Christian READER.
THe Reverend (now triumphing and glorified) Author, was so famous and
deservedly in very high esteem in our Church, both because of the singular and
extraordinary way of Gods calling him forth to the Ministry of the Gospel,
having left the University (wherein I was at the same time a Student) before he
had finished his course of Philosophy, and without any purpose to follow his
book, at least in order to such an end; and having lived several years a
private Gentleman with his wife and children, enjoying a good estate in the
Country, from which he did, no doubt, to the great dissatisfaction of many of
his natural friends, and with not a little prejudice to his outward condition,
retire, and (being called thereto) humbly offer himself to trials, far from his
own home, in order to his being licentiated to preach the Gospel; in the
Ministry whereof, he was immediately thereafter settled here at Glasgow, where
it has not wanted a seal in the consciences and hearts of his hearers: And
also, because of his eminent piety, steadfastness, gravity, prudence,
moderation, and other great abilities, whereof the venerable General Assembly
of this Church had such persuasion, that they did, in the year 1650. after
mature deliberation, very unanimously pitch upon him, though then but about
eight and twenty years of age, as amongst the ablest, sickerest, and most
accomplished Ministers therein, to attend the Kings family; in which station,
though the times were most difficult, as abounding with tentations and snares,
with jealousies, heart-burnings, emulations and animosities, and flowing with
high tides of many various and not a few contrary humors, he did so wisely and
faithfully behave and acquit himself, that there was a conviction thereof left
upon the consciences of all who observed him, and so as he had peace through
Jesus Christ as to that ministration: The Author, I say, was in these and other
respects so famous, that he needs no Testimony or Epistles of commendation,
especially from so obscure and worthless a person; yet, being of his
particular and very intimate acquaintance, daily conversant with him, and
withal his ordinary Hearer, being in a good providence Coleagued with him in
the Ministry (though a most unequal yoke fellow to so strong a labourer) I
thought it my duty to give thee some brief hint both of himself (who loved
always to be hid, except when it was necessary for him to appear) and of his
Book, wherein thou will find that the spirit of Mr. Durham was not of an
ordinary elevation; notwithstanding whereof, as, in Preaching the Gospel, he
liked not to soar and hide himself from the Hearers in a cloud of words (it was
not in the wisdom of words, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power
that he taught) So in his writing, he used the same plainness of speech; how
low soever his style seems to be, I nothing doubt but that every intelligent
Reader will find such certainty of truth to satisfy the mind, and such
sweetness of matter to engage the affections, that he will count the Author an
Interpreter one among a thousand. And therefore, if at any time thou miss, as
possibly thou may, that comptnesse and finenesse of phrase which in this
phrasing and wordie age is much in use, Know that he had so very sharp and
pregnant an ingine, and so exceeding rich and fruitful an invention, that they
ordinarily did outstripe and go beyond his expression and pen, so that these
could very hardly and but seldom hold foot with him: beside, if his expression
was such as might make his meaning be conceived by the Hearers or Readers, he
did not at all affect, neither could be stay, being so close in his pursuit of
the matter, to chase, or follow after, fine words (so that I may here, without
all complement, according to the proverb, say, Aquila non captat muscas;) yet
none of his expressions were base and unsuitable to the matter, but,
ordinarily, very massy, significant and expressive of his meaning, though
plain and simple, and, it may be, sometimes not so beautifully situated, nor so
adorning and out-setting of it, as possibly some would be at, which the Lord,
in the depth of His wisdom, did so order, that, as the Author himself might be
kept humble (and indeed he did exemplarily shine in humility) so no other
should think of him above what was meet: for, it has been thought by some,
while hearing him discourse, that if he had bad such a polished style and so
well combed words as several others have, whose matter yet falls exceedingly
short of his, he would have been looked upon as a very rare and singular man in
his generation, as really he was, and as these same Lecturs of his upon the
Revelation (which he was by many importuned to publish) will readily give
ground to think of him: which, though for substance (except as to these few
intermixed solidly, succinctly, and, I hope, satisfyingly discussed questions)
they were delivered by him to the people of his charge within a very short
time, one of them every Lord's Day before Sermon, when all that time he did also
preach twice a week at least, and most ordinarily thrice, beside his daily
public Lecturing every fifth week according to his course in the City, and all
his other Ministerial duties of Catechizing, ^isiting of the sick, exhorting
of the whole from house to house, and his weekly meetings with the
Congregationall Eldership for the exercise of Discipline, most dexterously,
faithfully, condescendingly and indefatigably discharged by him toward about
fifteen hundred souls, of whom he alone as Minister had the oversight; yet in
the whole series and contexture thereof, thou will, notwithstanding, find as
much solidity, sobriety and modesty, much quickness and sagacity, and very
much plainness and perspicuity (considering the obscurity ( comparative I
mean) of this Scripture) which is rare, sweetly kissing and embracing each
other; so likewise thou w^lt discover, beside a clear explication of the Text
of this Book and convincing proofs of the Pope of Rome his being that
Antichrist (a main scope of it) even to the awakening of the lamentably decayed
zeal of the people of God against that Beast, drunk with the blond of Saints,
after whom, so considerable a part of the Christian world, and that to the
great offense of the Jews, is, alas, still wondering; thou will, I say, beside
those, discover vast lecture in History, great light in the Scriptures, and
very deep reach in the profoundest and most intricate things in Theology, to a
public profession whereof, in this University of Glasgow, he was sometime (to
wit, a little before his being appointed to attend the Kings Family) by the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, authorized for visiting the said
University, most unanimously and solemnly designed and called, to the great
satisfaction and refreshment of many, and more particularly and especially of
famous and worthy Mr. Dickson, to whom the precious Author was chosen to
succeed in that Profession, (he being called to a Profession of the same nature
in the University of Edinburgh) as one of the ablest and best furnished men
(all things being considered) ^n our Church, that were not already engaged in
such employments, and most likely to fill Mr. Dicksons room: But, his work will
speak for it self, and praise him in the gate, and, no doubt, provoke the
Reader, as to bless God for him, so to lament the Churches great loss in the
removal of such an useful Instrument, in the very flower, prime, and vigor
of his grace, gifts and age, being but about six and thirty years: which loss,
is so much the greater, that he was eminently and beyond many, as several
other ways; so, through the healing disposition, and great moderation of
spirit given unto him, fitted to deal in the edification-obstructing
differences of this poor (...) and divided Church, as may further afterward
appear by a Piece of his concerning Scandal shortly, if the Lord will, to be
published. I will not detain thee much longer from perusing of this Work, only
I shall in short give thee an account (left his way of Writing should be
mistaken by any, because it differs from that which others, especially of
late* have followed to the no small edification of the Church of God) of the
reasons inducing the Author (as he once passingly showed me upon his deathbed)
to insert these questions that are by way of digression more largely handled in
this Book. 1. The importunity of some friends. 2. His persuasion of the
soundness and in-offensivenesse of the matter: wherein, though he has here
and there differed from some great men; yet has he carried the difference with
so much meekness, and so few irritating or reflecting expressions, dealing
only by the strength of simple reason, that he has cast a copy, worthy to be
followed by others in this eristick age. 3. Some apprehension, that to not a
few that way of touching upon some questions might be more pleasing and taking.
4. To prevent drowning, as it were, in following the series and tract of the
story and Commentary, according to the practice of several Learned and worthy
men in their Writings upon the Scripture. 5. Because the clearing of some
places along the Book it self did call for several of them. 6. That if they
might any way at all be useful, they should not altogether perish, there
having been no other convenient way for the publishing of them; and indeed it
had been a pity to have smothered and kept them from seeing the light, for I
have sometimes heard him in his sickness, profess, that (however fectlesse
they were) as he had peace in his mind, that there was no new, uncouth or
strange thing in them, So he could not deny but that sometimes in them and
other parts of the Book, he had found God sensibly assisting and carrying him
through beyond his own expectation. Now, desiring that these labors of the
Author, which were intermixed with much prayer to God (for, all the while he
was a Lecturing upon this Scripture (and since) there was a considerable part
of a day every week extraordinarily set apart for prayer, as for other causes,
so, no doubt, for seeking Gods help in that work) desiring, I say, that these
prayer-full labors of his may be richly blessed of God to thee, for making thee
read the Revelation (which, it may be, has lain by thee, for most of it at
least, as a sealed book hitherto) with more understanding, edification and
comfort than ever; and desiring withal, that the bright and Morning Star, who
holds the Stars in His right hand, may illuminate and fix many Stars of such
magnitude, and keep them long brightly shining in the firmament of His Church,
for the direction, guidance and comfort thereof in these cloudy and sad times,
I am, at least would be, Christian,

Glasgow, the 23. of September, 1658. Thy servant for CHRIST'S sake, in the work
of the Gospel, JOHN CARSTAIRS.

READER,
BEing desired to speak my knowledge of this subsequent Work, I acknowledge
that I was one who frequently encouraged the Author to let it go abroad. For,
however he had no time to polish it, and what is here almost all was taken from
his month by the pen of an ordinary hearer: yet I am assured, the matter of it,
as I heard it weekl^ delivered, is so preci us as cannot but be very welcome and
acceptable to the world of Believers. I am confident, that the gracious design
which some worthy Brethren among us have in hand, and have now far advanced to
the good satisfaction of all who have asted of the first fruits of their
Labors, of making the body of holy Scriptures plain and useful to vulgar
capacities, is not a little furthered by this Piece: For, albeit with greater
length (as the nature of the book of necessity did require) than these
Brethrens design of ^hortuesse does admit; yet it makes very plain and useful
that without all question hardest of all Scriptures. This I can say, that
diverse of the most obscure texts of that holy Book, which I unde^stood little
at the beginning of his Lecture, before he closed his Exercise, were made to me
so clear, that I judged his Exposition might well be aquiesced into without
much more debate.

That wit were more than ordinary weak, which durst promise from the pen of any
man a clear and certain Exposition of all the Revelation before the day of
performance o^ these very deep and mysterious Prophesies. It was not for
naught, that most judicious Calvin and acute Beze, with many other profound
Divines, would never be moved to attempt any Explication of that Book: Yet I
hope I may make bold to a^firm, without hazard of any heavy cen^ure, that
there is here laid Such a bridge over that very d^ep river, that who ever goe^h
over it, shall have cause to bless God for the Authors labor.

The Epistle speaks to the man, I shall add but this one word, That from the
day I was employed by the Presbytery to preach and pray and to impose, with
others, hands upon him for the Ministry at Glasgow, I did live to the very
last with him in great and uninterrupted love, and in an high estimation of his
egregious endu^ments, which made him to me precious among the most excellent
Divines I have been acquainted with in the whole Isle. O i^ it were the good
pleasure of the Master of the Vineyara to plant many such noble Vines in this
Land! I hope many more of his Labors shall follow this first, and that the
more quickly as this does receive the due and expected acceptance.

Thine in the LORD, ROBERT BALIE.

An INDEX of the principal Questions and Controversies which are discussed and
cleared in this TREATISE.
1. Concerning the holy Trinity, and Object of Worship, page 6 2. Concerning a
Calling to the Ministry, and clearness therein, 52 3. Concerning Writing, 61
4. Of Reading and Hearing, 64 5. Concerning Church Government and Discipline in
general, 82 6. Concerning a Ministers relation to a particular Congregation,
104 7. Concerning the nature and di^ference of common and saving grace, 119 8.
Concerning the influence the Devil has on some wicked men's actions, and how he
carries on the same, 149 9. Concerning Ministerial qualifications, 198 10.
Concerning the identity of Angel, Bishop and Presbyter, 223 11. Concerning the
way of Covenanting with God, and of a sinners obtaining justification before
Him, 234 12. Concerning Repentance, 248 13. Some general Observations
concerning Preaching, and especially Application, 260 14. Concerning the nature
of Christ's death; or, if it be properly a satisfaction, 295 15. Concerning the
extent of the merit of Christ's death, or, if it may be accounted a satisfaction
for all men, 299 16. Concerning Christ's Intercession, 407 17. Concerning
learned Mede his Synchronisms, 333 18. Concerning the comfortless grounds laid
down in Popery, for easing afflicted consciences, 445 19. Concerning the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome, 454 20. Concerning Prophesying, 469 21.
Concerning a Ministers particular Message to a particular Auditory, and if it
may be again and again insisted on and repeated, 472 22. Concerning the
Waldenses, 501 23. Concerning the Constitution of true Churches by Reformation,
out of such as have been corrupt, 516 24. Concerning the unity of the Catholic
visible Church, 538 25. Concerning the difficulty of salvation under Popery,
584
Reader, thou will find the particulars, relating to each of these heads,
digested in the following Table at the end of the Book, according to the order
of the Alphabet: And besides, in the perusal of the Book, thou will find a
detectable variety of other concerning-questions, right satisfyingly, though
but shortly, handled.

ERRATA
Discreet Reader,
THe distance of the Author from the Press, his continual sickness from the
time of the off-coming of the very first sheets of this Piece, a part whereof
100 was since that time transcribed, which he was never abie well to revise,
and his removal by death a long time before the finishing of it, have
occasioned several escapes, viz.

Page. Line. Read. 9 56 named: and dele be 11 27 dele in after believed 16 27
dele no 18 3 their fixing in their, etc. 19 40 lovely 24 50 this Scripture 30
34 no other solid 44 16 in our way of exercising the same 79 ^6 formally 84 56
to ^o i^ ibid ult. if it had 88 50 of 106 34 Gal. 4 26. 116 16 preceeded ibid
28 seeing also the removing 117 17 an call 118 52 Nazianzum 119 26 their reason
127 36 objects 128 46, 47 but gold simply, is not only to be tried by the
weight. 132 3 dele which 135 38 rational 137 56 because they are such 139 17
dele 1. 140 48 and in things spiritual 145 11 or if it may 149 10 rare 156 16
his ordinances 178 10 they may be 184 6 blank 186 19 to have 193 34 freeness
194 15 either 195 42 poor creature 197 49 third chapter 198 14 improving 199 21
equally 203 12 as well as the fruit 218 56 main 219 55 4. If 221 53 close the
parenthesis before such as 224 10 after Ancients, add make against this 225 22
agreement ibid 44 Presbyter 226 49 Seduliu^ Scotus ibid ult. presbytero 228 38
2. Because these 232 33 Philip. 1. 235 47 dele etc. 236 37, 38 In this indeed
243 51 1. Because 245 48 they are 247 13 upon that account 250 40 purposed 257
40 cannot but be again renewed 267 22 events that were to fall out to all the
world 278 21 in the beasts praise 296 8 Christ's death and sufferings were not
only for ibid 24 as man 298 16 cap. 1. v. 4, 5. 299 36 eternal sufferings 301
35 Job. 17.6. and 9 304 37 premises 329 18, 19 close the paren. thesis after
the sixth preceding 331 48 and the party 334 53 trumpets 339 47 by one of the
Sabbaths ibid 46 Chap. 5. 342 38 word 348 20 Saturninians 352 19 Basilidians,
Carpocratians ibid 28 lib. 8. 361 43 of this prophecy 373 52 changes 375 8
Maximianus 376 35 cap. 18.19 377 41 Sapores ibid 48 Valens 378 32 draw on sin
380 9 1, 2. for 12 ibid 43 sealed for separated 385 7 9. ver. for 3. 387 33
after Elias days, add 3 395 ult cap. 5. 396 33 The first serves to show, 1.
397 35 meet as end 398 28 1. Teaching 401 ult streets 410 51, 52 every evil 412
14 dele not 413 ult and for an 417 11 seals are 420 47 (yet-particular) ibid 49
declining state 421 36 Syrmium 432 1 In Gregorius his life, and dele decretals
435 45 only for also 436 14 dele and 438 39 and did flow 439 21 kills for
corrupts 452 7 cuivis 456 40 sententiarum 457 2 dele Ergo etc. 451 15 nobis
14 470 55 Cominaeus 474 9 yea if there has 475 6 and particularly in the
Epistles 482 42 Hammond 489 20 they wrong ibid 28 and though no 497 55 will
find that 499 41 1054 ibid 47 sat. About 500 50 Opeds 501 40 Illyricus 502 14
transubstantiatio 503 19 Cassaeneus, Alenius ibid 40 Sadolet ibid 48 Turnou
ibid 51 Oped 505 31 the seven vials do contemporate 524 46 Malchi 540 ^ an
universal ibid 31 Cobbet of New England own that and assert the contrary to be
a principle 541 31 Commissioners for 544 23 Martellus 545 19 his mark 547 56
I^idorus 551 56 Livius writings 581 28 imminency 600 39 beyond for behind ibid
46 persecution for perfection 601 14 mile, 619 50 close the parenthesis after
remarkable ibid as also that although they be generally very rich, and so in
capacity to go in some expedition, yet 627 29 begin the parenthesis immediately
after the seventh vial 628 34, 35 (such -- heathens) and dele because it 629 12
dele and 636 50 if papacy be this head then 642 11 dele had 645 19 dele the
first as 648 45 Seieucus ibid 56 aquitanica 651 3 either 653 52 their bulls 656
17 close the parenthesis after Antichrist 660 45 close the parenthesis after
Alcasar say 664 5 de objecto fidei ibid 50 dele else 665 23 puncto 7. 666 20
from it 686 57 her sins 749 8 2. We acknowledge 750 11 but 752 22 1. Not this
for 1. Note this ibid 23 the same with her spoken of chap. 19. ibid 48, 49 with
any one of the vial^ 753 37 2. Epist. 761 11 eternal 770 49 Elect, 782 19 what
785 41 prophesies were, as chap. 4 and 5. 787 42 1300. year 787 12 it speaks.
399 32 completed 402 23 will find 412 42 Christ 417 34 Religion for Church 418
35 trumpets for beasts 419 25 Origin in his followers 426 36 Ierem. 51. 446 7
dele)

These and other lesser escapes be pleased to help with the pen, at least the
most material of them, and so much the rather as some of them mar or darken
the sense, though but few.

AN EXPOSITION Of the BOOK of the REVELATION.
LECTURE I.
CHAP. I.
Verse. 1. THE Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto Him, to show unto
His Servants things which must shortly come to pass; and He sent and signified
it by His Angel unto His Servant John:

2. Who bare record of the Word of God; and of the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw.

3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at hand.

4. John to the seven Churches in Asia, Grace be unto you, and peace, from Him
which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven Spirits which
are before His Throne.


IT may look well presumptuous-like to read, or undertake to open this Book:
and indeed there is need of much humility and sober^^ss in going about such a
work, and that the Spirit of Jesus Christ, who has given this Book for a
benefit to His Church, help us to a ^ight uptaking of it; Yet, considering that
the subject matter of it, is so profitable and comfortable to the Church, to
the end of the world; considering also what was Christ's and in giving it, as
His last Will and Word, to His Church, to wit, to be a Revelation, and thereby
to make manifest His mind to them: therefore John is forbidden to seal it, that
it might be open for the good of His Church; and considering withal the many
motives and encouragements that are given to read and search into it, as ver.
3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy:
which saying, is also renewed again after the prophetic part is immediately
closed, chap. 22.7.14. which seem to be notable encouragements, not only to
undertake, but also to lay it on as a duty, to read and seek to understand it.
We resolve, through Gods grace, to essay it, that it be not altogether useless
to the Servants of God to whom it is sent, as ver. 1. It is true, many things
in it are obscure; and it is like, that the full clearing of them is not to be
expected, till God in some singular way shall open them up, (neither is that
undertaken) Yet, there are, 1. many clear, edifying, and comfortable passages
of Gods mind in it; the holy Ghost mixing in those to be fed upon, and to
sweeten those passages that are more obscure; and to encourage the Reader to
search for the meaning of them. And, 2. though we be not clear to apply such
passages to this or that particular time, or party, or person; Yet, seeing the
scope sets out, in general, the enemity of special enemies of the Church; and
it being clear who they are: we think they may be exponed not only according to
the Analogy of Faith and found Doctrine, but according to the scope of the
place, though every thing hit not, yet nothing being contrary to it. 3. In
those things that are most obscure, there may be found Doctrines concerning the
disposition of enemies, and Gods giving victory over them, and preservation and
outgate to His People. And lastly, those things that are most obscure, being
particulars, wherein there is no such hazard for us to be ignorant, as in
fundamental Truths; and yet being such as God has allowed folks by wisdom to
search out: therefore, here is wisdom, is prefixed to the hardest places in it,
as chap. 13. ver. ult. Upon these considerations, we intend (through the Lords
help) to hint at some things in the reading of this Book to you, for your
up-stirring to search further into it. The whole strain and form of it, is by
way of an Epistle, Jesus Christ, by John, writing His last Will to His Church.

The Preface is in the words read, to ver. 9. The Body of it, from that to the
6. ver. chap. 22. The Conclusion, is in the end of the 22. chap. where it is
closed with the ordinary close of other Epistles. We shall first speak to the
Preface, and then to the Body, when we come to it. We need not stand upon the
Authority, nor Title of it that holds out the Penman; it being of such a divine
stamp and Majesty, does carry Authority in the bosom of it, that if any
Scripture hold forth the Soveraignity, Majesty, Justice, Mercy and Truth of
God, to the comfort of His People, and the making the hearts of His Enemies to
quake, this Scripture does it. The Author, that is, the Penman, is John the
Divine, as he is holden out in the Title. Whether this Title be authentic or
not, it is not much to be disputed. It is in some Greek Copies, The Revelation
of the holy Apostle and Evangelist, John, the Divine. And, we think it is clear
to be John, the Apostle, honored here to bear Christ's last Message to His
Church. He got this name in the primitive times, as being most full of Divine
Revelations, and prying into the Mysteries of the Gospel, and particularly of
Christ's Divinity. And in the Preface there seems to be some things that bear
this out, 1. That he is called John, without designing what John, importing
that he was the John, that was well known and famous for an infallible and
extraordinary measure of the Spirit. 2. He is said to be that John, that was
banished into the Isle of Patmos: which, from the ancient famous story, is
clear to be John, the Apostle, he being banished thither under the persecution
of Domitian the Emperor. 3. It Is further clear, from the 2. ver. in his
description, Who bare record of the Word of God, and of the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, which relates to his writing of the Gospel, as he styles himself in the
close of it, chap. 21.24. This is that Disciple, which testifies of these
things, and wrote these things, and we know that his Testimony is true. Neither
does it make any thing against this, that this Book (being prophetical) does
differ somewhat in style from his other Writings: for, the style is not so
unlike his; there being many words and phrases in his Gospel, and in several
Chapters of this Book so like one another; as, that Christ is called the Word,
and the Lamb, in the one and in the other, these phrases being peculiar to Him.

The Preface has two parts. First, A general Inscription of the Book, ver. 1,
2, 3. Secondly, A particular Inscription and Direction to the seven Churches in
Asia, to which the seven Epistles in the second and third Chapters are written,
from ver. 4. to ver. 9. And there are several particulars in every one of
these. To begin with the Inscription. The Revelation, that is, the making open
and unfolding of some things, obscure: and though they be still obscure to us,
yet not in themselves, nor to us now, as they were before this. 2. It Is of
Jesus Christ: First, Because given out by Jesus Christ, to John, as from the
Administrator and great Prophet of His Church: And secondly, Because much of
this Revelation concerned the governing of His Church. Thirdly, Whith God gave
unto him: which denotes the order of the Persons in their subsisting and
operations; the Father working from Himself, by the Son; and the way of Christ's
working as Mediator, who does the will of Him that sent Him: for, as God, He
understands all things essentially by Himself, but as Medlatour, He has that
given and communicated to Him. Fourthly, The end of this work, is, To show unto
His Servants things which must shortly come to pass, that this Revelation may
not be kept up, but made forthcoming to His Servants: by whom is understood
not all Creatures, nor all in the visible Church, nor only such special
Servants by Office, as John was; but such as were and are His Followers,
Subjects, and Believers in Him in the visible Church. Fifthly, The subject of
this Revelation, things which must shortly come to pass, not things past, nor
so much things present, (though in the second and third Chapter, such things be
spoken to) as mainly, things to come. And it is said, That they must shortly
come to pass: because, though the full accomplishment of them was not to be
till the end of the world, as will be clear from the Prophecy, and therefore
those events cannot be confined within some few years; yet, the beginning of
the fulfilling of them was instantly upon the back of this Revelation. Sixthly,
He sent and signified it by His Angel, that is, Jesus Christ made use of the
ministration of His Angel to signify this, both to set out His dignity and
grandour, and to conciliate the greater credit to it. Seventhly, The person it
is revealed to, is, His Servant John; His Servant by special Delegation and
Office, in a special Employment, as a Steward in His House.

1. Observe the great advantage and benefit, the privilege and prerogative
that Christ's Servants have beyond all others; Christ writes His Letters to
them; there is not a word written to Kings and great men; but it is to show His
Servants things to come to pass: To be His Servants, is to be Gods freemen;
and they win fardest benn upon His Secrets and Mysteries, Psalm. 25. The Secret
of the Lord is with them that fear Him, and He will show them His Covenant.

2. Observe Christ's way of Administration: Though this Revelation be sent to
His Servants; yet not immediately, but first it is given to Christ, and He gives
it to His Angel, and the Angel gives it to John, and he brings it out to the
Churches. Jesus Christ must have His own place; and the first notice of any
thing, concerning the good of the Church, comes to Him as Mediator; and He
does nothing but He first reveals it to His Servants the Prophets, Amos 3. They
are His Servants of State to bear His Mind to His People.

Verse. 2. The second thing in the Preface, is, A description of John, wh^ bare
record of the Word of God: which may relate to the Gospel of John, which holds
out Jesus Christ, who was, and is the substantial Word of God, as he begins his
Gospel. 2. And of the Testimony of Jesus Christ: which may look to his
Epistles. 3. And of all things that he saw: this looks to the particular
Visions God gave him in this Book. John's baring record, points out his
faithfulness according to the Charge and Commission given him; what is given
him to deliver, he keeps not up; what he receives in charge, he discharges.

3. We have the commendation of this Book, ver. 3. to stir up folks to make use
of it, because He knew many would scarre at it, and be ready to let it lie
beside them as useless and unprofitable; whereas all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16. Therefore this is
added, Blessed is he that reads; that is, this Book is not a thing to be
spoken of only, and not to be read and studied: for, the Seals of it are
opened; and blessed are they that read it. It Is a happy and a good thing,
soberly and humbly to read, and to seek to understand it: and because every one
cannot read, he adds, And blessed are they that hear the words of this
Prophecy; it may relate not only to private, but to public reading and hearing
of this Book, when it is read and exponed; So that by Christ's own Ordinance,
this Book is to be brought forth to His People: and, because folks are ready to
grow vain and secure, and to rest upon reading and hearing. He adds another
word, and keep those sayings that are written therein, that is, it is not the
reading, nor the hearing simply, that will bring the blessing; but the
observing and making right use of it. Then He adds a reason why He would have
it read and heard, and the sayings of it observed and made use of, because the
time is at hand, the fulfilling of the things in this Book, is at hand; the
time hastes of calling folks to a reckoning, what use they have made of those
sayings; the time of pouring out His wrath on His Enemies, and of being very
kind to His Church and People, is at hand.

1. Observe, It Is a good thing to be studying the Scripture: it is a mark of the
blessed man, Psalm. 1. It makes the man of God wise to salvation; and it is good
that those who want the use of reading themselves, make up that want by hearing
others: and particularly, it is good to be reading, and hearing this Book read;
those that are fitted for reading, let them use it well; and those that have
not this benefit, let them take and improve other opportunities that may bring
them to the knowledge of Christ's mind; and the more, that blessedness is given
but to six or seven sores in this Book, and twice or thrice over, to those that
study it, Rev. 22.7.14.

2. Observe, That it is not enough to be given to reading and hearing of the
Word: neither would folks rest on it; but join practice with both, Luke 11.28.
Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it. It is not the reader,
or hearer, but the doer, that is the blessed man. Yea, though ye were able to
open and unfold all the Mysteries that are in this Book, if ye be not suitable
and conform thereto in your practice, ye are but like that man spoken of, Iam.
1.23, 24. who, beholding his natural face in a glass, goes his way, and
forgets what manner of man he was. He that is a hearer, and not a doer,
deceives his own soul: als much hearing and reading does you good, as is
improven in practice.

Quest. How is this Book called a Prophecy, seeing some things in it concern
things present, as in these Epistles, written to the seven Churches in Asia?

Answ. Prophecies are of two sorts. 1. Prophecy, is that whereby things past or
present are known by an instinct of the Spirit: So Moses writes of the
Creation of the World, and things that were before his time; So Ahijah knew the
wife of Jeroboam; and Elisha discovered the King of Syria his Counsel, and the
covetousness of Gehazi: And, in this respect, as well as in reference to things
to come, this Book may be called a Prophecy; because those things that are
present are revealed by the Spirit. 2. Prophecy, is of things to come: and in
this respect, it is called a Prophecy; because the main drift of this Book of
the Revelation, is, to show things to come, the first three Chapters being
introductory to the rest.

Verse. 4. Follows the second part of the Preface, and it is the particular
Inscription and Direction of this Epistle to the seven Churches in Asia, John
to the seven Churches in Asia; and it begins as the Epistles ordinarily
begin, Grace b^ unto you, and peace. Where we have, 1. the thing wished, Grace
and Pea^e. 2. The persons to whom, the Seven Churches. 3. The Persons from
whom, the Three Persons of the Trinity. 4. And upon the back of this, a
thanksgiving. John, is the person wishing; that which is wished, is, Grace and
Peace, two words, which comprehend all good: Grace, is the fountain of Gods
free love; and Peace, the effect of that free love: which being here put
together, is love, vented in its precious effects. The Persons from whom, are
Three, or, the Three Persons of the Trinity, 1. From the Father, which is,
which was, and which is to come, that is, from God the Father, described from
His eternal being, without all beginning or ending. And this description of the
Father, relates to that of Exodus 3.14. I AM THAT I AM, has sent me unto you:
and it is a name that God often takes to Himself, The first and the last, the
beginning and the ending: and the Title JEHOVAH takes up these three; JE, the
future time; HO, the time present; VAH, the time past. In a word, it is the
paraphrase of the word JEHOVAH: and this title is attributed to the Father, not
secluding the Son and Holy Ghost; but the Father, being the fountain of the
Godhead, when He is joined with the Son and Spirit, those things that are
essential to God, are ordinarily attributed to Him. 2. From the Seven Spirits:
These are not creatures, or created spirits: for, first, created spirits' are
not objects of worship, from whom we may wish Grace and Peace. Secondly,
neither are created spirits set in betwixt the Father and the Son, as those
seven Spirits are here. Thirdly, In the 5. chap. ver. 6. those seven Spirits,
are called the Eyes and Horns of the Lamb: Eyes being His Omniscience, whereby
He sees every where; and Horns, being His Power, working by His Spirit, and
making stubborn fouls submit unto Him: and these seven Spirits being His Eyes,
which are every where, and His Power or Omnipotency, which here also are
invocated, They can be no other but the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is called
the Seven Spirits; not only, because it is frequent in this Book of the
Revolution to go on the number of Seven; but also, and mainly, to show the
manifold and various operations of the Spirit, as 1 Cor. 12.4, 6. There are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; and diversities of operations, but
the same God, which works all in all. 2. Because it has relation to the
seven Churches He is to write to, their need requiring much; and He being an
infinite and powerful Spirit, He was able to let out abundance of grace and all
consolation to every one without prejudice to another, as if each of them had
the Spirit wholly, Therefore He is so described in this wish. Secondly, These
seven Spirits are said to be before the Throne, that is, present with God, yet
made u^e of by God the Father and the Son, working by the Spirit, effectually
communicating what may be for the comfort of His People: and in these words,
the holy Spirit is holden out in a posture, apt to execute what is needful.
The third Person is in the 5. ver. And from Jesus Christ; Grace and Peace is
wished from Him: He is set out in His Three Offices of Prophet, Priest, and
King. First, In His Prophetical Office, The faithful Witness, because He
reveals the Will of God, and that faithfully: therefore, Isa. 55.4. He is given
as a Witness, a Leader and Commander to the People. Secondly, In His Priestly
Office, The first begotten of the dead: To show, 1. that He offered up Himself
to the death. 2. Because He was the first that rose from the dead in His own
strength, and made others to rise, and He died not again: for, though Lazarus
rose, he died again, and though Enoch and Elias did not die, yet that was by
virtue of His Power and Resurrection, as also that any other did arise.
Thirdly, In His Kingly Office, The Prince of the Kings of the Earth: which
Title sets out Christ, not only to be God, equal with the Father, but as
Mediator, King of His Kirk. He is called, Prince of the Kings of the Earth,
not as if Kings, and all great men, or others, were in the same manner subjects
to Him in the relation that Believers are (in which respect His Kingly Office
extends no further nor His Priestly and Prophetical Office) but though so He
have not such a near relation to them, nor they to Him; Yet He is King over
them, to restrain them that they prejudge not His Kirk; and to judge them for
any wrongs or prejudice they do to them, and to inflict temporal judgments on
them here, and eternal hereafter, when He shall be their Judge, and the Books
shall be opened at the great Day. The wish is from the Three Persons: and
though the Holy Ghost be here named before the Son, it is not to confound the
order that is among the Persons of the Trinity in Their subsisting and
operations; but for this reason, because John is to insist on Jesus Christ the
second Person, he keeps Him last in naming, to make the progress in his writing
the more clear.

Observe, There are three distinct Persons of the blessed Trinity, the Father,
Son, and Spirit, who are the same one God: in the Name of these Three, is
Baptism administrated; and from Them, Grace is wished and prayed for, 2 Cor,
13.14. For, 1. That there are Three, who are distinctly mentioned here, cannot
be denied; that the first is the Father; and the third, Jesus Christ, really
distinct from the Father, is clear: for, the Son, and not the Father, was
incarnate: and therefore the like must be said of the seven Spirits, that they
set forth the Holy Ghost personally, seeing it is He who in the like places
uses to be joined in with the Father and the Son, as 2 Cor. 13.13. 1 Ioh. 5.7,
8. and therefore it is said in the seven Epistles, to be what the Spirit says.
These Seven Spirits therefore, is that one Spirit, and He a person that
speaks to the Churches. Secondly, That each of these Three must be God,
appears, 1. Because the last Two are both joined as equal with the Father, of
whom there can be no question. 2. Because the Son, Jesus Christ, afterward has
the same Title attributed to Him, which is here given to the Father. 3. Because
the same one suit, is prayed for from all of them; and, it being Grace and
Peace, which only God can give, suppones divine essential Attributes to be in
those from whom they are wished: yea, They are named here, as joint Senders of
this Epistle, and Authorizers of this Word; therefore is it so often afterward
said, Let him that has ears, hear what the Spirit says: and there can no
Authority but what is divine, be sufficient here. Hence also, Thus says the
Lord, and, thus says the Holy Ghost, are frequently put for one another: each
one therefore of these Three must be God. 3. It may appear from this also, that
all these Three are One God, thus, This Revelation and Salutation comes from
one God, chap. 1. ver. 1. and 22. 18, 19. and yet this Revelation and
Salutation comes from the Father, Son, and Spirit: therefore They are that One
God. Again, If the Grace and Peace proceed from one Essence, which is common to
all, then they are the same God essentially, though distinct Persons; but Grace
and Peace looks to the same Godhead and Essence, though it be wished for from
all, for the effect, Grace and Peace, is but one, it does therefore suppose an
unity in the fountain from which it comes, to wit, these Three Persons of the
glorious Godhead, who are named distinctly, not to show a different effect from
the Father, which is not from the Son; but to show the concurrence of these
blessed Three in an united way for bringing forth of these; so that what comes
from the Father, comes also from the Son and Spirit. These essential
Attributes, and that most simple and infinite Essence, being common to all the
Three Persons, it rests therefore that they are Three distinct Persons, and yet
of the same infinite Godhead. Neither will that which the Secinians and others
oppose to this place, have weight. Say they, Christ is spoken of here, as dead;
Therefore cannot be God. For, it is one thing to speak of Him who was dead,
another to say that it speaks of Him as such. He that died was God, but He died
not as God: and therefore this can only prove, that Jesus Christ, as to His
Person, is man; but by it, we can no more deny Him to be the second Person of
the Godhead, than afterward when He is called the first and the last, by that,
we can deny Him to be man. And that the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are equal with
the Father, appears also in this, That they are both equally with Him, the
object of divine Worship here, to wit, of Invocation and Prayer, which could
not otherwise be.

Concerning the Holy Trinity and Object of Worship.
THere is much spoken of the Glory of God in this Book; and no where is the
distinction of the Persons of the glorious Godhead more frequently and clearly
set forth. John was more full in this than any who wrote before him; because
that in his time Ebion and some others had arisen, who did deny the Godhead of
the Son and Holy Ghost; and therefore, with a particular respect to These, he
did write the more fully of this, for which he got the style of Divine
singularly, as was marked on the Title. It will not therefore be impertinent
now, once for all, to touch that a little further: and although here curiosity
would be restrained, full satisfaction in the up-taking of that Mystery being
peculiarly reserved to that time when we shall see Him as He is, as our Lord's
word, Ioh. 14.20. Then ye shall know that I am in the Father, does import: and
therefore we would not presume to satisfy our selves in the (...), or
particular manner how that is; but humbly be contented to have our Faith
solidly grounded in the (...), or being thereof: which may be done by
considering these three, to wit, 1. the truth of the thing, 2. the expressions
used in holding of it forth, and, 3. the necessity of the believing thereof.

For the first, we say, That as there is but one God essentially, so there are
three distinct, coequal, co-essential, and con-substantial Persons of that
blessed Godhead, the Father, Son, and Spirit, who yet in a most wonderful,
excellent and infinitely perfect (though an inconceivable) manner, have an order
of subsisting and working amongst Themselves. It was a saying amongst the
Ancients, That to speak of God, even that which was truth, was dangerous;
(Etiam de Deo dicere verum, est periculosum:) and indeed here it ought to be
remembered. Yet may we consider the former general Proposition in these
Assertions.

1. Assert. There is but one God essentially considered: and in this the
Scripture is clear, and so in this Book, chap. 1. and last; although there be a
plurality of Persons mentioned, yet it is ever God spoken of as One, in the
singular number; and thus He is still opposed as the One living God, to the
plurality of Idols. And indeed, there can be no plurality in this: for, if that
One God have in Him all perfections, There can be no perfection beside Him; and
so no God beside this One true God. And, if we supposed any perfection to be
beside Him, then were not He God, because not infinite in perfection; and, if
infinite, then that which is infinite, in that respect, cannot be multiplied.
There is no question of this, seeing the most wise Heathens have been
necessitated to acknowledge it.

2. Assert. Although there be but One God, yet there are Three Persons, the
Father, Son, and Spirit. There is not one of these Epistles to the seven
Churches, but this may be gathered from it, 1. The Father is the Sender of them
all, as from ver. 1. chap. 1. may be gathered. 2. The Son is He who immediately
gives John Commission to write, as the Titles he takes to himself do clear. 3.
The holy Ghost is in the close of all, mentioned as a joint speaker, Let him
hear what the Spirit says, etc. 2. More particularly, They are distinctly
mentioned in the Epistle to Thyatira, chap. 2. ver. 18. These things says the
Son of God; that holds forth the Father and Son: where a son is, there is a
father; and God here is personally taken as an other from the Son. And ver. 29.
we have the Spirit as distinct from both. 3. They are put together, chap. 3.1.
These things says He that has the seven Spirits of God: He, that is, the Son
formerly mentioned; God, that is, the Father, distinctly considered as another
Person; the seven Spirits, that is, the holy Ghost, in whose name John saluted
the Churches formerly, and who is to be heard, as the close of every Epistle
shows. 4. The like is, ver. 12. where the Son speaks in the first Person, I
and Me. The Father is designed by the title GOD; the Spirit again, as distinct
from both, ver. 13. 5. The same may be gathered from ver. 14. with 22. where
the faithful Witness, God, and the Spirit, are mentioned as three that are
distinct. 6. And lastly, chap. 5. we have Them most fully distinguished, First,
there is the Father, on the Throne, with the Book in His hand, ver. 1.
Secondly, There is the Lamb, the Son: And thirdly, The seven Spirits of God,
the holy Ghost, ver. 6. all of them considered as distinct Persons.

3. Assert. These Three, Father, Son, and Spirit, are really distinct one from
another; and so are Three Persons. All that is said, does confirm this also:
for, 1. They are really distinct, though not simply in respect of their
essence; yet, as they are personally considered, the Father, is not the Son;
and He that sits upon the Throne, is not the Lamb. The Father did not become
man, nor the Spirit; but the Son, He died, was buried, etc. which can be said
of none, but of a person; and yet cannot be said of either of the other Two.
The holy Ghost is the Spirit of God, as the Son is the Son of God: and if that
suppose a real distinct personality, this must do also; the Son says, so does
the holy Ghost or Spirit say to the Churches: the Father is God, the first, and
last; the Son has the same Title, chap. 2.8. even He who was dead, is the
first, and the last; the Spirit has the same authority, and is to be heard,
and has a divine omnipresence to be in all the earth, chap. 5.6. which can be
said of none but of Him that is God. Now, if the Father be God, and the Son
God, and the Spirit God also; and if there be but one God, and yet these Three
be really distinct, then They must be distinct Persons in respect of Their
personal properties, seeing they are Persons, and distinct.

4. Assert. Although They be Three distinct Persons, as to Their personal
properties; yet are They all Three One God, essentially considered; and all
have the same infinite indivisible Essence, though we cannot conceive how. This
follows on the former: for, if there be Three Persons, and each of them be God,
and yet there be but One God, then each of these Persons must be the same One
God, coequal and co-essential: so the Father is alius, another from the Son,
and each of Them from other; but He is not aliud, or another thing, but the
same. Hence, the Son, is the Son of God, and the Spirit, the Spirit of God:
They are upon one Throne, chap. 5. They concur by the same Authority and
Soveraignity to write; and He that sends this Epistle to the Churches, is but
One God, chap. 1.1. who therefore will avenge adding thereto, or diminishing
therefrom, chap. 22. yet, that One God, is the same Three Persons, chap. 1.
ver. 4.

Assert. 5. These Three blessed Persons, who are One most glorious Being, have
yet an inconceivable order in their subsisting and working; which, being to be
admired rather than to be searched, we shall but say, 1. They have all the same
One Essence and Being, as is said. 2. They all have it eternally, equally and
perfectly: none is more or less God, but each has all the same Godhead at
perfection: and therefore must have it equally and eternally: for, the Godhead
is the same, and the Son is the first and the last, as the Father is; and the
Father and Son, were never without the Spirit, who is the Spirit of God, and
each of Them is God. It does confirm all these, that They have One Throne,
Name, and Authority attributed to Them. Yet, 3. The Father subsists of Himself,
and does beget the Son by an inconceivable and eternal generation: the Son does
not beget, but is begotten, and has His subsisting, as the second Person, from
the Father, So much the titles of Father and Son import here: the Spirit
proceeds both from the Father (therefore He is the Spirit of the Father) and
from the Son, therefore is He said also to have the seven Spirits of God: and
the Spirit does neither beget, nor is begotten, but does thus, in an
inexpressible manner, proceed from Them both.

For the second. If any should wrangle for the expressions that are used by
Divines in this Mystery; we confess that many of the Schoolmen have exceeded,
and have taken too much liberty in this wonderful Mystery; yet, it is the
thing that we especially should be established into, and from Scripture that is
clear, that there is but One God, and yet Three, who being denominated in the
concrete, must imply three different real Relations, or Subsistences, or
Persons: and this Essence being infinite and communicable, there is no warrant
to bound it to the rules and properties of created beings, who are but finit;
and in that respect also incommunicable: And we conceive that the names here
given (and elsewhere in Scripture) will amount clearly to the equivalent of
Essence and Persons, which are most obviously made use of in this matter: for,
what is that, I am Alpha and Omega, who was, is, and is to come, but that same,
Exodus 3. I AM THAT I AM, which denotes His Being or Essence, as that which is
ever a Being: and Idols, being differenced from the true. God by this, that
they are by Nature no gods, Gal. 4.8. it implies on the contrary, that by
Nature He is God, and so God in respect of His Essence: and therefore that God
may be essentially considered, and in that respect of His Essence. Again, these
expressions, that the one is called the Father, and the other the Son, and yet
both One God, do clearly hold forth that there are real relations in that
Godhead, subsisting in a distinct manner; and so there must be Persons, as Heb.
1. the Son, is called the express Image of the Fathers Person, which plainly
says, that the Father, considered as distinguished from the Son, is a Person,
and subsists; and that the Son, as distinguished from the Father, and as so
lively and expressly representing His Person, must be a Person also, having this
from the Father: and what is said of the Father and Son, must also be true of
the holy Ghost, who is God equal with both, yet different from Them both, as
They differ from each other, though not in respect of that same incommunicable
property, yet he who proceeds, must differ from those from whom he proceeds,
as he who is begotten, must differ from him that begat him.

For Their operations, we may find here, that in some things They concur
jointly, yet some way differently. Some things again are attributed to one,
which cannot be to another, as their personal properties; the Son is begotten,
and not the Father or the Spirit: therefore He is allanerly the Son: the Father
begets; and the Spirit proceeds. These are called Their personal properties,
and Their works ad intra, or amongst, or in reference to Themselves: of this
kind is the incarnation of the Son, which can neither be said of the Father,
nor of the holy Ghost. Again, in things ad extra, or that relate to the
Creatures simply, whether in making, or governing of the World, They jointly
concur: the Father creates all, so does the Son and holy Ghost; the Son, from
the Father, by the holy Ghost; the holy Ghost, from the Father and the Son, as
those expressions of God, sending His Son, the Son's sending the Spirit from
the Father, etc. do declare, Ioh. 14.26. and 16.7. Gal. 4.6.

To the third. This Truth concerning the blessed and glorious Trinity, being so
often insisted on here, and coming so near to the nature of God Himself, it
cannot but be exceedingly necessary for Christians to be through in the faith
thereof: yet it is questioned of late, whether it be to be accounted a
fundamental point of Faith or not? I say, this of late is questioned by
Socinus, and the favorers of a boundless untolerable Toleration: for, of old
it was most sacredly received as such, amongst the Ancients, as the Creeds that
are called Apostolic, Nicene, and that of Athanasius, do manifest: But this
Engine the Devil drives, first, to make the most necessary Truths indifferent,
that then he may the more easily engage opposers to quarrel the very Truth of
them it self; but we conceive, whatever it was of old before Christ, yet now it
is to be looked on, not only as a Truth, which is clear from the Word, but also
as a fundamental Truth; which being shaken, would overturn Christianity, and
the way of Salvation that the Lord has revealed in His Gospel. This is not to
be extended to a rigid degree of knowledge in this wonderful Mystery, but to
so much clearness in this Truth from the Word, as may be a ground to Faith in
the thing it self. And that this is necessary, as a fundamental, we think
arises clearly from these three grounds. 1. That Truth, without which the true
God cannot be taken up, believed in, and worshipped, is a fundamental Truth;
but, this Truth of the Trinity of Persons, and Unity of the Godhead, is such,
that without it, that God, which is proposed in the Word, and is the only true
God, and the object of all Worship, can neither be taken up, believed in, nor
worshipped rightly: Ergo, etc. because the true God is One, and yet Three
Persons; and as such, has proposed Himself to be known and worshipped. 2. That
Truth without which the work of Redemption would be overturned, is fundamental;
But this is such: for, by taking away the Mystery of the Trinity, they take
away the Godhead and Personality of the Mediator, and so do enervat His
satisfaction. And, as on the former account, the true God is otherwise
conceived than He is in Himself; so, in this respect, the Mediator is made a
quite other thing. And, can any thing be fundamental, if this be not? 3. The
way that God has laid down in His Worship, requires this, seeing in Baptism
there is particular and express mentioning of these Three, the Father, Son and
Spirit, as the Superior, to whom they that are Christian Soldiers, should be
lifted and enrolled: and so we may account of all after-worship; seeing God
requires us to honor the Son, as we honor the Father; and seeing these Three
equally witness from Heaven, 1 Ioh. 5. the Father, Word, and Spirit; all which
Three, are One: can their Testimony be received as of Three, or can they be
accounted as One God without this? And yet there can neither be one, in Faith,
engaged unto in Baptism, or one, whose Testimony we may receive, but He who is
God: and can any think but it is necessary for a Christian, and that,
fundamentally, to know to whom they are devoted, whom they are to worship,
whose Testimony it is that they receive, whose operations they feel, whom they
are to make use of, etc? And therefore it is necessary to know the Trinity of
Persons in that One Godhead.

It may be the exercise of some tender soul, that they know not how to
apprehend this Object rightly, when they come to worship; and that often they
are disquieted, while their minds are unstable: Concerning this, there is need
here to distinguish betwixt what may satisfy us as to the Object in it self,
and what may be sufficient to us in directing of our Worship to that Object: If
we take up God as in Himself, here is a depth that cannot be searched out to
perfection: He is broader than the Sea; Who can know Him? higher than the
Heaven, What can we do, Job 11.8? But yet we have footing in His Word, how to
come before this God with fear, reverence, holy admiration, etc. and such
affections and qualifications as a true Worshipper that worships in spirit
ought to have; and in this, the pure Worshippers, who believe this Truth of One
infinite God and Three Persons, ought to be taken up, rather that they may be
suitable in their worshipping, and have becoming effects on their own hearts,
than to be disquieting themselves by poring too curiously on the Object
worshipped; except in so far as may serve to transform the heart into a
likeness to Him. And, it is not aiming to comprehend the mysteriousness and
manner of these incomprehensible Mysteries, that does work this; but the real,
through and near impression of the general, which is revealed clearly in His
Word. We would therefore commend these three in Worship. 1. That folks would
satisfy themselves in the general with the solid faith thereof, without
descending to particular conceptions or notions concerning the Persons of the
blessed Godhead: this particularness, is often that which both confuses the
mind, and disquiets the conscience, and cannot but do so in those who would be
at the looking upon God immediately here, without making use of the
expressions, Titles, Names, etc. whereby He has manifested Himself to us, and
wherein, we conceive, it is safest to rest, and to bound all our curiosity
within those: for, they must be the most solid notions of God, which Himself
has caught: Thus, Exodus 33 and 34. The Lord did answer Moses his desire of
seeing His Glory, by showing him His goodness in the proclaming of His
Attributes to him that are manifested in His Word: thereby teaching men to
conceive of God, according as He has revealed Himself in His Word, in the
plain and comprehensive Attributes that describe His Nature, wherein Gods
goodness is sufficiently holden forth to sinners, which ought to be a
sufficient manifestation of God to them here, without diving immediately into
His Essence, which could no otherways be manifested to Moses than by that
proclamation. 2. We would beware of forming Idea's, representations, or shapes
of that One God and Three Persons in the heart, or in the head: these cannot
but be derogatorie to Him, being a liknesse to Him of our own up-setting in our
hearts: and cannot but diminish that Authority, which the true God should have
in our hearts. We would remember therefore that He is purely Spiritual, whom
no eye has seen, nor can see: and therefore all such imaginations, are to be
abandoned and abhorred. 3. We would beware of dividing the Object of Worship,
or separating the Three blessed Persons in our worshipping of them, even in our
imagination; as if when One is named, we were not praying unto, and worshipping
both the other; and as if the Son were an other God than the Father or Spirit,
etc. But still this would be remembered, that what ever Person be named, He is
God, and that same One God with the other Two: and therefore the Object of
Worship, is ever the same One God, Father, Son, and Spirit, that are but One
God. We Worship the Father, the Son, and the Spirit; but we do not Worship the
Father, or the Son, or the Spirit, as if He who is not named, were less
worshipped than He who is named: and seeing the Son and holy Ghost, are the same
God with the Father (the former ground being laid) it is all one thing what ever
Person be named, though in Scripture sometimes respect is had to their order of
subsisting and operating; and so the Father is only named sometimes to be the
ground upon, and by which, we have access to God; and so, the Son, only is
named.

Now, by what is said, it does also appear that the holy Ghost may be expressly
prayed unto, as the Father, and the Son, although it be not so usual in
Scripture, because of the reasons formerly hinted at: for, this will follow, He
that is God, may be invocated, etc. and where petitions do especially respect
the increase of Grace, which is the Work of the Spirit, we will find Him
expressly mentioned with the Father and Son, as here, ver. 4. and 5. Grace be
unto you, etc. And, 2 Cor. 13.14. The communion of the holy Ghost, is
subjoyned, as a distinct petition, to the Love of the Father, and Grace of the
Son; and these first two petitions, being directed to the Father and the Son,
this third must be to the holy Ghost in like manner: and therefore to plead
against the Godhead of the holy Ghost, upon this ground that he is not expressly
prayed unto in Scripture, is both inconsequent, and false; and the Apostl's
taking the holy Ghost to be his witness, Romans 9. cannot be done without
invocating of Him: and the general commands of glorifying God, must infer so
much, supposing the Spirit to be God. There is no weight therefore to be laid
on that argument.

If it be objected, against the necessity of believing this Doctrine of the
Trinity, or, against the sinfulness of tolerating what opposes the same, That
the light of nature does not discover it; and that the Godhead of the holy
Ghost has sometimes not so much as been heard of by Disciples, as in Act. 19.
Therefore, etc.

To the first, we answer, That now nature being corrupted, it can be no good
rule to try what is truth concerning God by it; it can hardly be denied, if
nature be considered as in Adam at the beginning, but to him there was
clearness in this mystery, there being express mention of the blessed Trinity
in his creation, as the word, Let Us make man according to Our Image, does
import: which is not for naught mentioned then, more than formerly, especially,
considering that excellent knowledge that Adam was furnished with, which was a
part of the Image of that One God, who is Father, Son, and Spirit. But, not to
insist in this, we say, secondly, That if by nature, as it is now corrupted,
what is tolerable or intolerable in the matters of Religion were to be tried,
then were the whole Doctrine of the Gospel and Redemption through the Mediator,
to be accounted no fundamental thing; and consequently, no Error, destroying
it, were to be restrained, because nature has not discovered that. That
therefore must be an unsafe rule to walk by. And indeed if a master of a family
and father, who yet, as such, is (to say so) a servant of nature, is not by
that exempted from the obligation of bringing up his children and servants in
the knowledge of God according to the Gospel; but is notwithstanding to
exercise his authority in the restraining of every thing contrary thereunto
according to his station. Can it be thought, that a Magistrate, who must count
for his Authority over a people, as a master must do for his, over a family, is
less obliged thereunto? For, Christians are to be Christians in their
stations, as in their personal carriage; and so to seek the pr^moving of the
Gospel, and the restraining of what may ma^^ it according to their station.
Thirdly, we answer, That even this may be drawn from the Moral Law of God;
wherein not only the true God is alone to be worshipped, as in the first
Command; but also accordingly as he has prescribed and revealed in His Word,
which is the sum of the second Command. Now, this being true, that the Lord
has thus revealed Himself to be worshipped according to the Gospel, it becomes
no less necessary to Worship God in that manner, than to Worship Him, who is
the true God; and so, i^ by the first Command, and according to the light of
nature, Magistrates should restrain, and not suffer what is inconsistent with
the worshipping of the One true and living God, so is he, by the second Command
and that same light of nature, obliged to restrain all manner of Doctrine and
Worship, that is inconsistent with what he has revealed, according to the
second.

To the ^ast part of the objection, from that instance, Act. 19. We say, first,
That suppose there had been great ignorance then of the Godhead of the holy
Ghost, while that mystery of the glorious Trinity was more obscurely revealed;
yet, it will not follow, that it is equally excusable and sufferable now, when
it is so plainly discovered: yea, can it be said, that they had been excusable,
if, after Paul's teaching of them the true nature of Baptism and of the holy
Ghost, they had continued not to believe the same, as they were before he did
it; or, that we can be so now, having his lesson to them for our instruction*
Yet, secondly, It seems, that the Person of the holy Ghost, is not intended
there, but the gifts of the holy Ghost, which often get that name in the New
Testament: for, the holy Ghost, which is to be understood in that place, is
such as was communicated to Believers, and such as these afterward did receive,
as from ver. 2. and 6. is clear. Now there is great odds betwixt the necessity
of distinctnesse in the knowledge of these gifts, and of the holy Ghost
Himself, who is not, nor cannot be communicated by the laying on of hands,
except in respect of His gifts: this place therefore, does not meet the
conclusion formerly laid down, which was in reference to the Faith of the holy
Ghost Himself, and not to the knowledge of His gifts.

These generals being granted, there do arise, from this practice of John's,
several Questions, concerning the Object of Divine Worship: which, upon this
occasion, (it may be) were not unworthy to be more particularly considered, so
far as the nature of the place calls for, and does become our scope. As
first, we see in this Prayer, John does distinctly name all the Three blessed
Persons, for their instruction and consolation to whom he sends this message.
Secondly, When he names the Son, he does name Him by such Titles as agree to
Him only as Mediator; yea, and in this song, ver. 6. does respect that,
particularly, which is only applicable to Him as Man and as Mediator, to make
them welcome it the more heartily, and thereby also the more to commend Him to
them, and engage them to Him, by remembering them what He is, and what He has
done, that does thus salute them. Thirdly, He has a peculiar thanksgiving unto
the Son, considered under such designations, as express His wonderful love
that appears in His sufferings, which cannot be applied to the Father or
Spirit: which is indeed Divine Worship, being the same which is here given to
the Father, and Spirit. All which gives occasion to enquire in these four. 1.
Concerning the Object of Divine Worship, in general. 2. In what respect it is
to be given to the Mediator. 3. In what form, Petitions may be directed to Him;
or, if in any peculiar form. 4. Why the Mediator Christ, is so much, and so
warmly, under these considerations of His incarnation and sufferings, insisted
upon in the New Testament; and what may encourage and help in the improving of
those grounds. These things being deipths, are rather to be admired and
believed in, in the general, (so far as we see clear in this precedent) than
curiously to be pried into; yet, that they go not altogether without answer, we
shall lay down some generals in reference to all these, which will yield some
practical and comfortable conclusions. To the first, we say,

1. God is the alone Object of Divine Worship; and there is no Object thereof
but God: because there is none who has these infinite Attributes and
Excellencies, which are requisite in the Object of Divine Worship, but God,
such as Omnisciencie, Omnipotency, Infinitness, supreme Majesty, Glory, etc.
from which (to speak so) results Adorability, an essential Attribute of the
Majesty of God, as Immutability and Eternity are; He being adorable, because
Infinite, Immense, Omniscient, etc. And therefore it cannot be communicate to
any other, more than these incommunicable properties can be; and yet none can
be worshipped who is not (so to speak) adorable.

2. There is but one kind of Divine Worship, to wit, that which is Supreme, and
becoming this infinite Majesty of God: and, in a word, that which is required
in the first Table of the Law, as that which is competent to this glorious
excellent God: and this follows on the former: for, if there be but one Object,
there can be but one manner of Worship. Therefore, in Scripture, to Worship
God, is always opposed to the worshipping of any other, and to the admitting of
any Worship, which is not competent to God, as Revel. 19.9, 10, and 22.9.

3. Although there be Three Persons of the glorious Godhead, and all are to be
worshipped; yet, there are not three Objects of Worship, but one; nor three
kinds of Worship: Not three Objects, because these Three Persons are the same
One infinite God, who is the Object of Worship. For, first, Though the Three
Persons, be really distinct each from other; yet, none of them is really
distinct from the essence of the Godhead: Therefore, the Father, is that same
Object of Worship with the Son, because that same God. And, secondly, Though
the Father be infinite, and the Son infinite, etc. yet, there are not two
infinitnesses, but the same infinitness and immensness, that which is the
Fathers is the Sons also; because these are essential properties, and so common
to all the Persons: and therefore, though their personal properties be
distinct; yet, their essential Attributes being common, they are not distinct
Objects, but the same one Object; seeing, still, in Worship, respect must be had
to their essential Attributes; and so to the Godhead, which is common to All:
and therefore consequently to Them, as They are one Object, it being the Deity
(which is One) that is the formal Object of Worship: And, though sometimes
these Three Persons be named together, as here; yet, that is not to propose
them as distinct Objects, but to show, who this one Object God is, to wit, the
Father, Son and Spirit, Three Persons of the same One indivisible Godhead.
Hence, the unity of the Godhead, is inculcated, for this end; The Lord thy
God, O Israel, is One Lord.

From which it follows, 1. That the mind of the worshipper is not to be
distracted in seeking to comprehend, or order, in his thoughts, Three distinct
Persons, as distinct Objects of Worship; but, to conceive reverently of One
infinite God, who is Three Persons. 2. That whatever Person be named, he is not
to think that the other is less worshipped; but that in one act he Worships
that One God, and so the Father, Son and Spirit. 3. That by naming One Person
after he has named an other, (suppose he name the Father at first, and
afterward the Son) he does not vary the Object of Worship, as if he were
praying to an other than formerly; but that still it is the same One God. 4.
Because our imagination is ready to softer such divided conceptions, we
conceive it is safest not to alter the denomination of the Persons in the same
Prayer, especially, where it is in the hearing of others, who possibly may have
such thoughts, though we have none: and I suppose, this way is most ordinarily
taken in Scripture.

For answering to the second, to wit, how the Mediator is the Object of Divine
Worship: we shall first distinguish this title Object, then answer. By Divines,
there is in this case a threefold Object acknowledged (all agreeing to the
Mediator in some respect.) 1. There is Objectum materiale, or, quod, that is,
the Object, or Person to whom Worship is given. 2. There is Objectum formale,
or, quo, that is, the account upon which it is given to that Person, or Object.
3. There is Objectum considerationis, that is, the consideration that the
worshipper has of that Object in worshipping of Him; and is as a motive
thereto, or is (as the learned Voetius calls it, specificatio Objecti) the
specification of the Object, whereby the heart of the worshipper, by taking up
the Object worshipped under such a consideration, is warmed with love and
thankfulness, and strengthened in his confidence, to Worship that Object.
Thus, the relations that God took on Him to be the Redeemer of His people from
Egypt, and from the land of the North, did give no new Object of Worship; yet,
did they give some external denominations, or specifications, of that Object
God to them: the consideration whereof, in their worshipping, did much qualify
the Object to them, so that with the more thankfulness and confidence, they
might approach to him: and thus we distinguish between the Object worshipped,
and the consideration which may be had of Him in our Worship. And this does not
make Him adorable simply and in Himself, because He was so naturally; but, it
is the ground upon which He is accessible to us, who are sinners and enemies:
from which, we may lay down a threefold distinction. 1. Betwixt the material
and formal Object of Worship. 2. Betwixt the Object of the act of Worship, and
of our consideration in worshipping. 3. Betwixt that which is the ground of
Worship, suppose Prayer, Faith simply considered in it self, and that which is
the ground of our access considered in our selves, to pray unto, or believe
in, that Object.

To answer then the Question, we say,

1. That the Mediator is the Object of Divine Worship, is fixedly to be
acknowledged; even the Man Christ, is to be honored with Divine Worship,
prayed unto, etc. as in Scripture is clear. Thus the Mediator is the material
Object of Divine Worship, or, the Objectum quod: for, we worship and invocate
Him who is the Mediator; and there is no question of this.

2. Christ, considered as Mediator, and in the virtue of His mediation, is the
only ground, upon which we have right to expect to be accepted in any part of
our worship; or, to have prayers granted, which we put up to God under what
ever designation or title: for, so He is the Door and the Way, Ioh. 10.9. and
14.6. and in this respect though He be not as such, the formal Object of Divine
Worship; yet, He is the foundation whereupon it is now built; the Way, by which
it must be addressed to God; and He is the High Priest, Heb. 7.25. This was
typified by the Temple, Ark, and High Priest under the Law: for, sinners have
not access to God, but by Him; and this strengthens Faith to approach, that
God is manifested in our nature, and that so we have, by His suffering, entry
through the Vail, to the Throne of Grace, which formerly, without respect to
this, was shut.

3. Our Lord Jesus, who is God, in our worshipping of Him, may be considered as
Mediator; and, upon that ground, the heart may be imboldened to approach unto
God: because He that is God, is also Man and Mediator. Thus, we praise and pray
to Him that died, and considering Him as once dead, in our uptaking of Him, yet
so, as it is, because He is God: for, had it been possible that the Mediator
could not have been God, there had not been ground for giving of this Worship
unto Him; yet, this consideration warms the heart with love to Him, and gives
confidence and cheerfulness in praying to Him, or praising of Him, as in this
same place, and afterward, cap. 5. because seeing we have a Man to do with, who
has so experimentally felt sinlesse infirmities, of purpose to be the ground
of a sympathy with His Members; and seeing He has still humane affections, by
having a glorified body still united in One Person with His Divine Nature,
which wants not humane feeling, though in an inconceivable manner; and seeing
also, that that is given in the Word, as an encouragement for us, to step
forward, to expect grace and help in the time of need, Heb. 2.18. and 4.15, 16.
and that even from Him: there is no question but, by the actual considering of
this, a soul may, and ought to strengthen it self in its approaching unto God.

4. Yet, this Divine Worship is given to Him, as He is God, and because He is
God; and so Christ-God is the Objectum formale, or, quo of this Divine Worship,
because it is the Godhead that is the alone formal Object of Divine Worship, as
is said; and Christ only, as God, has these essential Attributes of
Omniscience, Supreme Majesty, Adorabilitie, etc. which are requisite for the
Object of Divine Worship. And therefore in this place, although He be set out
in what is peculiar to Him as Mediator; yet, His being reckoned with the other
Two blessed Persons, does prove that notwithstanding thereof He is considered
in His Person as God. It is then thus, as we say, Christ-God died, yet as Man;
so the Man Christ, is worshipped, yet as God: for, though He be one Person, yet
the properties of the two Natures are distinct. Hence, as the Fathers did prove
Christ's Godhead against the Arrians, from this, that He was worshipped with
Divine Worship; and account them Idolaters for worshipping Him thus, whom they
did not esteem to be God; so do the latter Divines in reference to the
Socinians.

5. Therefore this Worship that is given to Christ, the Mediator, is of the
same kind that is given to God, to wit, Supreme, Divine Worship: for, there are
not two sorts of Divine Worship. And to give the Mediator, who is God, an
inferior kind of Worship, would, 1. wrong Him who is God: for, by taking to
Himself that external relation, He has not diminished His essential Glory and
Majesty. 2. It suppones two objects of Worship, and two kinds of Divine
Worship; which is false. Therefore Divines have ever censured that assertion in
the Remonstrants Confession, anent giving a peculiar and middle-kind of Worship
to Christ the Mediator, as of it self unsafe and as making way for the Socinian
subterfuge, which is to allow a Worship to the Mediator, as Mediator, inferior
to that which is given to God; and so, that it should not follow from this,
that Christ is worshipped. Therefore, He is God equal with the Father. Now, the
Scripture gives Him that same Worship, and not any other, even when it is
denied to all creatures; yea, when He is worshipped in the days of His flesh.
He is considered as the only begotten of the Father, as Lord and Almighty,
having all creatures as servants under Him, etc. and yet He is styled the Son
of David, He that was to come, etc, even at that time; to show, that both
considerations have place in worshipping of the same Person, who is God, and
also Mediator; and not to bring in a new Worship; for, none can be more
glorious, than what is due to God; but to lay a new ground of having access to
give Him the Worship which is due, and by a new relation to give a kindly
qualification of the Object, whereby the heart may be provoked lovingly and
thankfully to give the same.

6. When this Worship is given to Him, it is given to the Person who is
Mediator, and that in one individual act: for, He, as God, is not worshipped
one way; and, as man an other way; nor is there a division of His Natures to be
conceived; but the Person, who is Man, is worshipped with this Divine Honor in
the same act, because He is God: therefore there is no such precision called
for in the intent of the Worshipper, as if one Nature of Christ's were to be
worshipped and not the other: for, it is the Person, who is worshipped, now
consisting of two Natures.

7. When the Mediator is thus worshipped, there is no distinct Object of Divine
Worship worshipped: but as whatever Person be named, it is the same God; so,
however the Mediator be named, or considered, it is the same Person: for, though
the second Person of the Godhead, considered in Himself, be not unum, or, the
same thing with the Mediator, ( sensu sci-formali, as Divines say) yet is He
Vnus, the same Person; and the second Person of the Godhead, being Vnum, to
wit, the same God with the other two glorious Persons essentially considered,
although He be not Vnus with the Father and Spirit, considered personally: for,
the Godhead, essentially taken, is the same thing with the Father, Son and
Spirit, as has been said. Then it will follow, that even when the Mediator is
worshipped, there is but still the same one formal Object of Divine Worship, to
wit, God; they being still the same essential properties, which alone give
ground for a creature to Worship all the Persons of the glorious Trinity,
considered in themselves; or, the Son, considered as Mediator, in the manner
expressed. Again it appears thus, the Son who is Mediator, is the same Object
of Worship, that the Son the second Person of the Godhead is: for, now He being
One Person, cannot be conceived as two distinct Objects of Worship; but the
Son, as the second Person of the Godhead, is the same Object of Worship with
the Father and Spirit, as has been said. Therefore the Son, who is Mediator,
when worshipped with Divine Honor, is the same formal Object of Divine Worship
also. And this also does confirm, that Divine Worship is given to Him as God;
for, so only is He the same Object with the Father and Spirit.

8. When the Son is worshipped, there is no less respect to be had to His
Mediation, than when the Father is expressed; so that who ever be named, the
Son still, as Mediator, is to be made use of, and that in the same manner: for,
as there is but One God, So there is but One Mediator betwixt God and man, 1 Timothy 2.3. without whom there is no access for a sinner to approach unto, or
worship acceptably, this One God. Thus, God is the formal Object of Worship;
the Mediator, considered as such, is the ground upon which with confidence we
may approach to that God: therefore is He the Way, and Truth and Life; there is
no going to God but by Him, so that in our Worship, God and the Mediator are
not to be separated; yet are they not to be confounded: for, we Worship God, in
and by the Mediator: in which respect, the Mediator is called the Door, Altar,
Way, etc. because it is by the virtue and efficacy of His Mediation that the
sinful distance betwixt God and us is removed, and access made for sinners to
Worship Him, as was typified by the Temple, and Tabernacle, in which the
Mercy-seat was placed; and in looking to which, the people were to worship God.

From all which, it will follow, in reference to the third. First, That our
Prayers may be directed to Jesus the Mediator expressly, as Act. 7.59. Secondly,
That He may be named by Titles, agreeing only to Him as Mediator, to wit,
Mediator, Jesus, Thou who died, Advocate, etc. because these, being given Him,
in concreto, design the Person. Thirdly, That the heart may be in the instant
stirred and affected with this, that He is Mediator, so as to specify Him, or,
to make Him the Object of our consideration as such, in that act, as has been
said. Thus a soul may pray to Jesus, who died, who made satisfaction, who
interceeds, etc. and, upon that consideration, be affected with love,
strengthened in hope and confidence in its Prayer, which yet is put up to Him,
because He is God. Fourthly, We may ask from Him what peculiarly belongs to the
Office of Mediation; as, that He may guide His Church, pour out the Spirit,
gift Ministers, interceed, etc. because the Person to whom these belong, is
God. And that extrinsick relation, or denomination, of being Mediator, does not
mar us to pray to Him; as his being God, hinders not but that He still
executes that office by performing of such acts: but both give ground, that
confidently we may pray to Him, for these things; yet, in that, still His
Godhead is the formal Object of our Prayer, though the things we pray for,
belong to His Mediation: for, we could not seek these from Him, were He not
God; and because He is God and Man, we are imboldened to seek them and to
expect them. See Psalm. 45.3, 4. etc. for, the matter fought, to wit, riding
prosperously, etc. belongs to His Mediation, as the scope clears; yet, the
account upon which, is, that He was God most mighty. For (as they say) it is
not Mediatio, but Deietas, that is the ratio formalis of Divine Worship; or,
His Mediation, as it includes His Deiety, by the wise Grace of God these two
being now inseparably joined together: for, certainly, Christ the Mediator, was
to be made use of with respect to His future satisfaction, before He actually
became Man; as it is since to be done, with respect to His incarnation and
suffering (for He was Mediator and stood in that relation before He was Man)
yet, it cannot be said, that He was then, as such, considered as the formal
Object of their Worship (even when they did explicitly consider Him with
respect to His Mediation) because He did not then actually exist in two
Natures: and therefore, behoved to be the formal Object of Worship, in respect
of that Nature, which alone did then exist. Fifthly, As any of the Persons may
be named in Prayer; so, for strengthening of our Faith, may the Mediator be
named and prayed unto under such titles and relations as agree only to Him, and
not to any other Person; Yet, then we would beware, 1. Of conceiving that we
are praying to a different Object, or that the Mediator is less glorious,
just, holy, etc. unto whom we pray, than when God is expressly named. We would
also beware of conceiving that by so doing, Christ is any way more engaged to,
or employed by, any, than when any other Person of the Godhead is named; or,
when other expressions are used, though we our selves may be more strengthened
by such considerations. 2. When there is an alteration of the expression, we
would beware of conceiving that we alter the Object; but, would mind that it is
the continued worshipping of the same Object GOD, however he be designed: or,
what ever be the expressions or different helps, which we seek to strengthen
out Faith by. 3. We conceive, that in public, especially, that change should
be warily used, left it breed, or be apt to breed any such thoughts in others,
the generality of people, being prone to imagine different Objects of Worship
in such cases.

From what is said, we conceive, that the different expressions among Divines
in this matter, may be easily agreed; for example, some call Him, as Mediator,
Objectum materiale; as God, Objectum formale: some say, as Mediator, He is
Objectum quod; and, as God, Objectam quo: some say, "Persona, seu is, qui est
Deus, est invocandus, quia Mediator, sed qua Deus: some again say, Christus qua
Mediator, est invocandus, sed quia Deus: for when some say, qua Mediator, He is
not the Object of Worship, they understand the formal Object; which is that,
that is understood by others, when they say, quia Deus. Again, when others say,
qua Mediator, He is to be worshipped, they understand it as He is the Object of
consideration^ which is expressed by others, when they say, quia Mediator,
Christus Deus est invocandus; or, as such, He is Objectum materiale of our
Worship.

It may then be asked, what may be thought of such a form of Prayer, O
Mediator, or, O Advocate, plead for me, which some may be apt to put up as
being comfortable to them? We answer, in these five Assertions.

Assert. 1. It cannot be simply condemned if well understood with these and
such like qualifications, that is, 1. If the Mediator prayed unto, or He who is
to plead or interceed, be not conceived to be any different Object of Worship,
from God, with whom He interceeds; otherwise there is no keeping of the unity
of the Object of Divine Worship; much less is He to be prayed unto as if He
were inferior to God, as easier to (...) dealt with, or, as if He might be
spoken unto, When yet we are not praying unto the Father, and Worshipping Him,
in that same act: for, as Christ-God, reconciled us to Himself, by His own
satisfaction; so, is Himself prevailed with, to make the benefits purchased,
forth coming to us by the virtue of His own intercession; and the Person is the
same, though the consideration of Him in these, is diverse. 2. If there be a
right up-taking of His intercession, that in the time while He, as God, is
prayed unto, Faith be exercised on the virtue of His intercession, for
attaining what is prayed for; so, that expression is but made use of for
strengthening, of Faith, without any new, or different act of Faith, but such
as is used with other expressions. 3. If the Object prayed unto, be
distinguished from the sure or matter prayed for: for so, it is as if we prayed
unto Him that is King of His Church, and has received the government, to
manage the same for His Churches behoof: because, though the thing sought, to
wit, Christ's intercession, be peculiar to the second Person of the Godhead, and
that as Mediator; yet, He from whom it is sought, is God; and so the Object is
the same. 4. It must be one in the matter, as if in different expressions by
naming the Father, we should pray, O Father, make me partaker of the benefits
of Christ's intercession: for, if it be thought that that expression comes more
nearly to the improving of Christ's intercession, (or, so to say) to the
employing of Him, than any other expression does. Then it is not to be
admitted: because it places the improving of His intercession, rather in
words, than in faith.

Asser. 2. We grant, that sometimes, de facto, it may be used in sincerity, and
accepted by God, when there is much confusion in reference to these
qualifications in the Person: because it may have what is essential, to wit, an
adoring of God, and an exercise of Faith in Christ, under that expression; so
that their meaning is, to obtain what they seek from God, through the virtue of
Christ's intercession, though themselves be unworthy. Thus, no question, many
Prayers of the Saints, where Faith has been in the Mediator, have been
accepted, although there has been much indistinctnesse, as to the Object, in
many things: such were Cornelius his Prayers, Acts 10. And the Apostles, no
question, prayed and were accepted; yet, had defect here, Ioh. 16.24.

Assert. 3. Again, we answer, That such a form is not necessary simply to the
use-making of His intercession, either as if that were limited to this
expression, or, as if it were a way more proper, compendious, weighty, or
acceptable, in the use-making of Christ, than another; even though all these
qualifications concur: for, no question, in the Prayers that are registrated in
the Scripture, Christ's intercession is made use of; yet no such form is
recorded therein.

Assert. 4. We say further, that it may be abused, and, we are afraid, often
is; and that it has some aptness to softer mistakes concerning the Object of
Worship, or our act in it, as, 1. That the Mediator is one Object, and the
Father an other, as if we might pray to the Mediator before we pray to God, and
not be in that same act worshipping the Father; or, as if the Mediator that
interceeds, were an Object different from God, with whom He is to interceed. If
it be said, that He is an other thing than God. Ans. Formally considered, (as
is said) He is another thing than the second Person of the Godhead; but He is
not any other Person, nor any other God; and so not an other Object of Worship.
2. It tends to propose Christ as more easy to be dealt with than God; and
God, (to wit, the Father) as more rigide, and severe than the Mediator, whereas
the divine Attributes are the same in both: for, if Christ-God be considered
without respect to His own Mediation, there is no access to Him more than to
the Father: and if respect be had thereto, there is no equal access to the
Father, there being the same Covenant and Promises. And it is certain, some
will think they may pray to Christ, when they dare not pray to the Father. 3.
It obscures the way of the use-making of Christ's intercession, which is a most
sublime thing; and being the same with praying in His Name, and in Faith, must
be conceived to be done Spiritually by Faith, whereas thus Christ is
represented as a Mediator amongst men; to whom first adresse is made, and then
by Him to the Principal Party; and so it constitutes two addresses, which
brangles the unity of the Object of Worship. 4. It some way lestens the Glory
of the Mediator, at least in appearance, as if He, even the Person, were not
Supreme, but had an other to plead with. It is true, it is so, as He is
Mediator; but still it would be adverted that He is also God; and so He may,
and can confer what His Mediation procures: and expressions in Prayer, would
befit that, and would not be as if He were not God as to His Person, since His
Incarnation? 5. It seems, if not to represent two Objects of Worship, yet two
kinds of Worship, to wit, one to the Mediator, or to Christ, as Mediator; and
an other as to God: for, who readily will think, that He who is a distinct
Party, entreated to plead, is to be equally honored, and that in the same act
with Him with whom He pleads, or at least, a twofold manner of the same
Worship, viz. one in this manner, and an other, when this form is not used. 6.
It is hard thus to conceive rightly of Christ's Person: for, when we pray to
Him, we must consider Him as God, at least that must be implied: then, He is
also to be interceeded with by His own Mediation, as the Father is, which, I
suppose, few intend. If they take the Father Personally, and so that Christ is
to interceed with the Father as a distinct Person, or a distinct Party, and so
not with the Son and Spirit also, That will insinuate that the Father is not
the same God with the Son, and infer a divided conception of the most simple
essence of the Godhead, which is the One Object of Worship.

Assert. 5. Therefore, When all is considered, although we will not condemn it
simply, yet we think it more fit to abstain from such formal expressions; or,
at least, to be sparing therein, especially in public: because, 1. So it is
difficult to preserve that unity in the one Object of Worship, which should be;
for, it is not easy to redd things in practice, as distinctions may be given
in doctrinal debates and conclusions: and should souls hazard on what may
confuse themselves. I say, especially in public, or with others: because, if
it be difficult to keep our own imaginations stayed in such expressions, it,
will be more difficult to redd other men's imaginations, considering what
ignorance and vanity usually does accompany many. 2. There is no such form in
Scripture, even in the New Testament, when the Mediator is prayed unto; and it
is safest we should follow these that have gone before us: He is indeed prayed
unto, considered as Mediator, but still so as the thing prayed for, is expected
from Himself, as well as to be obtained by Him.

To close then as we began; here sobriety is called for, and curiosity is to be
shunned: and in Worship the heart is rather to be occupied with Godly fear,
reverence and dread, than the head to be filled with imaginations.

Having these following things fixed in our hearts by Faith (which we conceive
more simply necessary to Worship, what ever the expression be,) to wit. 1. An
impression of the Holiness, Justice, Omnisciencie, and Glory of God, etc. and
suitable affections with the present work, to wit, such as the worshipping of
such a God does call for. 2. A conviction that we are praying to that One
glorious God, what ever our expressions be; that it is He we are worshipping,
that it is our design to adore Him, and that it is from Him that we expect what
we pray for, what ever the designation in the petition be, and whatsoever
Person be named. 3. An impression of our own sinful dis-proportionablenesse to
that work, and of the utter incapacity that we stand in of having access to
God, or any ground of expecting any thing from Him, in respect of our selves;
if it be not obtained by virtue of Christ Jesus His satisfaction and
intercession. 4. An exercising of Faith on Christ the Mediator, for attaining
of what is prayed for, from God, by virtue of the Mediation of the Mediator.
All which are necessary; and where they are, we conceive, the soul is to
silence all other questionings, and to hold here; and when doubtings arise, to
put these two Queries to a point within it self. 1. To whom art thou praying?
Or, was thou praying? Or, from whom expects thou what thou was seeking? Was it
not to, and from God? And, 2. For whose cause, and by virtue of what, do thou
expect it from God? What gives thee confidence to put that suit to Him? is it
not only through the Mediation of Christ Jesus alone? And where these two are
fixedly answered by the conscience, when tentation would jumble, because of
indistinctnesse in Prayer, there may be quietness notwithstanding: because,
these two are the essentials of Worship, to wit, First, That God be approached
unto and adored. Next, That in and by the Mediator, address only be made unto
Him, and this may be where there is no such explicit expression of either;
for, where God is mentioned, the Mediator is employed as the ground upon which
we approach unto Him; and when the Mediator is expressed, it is understood,
that God in and by Him is worshipped; and that no other God but He who is the
Father, Son, and Spirit. And if in all these a conscience were posed, that, may
be, had no such explicit thoughts (nor is it possible in worshipping actually,
to entertain them distinctly) it would answer, that so it intended and meaned,
from one question to another, till it result to this, to wit, that he were
praying to the One God, through the virtue of the Mediator Christ Jesus, which
is the scope. And thus, much anxiety may be prevented.

As to the fourth Question formerly mentioned, to wit, What may be the reasons
why Christ is so much infitted on in particular, in the Saints approaching to
God, so as the heart is especially rejoiced at the mentioning of Him? or, what
may help to improve that ground of access which we have by Him? Answ. To the
first part: It is no marvel that this relation that Christ does stand in, be
much insisted on, in such a case; and, that thereby the heart be warmed, and
made to exult.

First, Because, by that consideration, there is some staying of us in
approaching to God: for, the Godhead considered in it self, is an infinite,
inconceivable thing: and as there is no proportion betwixt Him and us; so not
betwixt Him and our capacities of reaching Him so considered, but by this union
of the Godhead with our nature in the Person of the Son; so that He who is Man,
is also God, Having the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in Him bodily, Coloss.
2.9. There is a condescendencie upon the Almighties side, showing Himself
accessible to sinners, and as appointing this (to say so) for a trysting place
with them, to wit, that, He is in Christ reconciling the World to Himself, 2
Cor. 5.19. whereupon the heart fixes, there to meet God, and find Him there;
and is thereby imboldened and helped to tryst with the great and dreadful God.
This was typified by the Lords placing of the Mercy-seat above the Ark, by the
giving of His answers from thence, and appointing the people with respect
thereto to make their addresses to him; whence we see, looking toward the
Temple, Jonah 2.4. toward the holy Hill, and holy Oracle, etc. frequently
mentioned in the Saints straits; which were typical of this true Tabernacle,
which God pitched and not man; and also held out there in their fixing Worship,
where God had by His Ordinance trysted them, though it was but in Type. And,
seeing they made so much of it, what wonder is it that the Saints, since Christ's
incarnation and suffering, make so great account of the Substance and Antitype
it self?

Secondly, A second reason; is, Because in Christ Jesus the glory and riches of
the Grace of God, in the work of Redemption, does most eminently and palpably
appear: which is both sweetest to the Saints, to insist on, and also tends to
the advancement of the glory of God, dwelling in Him, and so furnishing Him for
them. And therefore, these commendations that are given expressly to Christ the
Mediator, and whereby Faith is strengthened in Him, do also set forth and
commend exceedingly the Majesty of God, and His Grace condescending thus to
men; and, in the same act, do serve to strengthen Faith in Him: for, honoring
of God, and the Mediator, and also the speaking to the praise of God, and to
the commendation of the Mediator, cannot be separated; and what strengthens
Faith in the one, does it also in the other.

Thirdly, A third is, Because there is most sensible footing and (to speak so)
gripping to be gotten by looking to the Mediator, and mentioning of Him: for,
He being God and also Man, there is more access to conceive what the
affections and bowels that He as Man has, and for this end has taken up to
Glory with Him, that sinners thereby might have confidence in approaching to,
and by, an experienced high Priest, Heb. 2.18, and 4.16. than can be had to
consider God abstractly in Himself: of whose divine Attributes, there can be no
such apprehension. And this is not to give a new Object of our Faith, as if
thereby it were surer, (for nothing can be added to the fullness of God) But,
is to make that Object (to say so) more discernable, conceivable, suitable and
accessible unto us; and to give us a new ground to strengthen our Faith, and a
new way of having our necessities made sensible (to say so) to Him, that is,
when not only by His Omnisciense, He knows them fully, as God, but also being
acquainted thereby with the same; In respect of His humane affections, He is,
in an inconceivable manner, by sympathy affected therewith: which though it
add not to the hight or degree of His love and pity; yet, does it bring it to
such a channel (to say so) that hearts are more able to conceive thereof, and
are more delighted and comforted therein. And therefore it is no marvel, that
the same be most frequently mentioned.

Fourthly, He is (as is frequently said) the ground upon which we have access:
for, sin made a gulf betwixt God and man; man could not step over the same to
God, but God stepped over, and has come to man's side by being manifested in
our nature, in the Person of the Son, that so He might give men access again
to Him. Hence Christ is, in going to God, the Door, and Way; and, as it were,
the bridge by which they pass, and that safely unto their former communion
with God; and therefore Christ being God, so that they cannot have Him but they
must have God; and, being also the Way, by which access is given them to God,
it is no marvel that the mentioning of Him be sweet.

Fifthly, The great effects of the love of God have kythed, and have been
brought about in the Person of the Son, the Mediator: and, though there be no
greater love, as to its extent, degree, or freeness in the Son, than in the
Father and Spirit, (as is said) nor can be; yet, that makes the Mediator more
obviously lovely to the sinner, although indeed, in the same things, the love
of the other two Persons does appear also. And, seeing this makes the Object of
our love more sensible to us, and helps us to understand Gods love the
better, which otherwise is inconceivable: therefore, God, by proposing this as
the pattern and evidence of His love, and as the Object of ours, does even
allow sinners to feed their love, and strengthen their faith on this Object,
and on the immediate and explicit thoughts thereof, which yet is the
delighting and feeding on the love of God so manifested, which cannot be so
well read and understood, as by direct looking upon it, as it is manifested in
the Mediator, who, being God, became Man, suffered, died, and is now, though
glorified, yet a true Man, touched in a humane manner with our infirmities, as
a mother, or friend are touched with the difficulties of a child, or one
entirely beloved, though still in a manner becoming His sinlesse, glorified,
and most perfect state. This is a main attractive, to make souls look to God by
this open Door; and also by expressing this, which is nearest to their own
comfort, and conception to express their Faith in God, or their love to Him.

For encouraging and clearing of us in the improving of these grounds, these
things would be remembered.

1. That our blessed Lord is true Man, having these affections and properties
that are natural and not sinful, truly, and really: and that therefore, there
is a greater nearness conceivable in our approaching to Him, than to God
simply considered in Himself.

2. That, as He is Man, having such properties; so He is affected suitably
thereunto, that is, He has a humane affection to, and sympathy with these He
loves; and has the experimental ramembrance of His bypast sufferings, which
also has its own affecting influence on His soul, for awakning of such pity as
is consistent with His inconceivable glorified state.

3. That He who is Man, and thus affected, is also God; and so by His
Omniscience, acquainted with every need and strait of His people; and with
every petition of theirs, whereby His former affections are stirred, (to say
so) and His sympathy awakned, to make His divine Attributes forthcoming for
their good.

4. It would be considered, that the Scripture allows these considerations of
Christ to Believers, for helping them up to communion with Him, and so with God
in Him; and for strengthening them to approach to Him with confidence on that
ground.

5. As there is an exercising of Faith in God, and thereby, a keeping of
communion with Him; so there is a proportionable sympathizing, heart-warming,
and bowel-moving affection allowed us, even toward the very Man Christ, as one
has to a dear friend, or most loving husband: that so, in a word, we may love
Him, who is Man; as He, who is Man, loves us. And, this kind of communion, is
peculiar to the Believer, with the second Person of the Godhead, as it is
peculiar to the second Person of the Godhead, as Man, by humane affections, to
love Him; And thus we are not only one Spirit with Him as with the other
Persons of the Godhead, 1 Cor. 6.17. but we are one body with Him; of His
flesh, and of His bone, Ephesians. 5.30. in respect of this union and communion that
is betwixt a Believer and the Man Jesus Christ.

6. Hence, 6. As we have most access^ to conceive of Christ's love to us, who is
Man; so we are in the greater capacity to vent our love on Him, and to have our
bowels kindled upon the consideration of His being Man, and performing what He
did in our nature for us; so the Object is most suited, to be beloved by us, in
His condescending to be as a Brother to us. And this does confirm what is said,
and is a reason also why Believers vent their love to God by flowing in its
expressions directly concerning Christ: Because, He is both the more sensible
Object of our Faith, and love; and also because there is more possibility to
conceive and mention what He in our nature has done, than to consider God, and
His operations, in Himself abstractly.

7. Hearts would always remember that He is God, and so that they love, and
keep communion with Him that is God: that makes the former the more wonderfully
lively; as this should make souls keep up the estimation and dignity that is
due to such a Person, so condescending. And so by the Man Christ, both to love,
and believe in God.

And in sum, having the excellencies of God dwelling in the Man Christ, whose
affections they are more able to conceive of, whose sufferings have made H^s
love palpable, in whom God has condescended to deal with us* and on whom our
affections and Faith also may have the more sensible footing by the
consideration of His humane affections, There is no wonder that this way of
adoring, praising, and loving of God, be so much insisted upon; and yet; even
then when the heart is upon this consideration delighting and feeding it self
upon the Mediator; still His Godhead is emplyed, and God in Him delighted in;
without which, all other consolations would be defective. And so it is God, in
the Mediator, who is the Object of this delight. Now, unto this One God, be
praise in the Church, by Jesus Christ, for now and ever.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 4. John to the seven Churches in Asia, Grace be unto you, and peace,
from Him which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven
Spirits which are before His Throne.

5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the
first-begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: Unto him
that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,

6. And has made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.


WE heard of the Persons from whom: follows now these to whom the Epistle is
sent, to wit, the seven Churches in Asia; and they are particularly named, v^r.
11. and are several times spoken of in the two Chapters following: Therefore,
at the entry, we shall speak to a doubt or two concerning this inscription to
them.

Quest. 1. Why is this Revelation, in form of an Epistle, sent to particular
Churches, rather than to the Whole Church? 2. And why is it sent particularly
to the seven Churches in Asia? 3. Why are they styled seven Churches, and not
one Church.

To the first of these: Though it be sent to particular Churches; yet, this
excludes none from the use of it to the end of the world: for, though many
particular Epistles, as the Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians,
etc. be directed to particular Churches; yet, the benefit of the Word contained
in them extends to all Believers in all ages, as well as to them to whom they
were directed: So, those particular Epistles, directed to the seven Churches in
Asia, in the 2. and 3. chapters, are useful and behoveful to all the Churches
of Christ in the like cases, as if they had been particularly directed to them:
therefore is that Word cast to, in the close of each of those Epistles, Let him
that has a^ ^ar, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. 2. As to the
general subject matter of this Book. It concerns not those particular Churches,
more than others, as we told at the entry. For, ver. 1. It is directed to his
Servants, to be made use of to the end of the world, and it is sent to those
particular Churches to be transmitted by them to other Churches; and in this
sense, the Church is called the pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. as
holding forth and transmitting the Truth to others.

To the second, Why is it dedicated to the seven Churches in Asia? Answ. 1.
Either because those Churches were next to Pasmos, where John was now banished;
for, those who are skilled in Geography know, that this little Isle lies off
Asia the less. Or, 2. Because it is like John had particular inspection of
those Churches in Asia committed to him: which though it be not particularly
set down in Scripture; yet, it is clear from Scripture, that there was a
division of inspection among the Apostles, without limiting any of them. Peter
was sent to the Circumcision; Paul to the Gentiles; James shode at Jerusalem.
And in the Ecclesiastic Story, it is asserted, that after Paul had planted
Ephesus, John stayed there, who lived l^st of the Apostles: And so these
Churches being (as would seem) under his special oversight, while he is absent
from them by ^anishment, he commends this Epistle to them. 3. Jesus Christ
sends it to them, partly, because of some special faults that were among them,
their need so remaining; and because of some special trials they were to
endure, and the need they had of consolation under these trials: partly,
because they were the most famous Churches then: for, Jerusalem was now
destroyed this being written in the days of Domician the Emperor.

To the third, Why writes ^e to them as particular Churches, To the seven
Churches in Asia, and not to the Church in Asia? Answ. For clearing of this,
the Scripture speaks of the Church in a threefold sense, 1. As comprehending
the whole number of visible Professors, scattered through the world; so the
Gospel Church is spoken of from the days of Christ to His coming again, as 1
Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secundarily
Prophets, etc. where, by Church, is not to be understood this or that
particular Church, nor the Church in Corinth: for, the Church he is speaking
of, is such a Church, as God had set the Apostles in, and all Officers; and
that was in no particular Church, but is the universal Church, spoken of in the
Verse before, made up both of Jews and Gentiles: and so the word is often used
elsewhere, as it is said, Paul made havoc of the Church, and that he persecuted
the Church. It was not this or that particular Church, but all that called on
the Name of Jesus Christ, to whatsoever particular Church they did belong. So,
(1 Cor. 10.32.) the Church is contradistinguished from Jews and Gentiles, Give
none offense to the Jews, nor Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, that is, to
the Church visible, professing Faith in Christ. And this Church, R^vel. 12. is
set out under the similitude of a woman in travel, in readiness to be
delivered, and afterward does flee: which is not this or that particular
Church, but the Mother Church, comprehending the whole visible number of
Professors. 2. It is taken, as comprehending a number of Believers, meeting
together in one place ordinarily for the Worship of God, the smallest
associated part of this body of the universal visible Church, as 1 Cor. 14.34.
a company of professing Believers met, or meeting together for Preaching, or
Prayer: and in this sense, the Scripture speaks not so often of the Church. 3.
It Is taken neither for the whole body of visible Professors, nor yet for such a
part of that Body, that is, a company met or meeting together; but, for a
number associated and combined under one Government, meeting in their
Church-Guides and Officers, though under this combination and Government there
be many Congregation^ and Meetings: and so the Church at Corinth, Ephesus, and
Jerusalem, is to be understood: not for the Universal Catholic Church, nor for
a particular Congregation; but for a number of particular Congregations under
one Government, such as there was in Corinth and Ephesus. And yet, when he
directs his Epistle to one Church, as under one Government, particular
Congregations are included; as in Jerusalem, there were many Churches and many
Watchmen, and they could not meet together in one place, for the exercise of
Gods Worship; yet it was not unsuitable to say, the Church at Jerusalem, (as
the Church at Glasgow) as under one Government, though it were not suitable to
speak of them as of one Congregation met together; for, there were many more
Congregations of people in one of those Towns, as 1 Cor. 14.34. compared with 1
Cor. 1.3. there were Churches under one Church: therefore, it behoved to be a
mutual combination, that made up one body. In answer to the Question therefore,
While he speaks to them as Churches in Asia, it is because he looks on them as
so many distinct incorporations, parts of the whole; or, because their cases
and conditions were distinct; and one message could not agree to all, the case
of Ephesus, was one; the case of Smyrna, another, etc. And several cases and
conditions, required several letters.

But if any say, It is improper to speak of a Church in the New Testament,
except of a particular Congregation, because it is said here to the seven
Churches in Asia, and elsewhere the Churches in Judea, etc.

We answer: 1. That inference will not hold; but rather the contrary: for here,
it is said, the Church at Ephesus; and in Ephesus were many particular
Congregations: therefore, it is meaned of a Church associated and combined under
one Government: neither ever are Churches in one place mentioned, of whatsoever
number they be, but as one. 2. Though seven Churches of Asia be spoken of here;
yet, Revel. 12. the Church is spoken of, under the similitude of one woman: and
these Churches, must be parts of that one; the seed of that woman, and children
of that mother. See more, chap. 11. at the end.

Observ^, That our Lord Jesus Christ takes notice of the particular estate of
His Churches: not only how it goes with the Church, in general; but how it
goes with this or that particular Church; how it goes with Edinburgh,
Glasgow, etc. which shows a reason why he distinguishes them in the
inscription.

The second part of the inscription, is, a thanksgiving, from the midst of the
5. verse. to the 7. verse. when he has wished Grace and Peace from Jesus Christ,
whom he calls the first begotten from the dead: because by virtue of Him, all
do arise; and because He was the first that rose and went to Heaven (for,
though Enoch and Elias be personally in Heaven, they tasted not of death; and
so cannot be called the first begotten from the dead; others died again, as
Lazarus) And when he has called Him the Prince of the Kings of the earth, as
set down now at His Fathers right hand, as the Fathers Lord-Deputy, to point
out His Mediatory and given Kingdom; and His reigning, for the good of the
Elect, and to rule others for their sake: though not to subdue and make them
willing Subjects; yet, to bruise them with His Mace and Iron-Scepter. When, I
say, he is speaking thus of Jesus Christ, his heart begins to warm; and he
breaks out in a word of thanksgiving: wherein there is, 1. a description of
the Person, to whom the thanksgiving is made. 2. The thanksgiving it self. The
description is excellent, and of exceeding great consolation to the Church, as
holding out Christ's bowels, and the privileges and benefits that Believers
have in and through Him. 1. In the Fountain they come from, Him that loved us.
What a One is Christ? He is He who loved us: this is the Bosome-grace, from
whence all other Graces and Benefits do flow, Prove. 8. everlasting love, and
the first and chief style in all our praise. If Believers would know who Christ
is? It Is he who loved us: a most comfortable style. 2. In the particular
benefits that flow from this love, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood. Every word has an emphasis in it: He had not an empty and complementing
love; but such a love as moved Him to leave the hight of Glory, and come down
and take on our nature; and in that nature to die, and shed His blood for us;
and by that blood, to wash us from the filthiness and guilt of sin, in taking
away the evil of sin and wrath. And, in that He is said to wash us from sin in
His own blood, It suppones, 1. That sin is a filthiness. 2. That this
filthiness is not easily washen away. 3. That there is a great efficacy and
real virtue in the blood of Christ, to wash the soul and cleanse it from sin,
as if it had never sinned; as there is efficacy and virtue in a fountain of
water, to wash a filthy thing. And this was typified in those ceremonial and
legal washings under the Law. 4. That, that wherewith Christ washes Believers,
is, His own blood: not the blood of Bulls and Goats; but the blood of the first
begotten from the dead, the blood of the true and faithful witness, the blood
of the Prince of the Kings of the earth; yea, the blood of Him which is, which
was, and which is to come, the blood of Him who was, and is God, Therefore (
Act. 20.28.) it is said, Feed the Church of God, which He has purchased with
His own blood. It holds out, not only the efficacy and satisfactorinesse of
the blood of Christ; but also the end of His death: that it was not a mere
Testimony and Witnesse-bearing, nor only to leave an example to others, (as
profane men, derogating from our blessed Lords death, affirm) but, to wash His
own from their sins in His blood, to take away the guilt of sin in
Justification, and to make the Power of His death come in and slay sin, and to
sanctify, as it is 1 Cor. 6. Such were some of you, but now you are washed,
that is, Justified and Sanctified. There is not a Name that Christ has, but it
has some privilege and benefit in it to Believers; it holds out love on His
side, and consolation on ours; and every benefit which comes to us, is a Name
and Commendation to Him, and may be so used by us.

Verse. 6. In the description, He sets out how Christ, not only takes away what
is ill, from us; but how He abounds in conferring privileges on us. He not
only takes away sin; but, He has made us Kings and Priests to God His Father:
First, Kings, 1. In delivering us from the slavery of sin, that the most part
of the world lives in; and in making us masters over sin and sinful lusts,
masters over the Devil and the World, and the Flesh in some measure. And this
is a Princely thing: so the Church is set out, Rev. 12. as having the Moon,
that is to say, the transitory world under her feet. 2. Kings, in respect of a
Spiritual reigning in our spirits with God, by an heavenly conversation; having
our conversations in Heaven, Philip. 3.20. Col. 3.1. in an holy and heavenly
pride, and in a sort of kingly majesty, disdaining the ups and downs in the
world. 3. Kings also, in title and right, being set as Kings on the Throne with
Him, to execute the judgment written, Psalm. 149.9. This honor have all His
Saints, in a spiritual way, and some way to judge the world in their practice:
and they shall be Kings in possession, when that, which is here, shall have the
full accomplishment: and all the Saints, as so many crowned Kings, shall follow
Him in the clouds. Secondly, Priests, to offer their bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy and acceptable to God, Romans 12.1. to offer Prayers and Praises, the calves
of their lips: and this is no small privilege, to have access to God as
Priests. The Jews held these two, as great dignities, the Kingly and Priestly
offices; and Believers are called by Christ to both, so that they may come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace, and enter within the Holiest, through the
Vail, by that new and living way, being freed from the spirit of bondage and
fear, which in a great part accompanied the Jews ceremonial Worship. 1. How
many excellent consolations are here to Believers, and grounds of directions to
them? What grounds of consolation comparable to these, to be washen in that
blood of the Lamb; to be made Kings and Priests to God and Christ's Father, that
is, to no Idol, but to Him, to whom Christ is a Priest? Here is life and
immortality brought to light by the Gospel, privileges and benefits of an
exceeding passing worth and excellency.

1. Comparing this verse with verse. 1. Here Kings and Priests; and there, His
Servants. Observe, That there is no such royalty and dignity in the World, as
to be our Lord Jesus his Servant; it is truly to be a King, to reign; and a
Priest, to be consecrated to God: It consists not in loosnesse and carnal
liberty, but in new obedience: and the more obedient, circumspect and strict in
Holiness, the greater liberty, majesty, and kingly stateliness. All our Lords
Servants are Kings, so great a King is He, and so happy are they.

2. These Privileges lay an obligation on Believers, to carry themselves as
such. 1. If Christ's blood be given as a fountain to wash at, then make use of
it for pardon of sin, Mortification and Sanctification. 2. Let us carry our
selves Kingly. Its a beastly thing to be a servant of sin; but, it is a Kingly
thing and stately, to be minding the Throne, we are called to the faith and
hope of; to have our hearts and conversation suitable to that holy and heavenly
place; to have royal spirits, disdaining, and trampling on the things of a
present world, as unworthy of our hearts and affections.

3. Comparing this with the former, when he speaks of Christ, his affections
warms; and when he speaks of the benefits, which come by Him, it leads him to
the love they came from: and by that, again, he is led to praise Him, and he
cannot get Jesus Christ set high enough. Observe, Believers hearts should warm,
and be often warming themselves with thoughts of Christ, and vent^^g their
warmness of affection to Him in pra^se: It Is a sweet thing, when Believers
hearts cannot part with Christ; but, when ever He comes in their mind or mouth,
still to give Him a word of praise, and come to their purpose again, as John
does here; And it is often thus with Paul, as 1 Timothy 1.17. Ephesians. 3.20.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they
also which peir^ed him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of
him: even so, Amen.

8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which
is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

9. I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and p^tience of Jesus Christ, was in the Isle that is called Patmos,
for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.


It Is a concerning message that Christ is now sending to His Church: therefore
there is the larger preface to stir them up he writs to, to make that which he
sends welcome.

We heard, from the 4. verse, the particular Inscription or direction of this
Book, as an Epistle: and when he has wished grace and peace, and set down the
partie^ from whom the grace and peace is wished, and the Epistle is sent; he
turns it over in a thanksgiving to Christ, especially, pitching on Him, as
looking to the benefits and privileges they enjoyed through Him; as being, in
a special way, purchased by Him: and this thanksgiving, or doxologie, is all,
that he and all Saints can give Christ, for all that He has done for them;
unto him be glory and dominion. Believers, in looking on Christ's purchase,
would be more in ascribing glory and dominion to Him; not that they can add any
new glory to Him, or enlarge His Dominion; but it is to acknowledge, that to
Him belongs glory and dominion, as it is afterward, Chap. 5. verse. 12. Worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and glory, and blessing. It Is Believers expression, and hearty
assent, in approving Gods purpose and project in making Him Head over all the
Church.

Verse. 7. He seems to come back where he left, when he began his thanksgiving,
to speak of Jesus Christ under the last title of Prince of the Kings of the
earth; and that by way of pre-occupying an objection, which carnal hearts
might make: and it is this. Is He Prince of the Kings of the earth, who was put
to death, and laid in the Grave? Where Is He now, if He be such a Prince? He
answers, Behold, he comes with clouds: though many profane carnal hearts
now do not acknowledge Him; yet, He shall one day be acknowledged: He is now
out of sight; but it will not be long so: He is making ready for His coming to
Judgment, and is coming, Chap. 22.20. Surely I come quickly. This coming, in
the present time, implies two things. 1. The seasonablnesse of His coming; He
misses no time, He comes quickly. 2. That even the short time He delays, He is
making ready, as it were, for His coming; He is leading Witnesses, and fitting
Processes, and discovering the truth and falsehood of every thing; and every
thing that may further His coming, is going forward; He is not idle in
reference to His last coming to Judgment, but is hasting all. Secondly, His
coming to Judgment, is set out in the majesty and stateliness of it, under an
expression ordinary in the Prophets (as much of this Book is) He comes with
clouds. So Psalm. 97.2. Clouds and darkness are round about him; and Mat.
24.30. He shall come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. So
Psalm. 18.10, 11. To set out the stateliness of the Judge that comes thus
backed with Celestial Majesty. Thirdly, His coming is set out by the
palpablenesse and visiblenesse of it, Every eye shall see him: though most part
of Atheists think not of his coming now; yet when He shall come, there shall
not be a reasonable creature, that ever had life on Earth, whether Believer, or
unbeliever, but they shall with their eyes see Him in that day. Fourthly, Among
them that shall see Him, these are added, They also who peirced Him: under
which is comprehended His greatest Enemies; and it takes in both those, who had
their hands hot in his blood, and killed him bodily; and those who crucified,
and do crucify Him spiritually, as it is said, Chap. 11.8. He was crucified in
spiritual Sodom, they shall all, in that day, be called before His Bar, and
be forced to look on Him. A fifth circumstance in His coming, All kindreds of
the earth shall wail because of Him; in the Original, all the Tribes of the
earth: it is a word borrowed from the Jews their manner of reckoning, who
counted their Kingdoms by Tribes. The meaning is, all the Kingdoms of the
earth, and those that laugh at Him now, and think little of His coming, when it
is spoken of, shall wail because of Him, that is, because of their slighting of
Him; and now seeing Him to be their Judge, whom they slighted and contemned:
and though there be now a kindly mourning, like that in Zach. 12.10. They shall
look upon Him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn; yet, this being to
be at the day of Judgment, and spoken of the enemies that think nothing of Him
now, we take it to be an anxious howling of enemies, when they shall see Christ
come in the clouds to the great Judgment, and all His Angels and Saints about
Him, as Matthew. 24.30. The^ shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn. Sixthly,
There is a sixth circumstance added, even so, Amen: which is John's setting to
his seal, to His coming; and its doubled (as it is ordinary) both in the Greek
and Hebrew. He wishes He may come, and believes He will come, that it may be
as he has said, even as he closes his Revelation, Amen, Even so, come Lord
Jesus. And so it looks to His stately way of coming, and the effects it shall
have in the world, it being for His Glory, to vindicate Himself from the rubs
that His profane enemies put upon Him in the world, he says Amen to that, even
so, Amen.

Observe, 1. Our Lord Jesus, that was Crucified, and thought little of, shall
be as high as ever He was low in the open view of all His enemies. The time is
coming (and now is advancing fast forward) when He shall take unto Him His
Kingdom; and be visibly seen by all the Kingdoms of the earth, to be the Judge
of quick and dead, the Prince of the Kings of the earth. This is one of the
Articles of our Creed; and we would make use of the Scripture, to confirm it:
there is a time coming, and it is not far off, when He shall set His Throne in
the Clouds, and all eyes shall see Him. Think ye this true, that there is a
time coming, when we that are here, and all others, shall see Christ in His
Humane Nature, and also much of His Godhead as He shall be pleased to let out,
and we capable of? Think on it, and let it not go with a word; but consider how
ye will meet Him and stand before Him: and when ye meet with difficulties, or
creature comforts that would turn you aside, Remember on this day: and where
will they all be, when ye shall be arrested to stand before Him, Eccles. 11.9.

Obs. 2. Christ's coming to Judgment, is a special part of His stateliness,
and a main part of the Universalnesse of His Kingly Office as Mediator, when He
shall come and sit as Judge, and give sentence on godly and wicked, and send
away the one, and welcome the other. This will be one of His stateliest days,
when He shall vindicate Himself from profane men, and bear Himself out to His
people in His exceeding Glory. Believers, believe there is such a Day; and let
it quiet your hearts in the mean time of all these confusions.

Obs. 3. Our Lord Jesus His coming to Judgment, will be a doleful coming to
the most part of the world: they also who peirced Him, and all kinreds of the
earth shall wail because of Him; they shall cry to the hills, Fall on us, and
to the mountains, cover us; and would be glad to get into the clefts of the
rocks, and to the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the
Glory of His Majesty, Isa. 2.12. Men would think the greatest hill or mountain
a light burden in that Day, to get themselves bid from the peircing view of a
slighted and provoked Mediator. Oh, but that will be bitter and sore to bide!
Think upon it. There is a time coming, when many of you that hears this same
word, if Grace prevent not, shall see and find the truth of it. It Is terrible,
but experience will make it true: many of you now skars to hear tell of Christ's
coming to Judgment; but when that day comes, it shall be bitter in another
kind to you, when this bitter yelling noise, crying and howling, shall be among
the carnal world that slighted Him, and ye shall find your selves among them,
and shall share with them; and every cry and yell about you, shall be a new
wound. Therefore humble your selves, and seek for mercy and reconciliation in
time: for, either must you get it now, or never.

Obs. 4. A hearty consenting and saying Amen to Christ's coming to Judgment, to
have fore-thoughts of it, and to be longing for it, and wishing that it may
come, is a good token of a Believer and friend of Christ, to whom this day will
be a comfort. But, if many of us had our own mind, we would never wish to die,
nor that there should be a day of Judgment.

Verse. 8. Christ comes in Himself to tell what He is, and to confirm what John
has said of Him, I am Alpha and Omega: which are two letters in the Greek
Alphabet; Alpha, the first, and Omega, the last: and the meaning is in the next
words, the beginning and the ending. The beginning, He who gives all things a
being and beginning, and have no beginning My self: The ending, He who puts an
end to all things, and in whom all things end, and has no ending my self: for,
all things terminate in Him as their end, Romans 11.36. To Him are all things,
which is, which was, and which is to come, the same description which was given
to God the Father, verse. 4. setting out the immutability and unchangeablenesse
of His being, that He is from Eternity to Eternity the same, and, as we show,
the title JEHOVAH takes in these three words. Then more plainly, the Almighty:
every word here is a proper Attribute of God; He is infinite in power,
sovereign in dominion, and not bounded as creatures are; And this is clear to
be spoken of Christ, not only from the scope, ( John being to set out Christ
from whom He had this Revelation) but from the 11. verse. following, where he
gives Him the same titles over again; or rather, Christ, speaking of Himself,
takes and repeateth the same titles.

Obs. 1. Our Lord Jesus Christ, is God equal with the Father, and holy Ghost:
He, who is the first and last, the beginning and the ending, which is, which
was, and which is to come, the Almighty, must be God. These titles can agree to
no other: there is no created being capable of any of these titles; but He is
such. Therefore, etc.

Obs. 2. the stateliness and majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ: What an
excellent and stately Person is He? there is not a property attributed to God,
but it is agreeable to Christ. The use of it, is, to bring hearts to high
thoughts of Christ and it is not for naught, but for this end that the
Scripture insists so much in giving Him such stately styles, even to wear souls
out of these Atheistical thoughts of Him, and to prefer and esteem Him above
all.

3. Looking upon these words as spoken by Christ Himself: after John has
described Him, He comes in, and takes it off John's hand, and describes
Himself. Observe, That our Lord Jesus own mouth, can best tell what Himself is:
hearing, reading, speaking, writing will not do it; If the description come not
out of Christ's own mouth, it will do little on bearers.

Verse. 9. Follows the body of this Book, or Epistle. We will not now enter on a
particular division of it. That which is verse. 19. of this same Chapter, shall
serve for the time, Write the things which thou have sern, and the things which
are, and the things which shall be hereafter. The whole may be taken up in
these two, 1. John his representing the case of things, as they were for the
present, and, 2. as they were to be hereafter.

The first of these, to wit, his representing the case of things as they then
were, is, that which is set down in the first three Chapters: wherein is set
out the case that the seven Churches of Asia were in; which he discovers to
themselves, and to the world; and shows how many foul faults they had under a
fair name and profession: and this takes up John's first vision.

That which is from the 9. verse. to the end of this Chapter, we take up in
these three. 1. There is the vision it self, what John saw and what he heard,
from verse. 10. to verse. 17. mixed throw other. 2. In the 9. and 10 verses, some
circumstances are set down concerning John and the manner of his receiving the
vision, to make way for the faith of the vision, and the whole story that
follows. 3. From the 17. verse. to the end, some circumstances, that make way
for John his writing and publishing what he saw and heard, are recorded.

The first circumstance that makes way for the faith of the vision and story,
is, the person by whom Christ wrote, 1 John: of whom we have heard before in
the entry. And he sets out himself here further, under several expressions or
titles. 1. Who also am your brother; a son of the same house, a joint heir with
you in the same Kingdom; a comforting title to them, and a humbling title to
him. Those he wrote to, being brethren, he reckons in himself a brother with
them: for, the most eminent Believers, John, Paul, Abraham, David, etc. come in
to be brethren with the meanest Believers; all being children of one Father, of
one House, heirs of one Inheritance: and Abraham, his being a brother, and John
his being a brother, prejudgeth not the least of them to whom he writes. And
as all have one Father; so all are begotten by the same word, have one Spirit
here, and Glory for ever hereafter. 2. The next title he describes himself by,
is, companion in tribulation, that is, a fellow sufferer with you, a sharer of
the sufferings of Christ as well as you; I, who am a great Apostle am not
exempted from sufferings more than ye are, who are in Smyrna, Philadelphia,
etc. I have mine own share of the Cross, as ye have; yea, he takes it to
himself as a title of honor, as a great prerogative and dignity, as Paul, Ephesians.
3.1. I Paul the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, So it is, John, who,
as I am suffering with you, so I am confined for Preaching to you in Patmos:
pointing out this, that as all Believers are brethren; so all have one lot in
suffering here away; and none are exempted from the Cross: were it the
Disciple whom Jesus loved and leaned on His bosom at the Supper, the night He
was betrayed; yet, he must be a companion in tribulation, and come into heaven
at the same door with the rest. Folks would not think this strange, that
afflictions light on these whom Christ loves best: the servant is not greater
than the Lord. It should comfort sufferers, and make them look on it, as their
prerogative, to be sufferers for Christ. 3. There is a further aggravation, or
explication, of the former, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ.
Lest it should be thought any thing derogatory to be a sufferer, he says, he is
a companion in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ with them. And these
two words, Kingdom and Patience, are put together, not only to show He is a
King and a Priest with other Believers; but to show this much, that Christ's
Kingdom, is often more in the exercise of patience than in dominion; and that
the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom here, are more put to exercise patience than to
reign. His meaning is, I am a sharer with you in the Spiritual Kingdom of
Christ, that needs no worldly grandour, but has need of patience. And it
says, that he counts it his prerogative to be singled out, and put to patient
suffering, for giving testimony to Christ as King of His Church. Afflictions
for Christ, and sharing in His Kingdom, may stand well together for the time
and in reference to the upshot, if we suffer with Him, we shall reign with Him.

A second circumstance, which is also a further description of himself, is,
from the place and cause. 1. From the place of his suffering, I was in the Isle
which is called Patmos. This Patmos, is an Isle in the Aegean-Sea, near the
coast of Asia the less, not far from the seven Churches in Asia, to whom he
writes: a place which is called barren, by them who write of it; not much
inhabited then, not now, because of the barrenness of it: therefore it was a
greater evidence of the cruelty of John's persecuters that banished him thither.
2. The cause, is, for the Word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ,
that is, for his Preaching the Word of God, and for his owning and maintaining
Christ's Gospel; for, his bearing testimonies that Jesus Christ was the King,
Priest, and Prophet of His Church, and the eternal substantial Word of the
eternal Father; for Christ's cause, who is the Word of God; or, for bearing
testimony to Him. The way how he came to this Island, is not set down; but
History tells, [ Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 14. ex Ireneo and Clem. Alex.] it was in
the fourteenth year of Domitian the Emperor, when he raised the second
persecution against the Church of Christ, about the 97. year of our Lord, that
he, after he had tortured John, banished him to this Isle: near about the same
time of John's age. This then is the place that John was banished to; and yet,
in the same place, he has sweet fellowship with God; is countenanced of Him,
and honored to be the carrier of this Revelation to the Church.

1. See here how far graceless and profane persecuters, (such as this beast
Domitian was) may prevail against the servants of Jesus Christ, when he does
banish John to Patmos, beside other horrible persecutions, which he raised
against the Church. Christ, by this, would have us know His Kingdom is not of
this world.

2. Solitariness for Christ, is not the worst condition. Christ can make up
that another way: and if there be a necessity of withdrawing men from their
duty, as of Ministers from their public Ministry, He can make it tend as much
to their private benefit, and to the public good of His Church, if not more:
neither does John lose any thing by his banishment and confinement; for, he
finds more intimate and sweet communion and fellowship with Christ, and gets
more of His mind: nor does the Church lose any thing by it; for, she gets this
Revelation of Gods mind. If we believed this, we would never go out of Gods
way, to make up His Work: for, if He please to lay us by, He knows how to make
up that, both to our selves and Gods people. The Christian Church, is as much
beholden to Paul's imprisonment in Epistles, as to his liberty in Preaching.

3. Honest suffering for Christ, has often with it the freshest and clearest
manifestations of Christ. Folks that will continue faithful, and bide by their
duty through sufferings, they shall not only not be losers, but gainers, 1 Pet.
4.14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for, the
Spirit of God, and of Glory rests upon you. I would have none carnal nor vain
in this, but humbly confident and constant, as they would thrive in their
Spiritual condition and maintain their peace.

LECTURE IIII.
Verse. 10. I was in the spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great
voice, as of a trumpet.


BEfore John come particularly to the Vision he saw, he insisteth in some
particular circumstances, that make way to the more full faith and credit of
the Vision and Story that follows: and though they be only circumstances in
themselves; yet they are profitable and conducing to the main end he has
before him. We heard of the first and second circumstance how, and where John
was, when he got this Vision.

Follows in the 10 verse. the third and fourth circumstances, that is, the day
when he got this Vision, and the frame he was in, I was in the spirit on the
Lords day. The words, in the Original, are, I was in the spirit on that Lords
day, pointing out a day singularly, and a day that in a particular and special
manner is called His Day, beside any other day, that Dominik day, or day which
is the Lords.

That we may have access to the use, we shall speak a little to these two. 1.
What particular day this is, seeing there is no mention made what day it is,
more than this, that it is called The Lords day. 2. What it is to be in the
spirit on this day.

For clearing of the first of these two, ye would consider, that there is but
one other phrase in Scripture like this, and it is spoken of the Lords Supper, 1
Cor. 11. This is not to eat the Lords Supper. They that know the Original,
know also this phrase to be singular, like this of the Lord's day, (...), and 1
Cor. 11.20. (...) which is opposed unto, and contradistinguished from, (...):
which was not see apart from other suppers, and common use, as this was: And
these two, being by one particular phrase expressed, we must expound the one by
the other. Now, the Lords Supper, is called so, for three Reasons; for which
also, we conceive this day, to be called the Lords day. 1. The Lords Supper,
because of the Lords singular instituting that Bread and Wine for a special
and religious end, distinguishing, differencing and setting it apart from a
common use, to a more special use: And so, this day, is called the Lords day:
because of the Lords separating and setting apart this day for His special
Service and Worship; and in that, distinguishing it from other days, as He had
done that Supper from common suppers, 2. The Lords Supper, for its special
signification, Jesus Christ and His benefits being especially set out in it,
His death and sufferings pointed at, and the benefits we have thereby. So this
day, is called, the Lords day, because it is of special signification, pointing
out not so much Gods ceasing from the work of Creation, as our Lords ceasing
from the work of Redemption: as the Lords Supper is for the remembrance of His
death till He come again; so is this day for remembering the work of Redemption,
and His Resurrection, till He come again. 3. The Lords Supper: because of its
special end, to set out the honor of the Mediator, and the Worship, and
Ordinances brought in by Him under the New Testament; so to distinguish it from
the Passover. So this day, is called the Lords day, for the same reason, to
set out the honor of the Mediator, and that it may be enrolled among the
Ordinances of the New Testament: therefore, when in the New Testament, ought is
called the Lords, it points ordinarily at Christ the Mediator, and at the
second Person of the Godhead, as 1 Cor. 8.6. One God, distinguished from One
Lord. We take it then for granted, that it is called, the Lords day, for these
Reasons: because its a special day, set apart for the Lords use, of special
signification, and for a special end. And Secondly, That it is a special day,
known to the Church, may appear: for else, John would not have given it such a
denomination; and that it points at some thing of Christ, and so is separated
from any Jewish day, and common day, It is a day known singularity to relate to
Christ. To clear it, consider, it must either be the first day of the Week, or
some other: But none other day it is. Ergo, etc. If any other, it can be
supposed only one of these two: either, not any particular day of the Week,
but any special day or time of Christ's appearing or manifesting Himself; Or
else the Jewish Sabbath day. Now, neither of these can be meant by the Lords
day. 1. Not the former: for, such a day of Christ's special appearing not being
named here, it would leave the Church in an uncertainty to know what day was
meaned; yet is this day mentioned, to point it out from other days; that is
the scope why it is so designed. Beside, if it were any such day, it would
point at no one day; for there are many times of Christ's appearing. It Is not so
to be understood then, though even so our Lords appearing may agree to the
first day of the Week, whereon most frequently He appeared after His
Resurrection to His Disciples, as Mat. 28. Ioh. 20.26. Acts 1.2. 2. Neither the
latter, to wit, the Jewish Sabbath day. 1. Because it is ever called the
Sabbath, and gets the own name that it formerly had and the giving of it this
name, will more obscure then clear the day. 2. Because the Jewish Sabbaths were
then annulled, as Colus. 2.1^. Let none judge you in meat or drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon part of the Sabbath days: Therefore
then can they not be called the Lords day. And Gal. 4.10. they are reproved for
observing Days, and Months, and Times, and Years, where it is clear, the
Jewish new Moons, Sabbaths and Festivities were then, and before that time
abolished in so far as peculiar to them, though all distinction of days was
not taken away, more than all distinctions of the Elements in the Lords Supper
from other Meat: because distinction of meat was condemned there also; But this
follows, all Jewish distinction both of meat and days was taken away, but
what is still assigned by Christ, that continues. 3. The Lords day, in the
phrase of the New Testament, looks to Christ, as having its name some way from
him: which cannot be said of the Jewish Sabbath; But this is called the Lords
day, as pointing at an Ordinance of the New Testament, whereas the Jewish
Sabbaths had a respect to the Old Testament Ordinances. 3. It remains
therefore, it must be the first day of the Week, because no other day can lay
claim to it: i^ is that day, which we call Sunday, or, the Christian Sabbath;
and was, in the Primitive times, called The Lords day. 1. Because the Reasons
why a day is called The Lords day, do agree to it especially. The Jewish
Sabbath, was called The Lords day, Exodus 20 and because on it He ceased from
the works of Creation: this day is called The Lords day; because on it He
ceased from the work of Redemption, Mar. 16.1, 2. Luke 24.1, 2. Ioh. 20.1. It Is
that day, whereon our Lord not only rose; but several times did meet with His
Disciples: and many mark several privileges and benefits conferred on this
day; as the pouring out of the holy Ghost, Acts 2. And more reasons might be
given, whereby this day is singularly beyond others to be called His. 2.
Because this first day of the Week and no other, was set apart for the Lords
Worship and Service, as distinguished from other days. And John's end here, is,
to fix on a particular day known to them, and so esteemed of among them, as
such a day. That it was set apart for the Lord and His Worship, is clear, not
only from places we have named, but from Act. 20.7. Upon the first day of the
Week, when the Disciples came together, to break bread, Paul preached unto
them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight:
Which intimates not only a meeting, but a custom of meeting, and that for
Preaching, Prayer, and celebration of the Lords Supper. So 1 Cor. 16.2. Upon
the first day of the Week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as God
has prospered him; and in the 1. verse. he tells, concerning the Collection of
the Saints, he had given the same order to the Churches of Galatia. If it be
asked, Why does Paul point at the first day of the Week, and bids give
themselves to Charity that day: here it is, because that day was dedicated to
Gods Service and Worship, whereof Charity was a pendicle: And (as we hinted at)
this was not peculiar to one Church, as Corinth; but was common to all the
Churches. The like order was in all the Churches of Galatia: and it does not
point at Paul's instituting a day; but at his supposing of it to be instituted;
and at his injoyning of a positive duty of Charity meet for that day. And it is
observable, that though the Saints had meetings on other days; yet, is it
never said, they did meet the second, third, or fourth days, etc. but on the
first: which certainly is done, to show a pecullarnesse in that day, and the
meetings on it; yea, few or none deny this denomination to signify the first
day on this account, it being so clear from Antiquity, and no other day being
here to compet with it, and that can lay such claim to this denomination, as
this day does; and was by the most Ancient still so named.

For the second thing to be cleared: What it is to be in the spirit on the
Lords day? To be in the spirit, is, First, to be Spiritual, to have the habits
of Grace, and a new Nature: and thus it taketh-in the ordinary walk of
Believers, Gal. 5.16. 25. Secondly, More especially, it is for these who are
habitually in the Spirit, to be actually and in a more eminent measure in the
Spirit, as Ephesians. 5.18. to be filled with the spirit, to be in a holy rapture and
ecstasie, is warranted and allowed to Believers in a more special frame, and
at more special times to be in a spiritualnesse abstracted from e^^nalnesse,
and lawful things, more than ordinary. Thirdly, It is to be in the Spirit in
an extraordinary manner and measure, or to be in an extraordinary rapture, the
Spirit revealing something extraordinarily: and this is to be in the Spirit, in
a sense different from the former, albeit consisting with them. We cannot
seclude any of these, in this place: for John was regenerated, and was
habitually Spiritual and Gracious; but we especially include the last two: As
if he said, though I was absent from company and Christian fellowship, and had
not a Congregation to Preach in on the Lords day; yet I was in the Spirit,
exercising the habits of Grace, and I was in an eminent, Spiritual and Holy
Frame; the Spirit, elevating my spirit: (which is that spoken of Isa. 58.13. If
thou cast the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord, etc.) and the Lord
takes him in this spiritual frame and strain, and ravisheth him in the
Spirit: and from the second step He brings him up to the third, to be in Spirit
as an extraordinary Prophet, as we take Peter to have been, Act. 10. when he
went up to Pray, that is, to the second step; and fell in a Trance, and saw
Heaven opened, which is the third. We think the same has been John's case here.

The words give occasion to speak of several Doctrines, as 1. The good that is
to be gotten on the Lords day, when folks are in a spiritual frame. 2. That
when folks are separated from the public Ordinances, they would be making it
up in private, by giving themselves to spiritual exercises, 3. And that God
not only can, but does make up the good to be gotten by the public, by private
and secret fellowship with Himself, when Believers in Him are banished from, or
denuded of the public Ordinances. But nor to insist on these, they give
occasion to speak a little of these three things. 1. The institution of he
Lords day. 2. The name that the Lords day gets. 3. Of the sanctification of it,
or of a special part, wherein the sanctification of it consists.

For the First, To wit, for the institution of this Day, several Arguments are
here; or, we may argue several ways to prove it. 1. If in the Apostles time
this day was set apart for the Lords Worship and Service, and in a special
manner called His, as being kept to Him on a moral ground, Then we have
warrant, and it is our duty to keep it for the same end and use: for, the
practice of extraordinary men, grounded on moral and perpetual Reasons, and
that were not peculiar to them as extraordinary, but are common to them and us
(as the Grounds and Reasons of the setting apart this day are, it being for the
remembrance of His Resurrection, and the bringing in of a new World; and
therefore, all did from the beginning, keep that day) are binding to us, as is
clear. But the first day of the Week, was appointed to be the Lord's day, in
the Apostles times; and singled out and set apart for His Service on a moral
ground, (for, no ground peculiar to them can be given) Therefore certainly it
must be our duty to keep it. 2. If the first day of the Week, was singled out
from other days, and counted the Lords day, Then there behoved to be an
institution for it, or, a supposed institution, that is, it must be the Lords
day, either because He instituted it, when He spoke many things to His Apostles
after His Resurrection, concerning the right ordering of His House and Worship;
and by His practice, observed and sanctified it, for His special Service; or,
because these that were infallibly guided and led by His Spirit, instituted and
gave warrant to keep it: for, without an institution and command, it is not to
be kept, or named so, more than another day: But this first day, was in
practice, singled out beside all other days, and is accounted the Lords in a
special manner, as is said, Therefore there must be some institution of it. 3.
Comparing this Text with 1 Cor. 11.20. If the first day of the Week be the
Lords day, as the Sacrament of the Supper is the Lords Supper, then it must be
by His appointment and institution Hi^; But so the phrase in both places is to
be understood. Ergo, by comparing these two places, the peculiarnesse of the
phrase is such, that (there being no other phrase like them in Scripture) it
seems the holy Ghost warrands us to gather the reasons of this denomination
of the one from the other, though the institution of this day be not so clearly
expressed, as the institution of the Lords Supper. For it is a received Rule for
expounding Scripture, to expound more dark places, by places that are more full
and clear: And therefore conclude we, that the Lord's day is to be called the
Lords: because of its institution, though we know not where; because, for the
same reason, the Supper is called His, there being no solid ground to conclude
upon. And they who give reasons to the contrary, must make it appear, that
there are other reasons more pregnant, or else the language of the holy Ghost
must have weight with us. 4. This first day is the Lords, as the seventh day is
called His, or any other thing in the Old Testament; but that is ever because
of His setting apart that day or that thing for His own, from others of that
kind, Therefore it must be so here.

There are some exceptions, made by some worthy men, which we shall speak a
word to, As 1. If it be so, it will follow that all days are not alike,
contrary to Romans 14.14. Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.16. where the Scripture seems to say
plainly, that all days are alike: Therefore the Lords day cannot be so
understood. Answ. This does indeed directly contradict the letter of the Text:
for either this Text points at one day by another, or else it does nothing.
2. The Apostles scope in the places that seem to be contrary to this, is clear:
when he casts the Jewish Sabbath and holy days, he casts them alike in respect
of Jewish observation only; or, in so far as they were Jewish and Typical: for,
Christ had taken them away in that respect, even as He casts meats also, yet
without prejudice of the Sacraments: and this confirms our Argument. For if
Jewish Days and Sabbaths, were taken away forty years and more, as is clear
by Paul, before John wrote this Revelation, in as far as they were Jewish, and
yet John speaks of a Lords day, as differenced from other days, it says it
continued when they were abolished. There is a great odds betwixt layingaside
of Jewish days, and the Lords day: and when John speaks of the Lords day, he
speaks of it in the singular number, in opposition to those many days, the
Jews had, under the ceremonial Law. And even that learned Doctor grants this
place to speak of the first day, and the Churches practice to meet on it also,
and, in several respects, to be privileged beyond other days.

A second exception is, If this day be so counted of, it will bring in the
sanctifying of it, in as eminent a measure, as the Jews Sabbath was. And, is
not that to judaize? Answ. Distinguish betwixt things Ceremonial or Typical,
and things Moral and Perpetual: We bring back nothing that was Ceremonial
and Typical, as their Sabbaths of Weeks, Sacrifices, and many other things
were; but for Moral duties, they become us as well as the Jews, and bind
Christians to the end of the World. And this brings not back Judaisme, neither
leads us to Sacrifices, and the like, which pointed at Christ to come; but
contrarily, this day and the duties of it, hold out Christ already come: which
destroys all these Ceremonies and Sacrifices, and declares them to be gone.

A third exception, It cannot be compared with the Lords Supper: for, 1. The
Lords Supper, is clearly instituted; but this is not clear in the institution
thereof. 2. The Lords Supper, is a Sacrament; this is not: and days may be
changed, as Sacraments cannot. Answ. 1. To the last part: It is a begging of
the Question: if it be the Lords day, set apart for His Service, all the world
cannot change it, except He, who can change Sacraments also. 2. To the first
part: That the institution of this day is not so clear, as the institution of
the Supper. Answ. We do not parallel them in respect of clearness of
institution; but, in respect of the ground, or reason why they get this name:
which suppones an institution. If the Sacrament of the Supper, be called the
Lords Supper, because instituted by Him, for a special use; so must the Lords
day get this name on this reason; or, some better or clearer reason from
Scripture must be given.

For the second, Seeing it gets this name to be called the Lords day: It may be
questioned here concerning our manner of speaking of days, calling the Lords
day Sunday, the next day after it Monday, etc. which has the first rise from
Superstition, if not from Idolatry; some of them being attributed to Planets,
as Sunday and Monday; some of them to Idols, as Thursday, etc. But to speak to
the thing it self, look to the Primitive times, we will find Sunday called the
Lords day; and the days of the Week by the first, second, third, etc. But the
names of days, being like the names of places and months, folks must speak of
them, as they are in use, and Scripture warrands us so to do, Acts 17.22. Paul
is said to stand in the midst of Mars hill. Acts 28.11. speaks of a Ship,
whose sign was Castor and Pollux. So, March, January, July and August, are
from the Idols Mars and Ianus; or, derived from men that appropriate more than
ordinary to themselves. And though it was ordinary to Christians, in the
primitive times, to call this day the Lords day among themselves; yet, when
they had dealing with the Jews, they called it the Sabbath; and when they had
dealing with the heathen, they called it the Sunday. And so, though it be best
to speak of days as Scripture names them; yet, it is agreeable with Scripture,
to design or denominate them, as they are in use among a people, especially
where no superstitions use is in naming of them.

For the third, The Sanctification of this day. It is pointed out in John his
saying he was in the Spirit on the Lords day: to point out this, that this day
requires a special Sanctification and setting apart to Worship God. And there
are four steps of it mentioned in the Scripture. The 1. is negative abstinence,
not only from sin, but from our civil and ordinary affairs, which are lawful on
other days, but not on this day, Isa. 58.13. The 2. is positive: in devoting
it to God, and spending the whole day in duties of Worship, in reading,
hearing, praying, singing, breaking of bread, or celebrating the Communion,
Acts 20.7. And that, not only in private duties; but in public: and in
private, when the public is interrupted, except in cases of necessity. 3. It
should be spent in the duties of charity: though the sanctification of this day
cannot consist with working; yet, it may stand well with giving of alms, and
seeing to the necessities of others, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. A fourth step, is, in the
Text: to have a holy and sanctified frame, a divine stamp, a heavenly
conversation, more than ordinarily taken up with God and Christ, and the things
of another Life that day. This is the main thing wherein the Sabbath is to be
Sanctified, and wherein it represents heaven, to be abstracted from the world,
and to be living above in our Spirits, eminently ravished in Spirit, as
abstracted from things, we are to be taken up with on other days. The frame of
a Sabbath, should be a kind of ravishment, wherein not only we are not taken up
with working our ordinary callings, but we do go about Prayer and other
Spiritual duties in a more heavenly way, than on other days, and that with a
difference in our frame, being more elevated and Spiritual, we should be other
men, in more divine contemplation. This is the main thing called for in
sanctifying the Sabbath: and therefore, Heb. 4. heaven is set out by the
Sabbath: wherein there ought not only to be a ceasing from our own works; but
an entering into our rest, Heb. 4.10. as it is ( Isa. 58.13.) a delighting in
God, calling the Sabbath our delight, the holy of the Lord and honorable, the
heart being taken up with it.

Remember from all that has been said, this day is the Lords day: and it says
that folks should spend it, not as they like; but for Him, and about the duties
of His service. It is not the sanctifying of the Sabbath to spend an hour or
two in public, and the rest of it in our own discourses, pleasing and
delightsome to our selves. All days are Gods; but He has given you six, and
reserved the seventh to Himself. Ye should be with Him in the spirit on the
Lords day: which is the main use of all that has been said.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 10. I was in the spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great
voice, as of a trumpet.

11. Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and what thou see,
write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches which are in Asia, unto
Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto
Sardis, and Philadelphia; and unto Laodicea.


JOHN has in the verses before, and in the beginning of this, put by the
particular circumstances relating to this vision: we shall say no more of them.
We come to the vision it self, in the rest of the chapter, with some
circumstances, making way to John's writing of what he saw.

We comprehend, under the vision, not only what is objected to the eye, or what
John saw; but all that he sees or hears, whereby some new thing is represented
to John, or that which he had heard or seen before, is again more clearly
revealed, and made known to him, as it used to be in the extraordinary
Prophets, having Gods mind, several ways, manifested to them.

This part of the vision has three steps, First, What John heard, from the
midst of verse. 10. to verse. 12. Secondly, What he did, verse. 12. And, Thirdly,
Follows that which he saw, to verse. 17. The rest of the chapter from verse.
17. has some following effects and circumstances, to clear the vision, and
John's writing of it.

That which John heard, is three ways described. 1. In the nature of the
voice, which he heard. 2. From the place where, or the manner or way how he
heard it; the voice spoke behind him 3. The particular matter that was spoken.
First, The nature of the voice which he heard, is set out with two words. 1.
It Is called a great voice. 2. It was a voice as of a trumpet, or, like a
trumpet.

1. A great voice, that is, a mighty sound, a voice that made a great noise, as
afterward, verse. 15. His voice was as the sound of many waters, like the
tumbling down of a great river over a high fall or precipire.

2. It was a voice as of a trumpet, that is, 1. Not a confused or inarticulate
sound, but a stately voice, having a kind of majesty with it. 2. Like a
trumpet, giving a certain and distinct sound. And, 3. Like a trumpet, to stir
up John to attention, to give him an alarm, to set him on his watch and guard
to observe what he saw and heard. And it imports these four things, which might
be so many grounds of Doctrine. 1. The majesty of the Person, who was speaking
to John, that John may come to take Him up; it is to show that it was no common
Person, but our Lord Jesus Christ, that is stately in His coming: and this is
the first thing that follis should have, when they come to hear the Word, they
should be affected with the majesty of Him who speaks and consider it is His
voice, who stakes the heaven and the earth, th^^ makes the binds to calve,
etc. Psalm. 29. 2. It is to point out to John the great distance between him and
the Person that speaks to Him, and so to humble him, and to affect him with a
humbling and kindly sense of his own infirmity. And these two go together, to
wit, an impression of the stateliness and majesty of God, who speaks; and an
humble sense of infirmity in the creature. See it in Abraham, Genesis 18. 17.
Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, Who am but dust and
ashes. and verse. 25. Shall not the judge of all the earth do right? And they
are also joined, Eccles. 5.1, 2. Keep thy foot when thou go into the house
of God: God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: let thy Words be few. 3. It is
to put John to an holy attention to hear, and to be watchful in hearing what He
was to say to him; the trumpet sounds that he may be the better taken heed to
when He speaks. And this is also a good property of hearers, when, as it is
Acts 10.33. We can say with Cornelius, We are all here present before God, to
hear Whatsoever things are commanded thee of God; to be in a humble, watchful
posture having the heart laid open to whatsoever God will say; hanging on Him,
as the phrase is, Luke 19.48. 4. The sound of the trumpet, is not only to waken
to attention; but to put to action: it gives, not only a distinct sound for
direction; but it puts to doing: to point at the nature of our Lords voice, and
how it ought to be heard. It Is not enough to hear, but there would be a
suitableness to the voice heard, according as the trumpet sounds distinctly.
Folks would hear suitably, and welcome what is said, and conform their practice
thereto; taking with convictions, challenges, directions to duties, promises,
etc. as the Word gives them. Therefore the Preaching of the Word, is compared
to the sounding of a trumpet, Isa. 58. Lift up thy voice like a trumpet, that
is, powerfully and distinctly: and, as it suppons some thing on the Ministers
side, that he would have his voice trumpet-like; so it suppons some thing on
the side of the hearers, that they would conform their practice suitably to it,
as Soldiers prepare themselves at the sound of a trumpet, 1 Corinthians. 14.8.

The second circumstance, is the place where, or the manner how, he heard the
voice; it spoke behind him; it came not as before John; but as it were unawares
surprising him behind him. 1. The more to affect John with the sound, and to
make him inquire in it: for, the more surprising a thing be, it affects the
more, and wakens up the more desire to enquire in it. 2. That our Lord may even
try John how he will carry himself in following the enquiry of the voice; and
so to put John to pains to find it out. Therefore, Isa. 30.21. it is said, Thou
shall hear a voice behind thee: partly, to signify that our backs are on God,
when he speak, we are running away from him: partly, to stir us up to turn our
face about, as it were, and to enquire after what is spoken.

Verse. 11. The third thing, is, the matter spoken: and it contains two things.
1. A description of the Speaker, His Title and Name, I am Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last, the last two words, are an exposition of the former two. 2.
The Commission John gets, and the direction given him. 1. Generally, To write
what he saw. And 2. More particularly, To send it to the seven Churches. For
this Title, we spoke of it before, verse. 8.

It is our Lord, asserting His own Godhead, as being the first, the beginning
of all the Creation of God actively, being of Himself God essential, and
giving a beginning and being to all things that exist, Ioh. 1.3. All things
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made; and the
last end of all things: not only everlasting Himself, without end; but to whose
Honor are all things that have a beginning: He is the ultimate end; they are
all for Him.

Quest. Why is this Title so often repeated?

Answ. Besides this general, that it is to hold out Christ's Godhead:
therefore, this and other such like Titles, are so often given Him in this
Book: which is of excellent use and benefit, to have this born in upon the
hearts, and minds of sinners. It is repeated here: 1. That John might know from
whom he had this Commission; even from Him, who had power to give him a
Commission both to speak and to write; The first and the last: a thing that
concerns Ministers to know when they come out to Preach the Word, whose
Commission they have, that they take not this honor to themselves, nor from
men, except in the ordinary way appointed by Him: for except they have Christ's
Warrant man's, will not Commissionate them to go to Churches and Preach at their
own hand. 2. It is also for the Peoples cause, to learn them to take the Word
off John's hand. It is not John's word, that comes to them; but the Word of
Alpha and Omega, the first, and the last: And it were good for us so to speak;
and good for you so to hear the Word. That same Jesus Christ, that gave John
and the Apostles warrant to Preach and Write, it is that same Jesus Christ that
sends out Pastors and Teachers to Preach; it is He that gives gifts to men for
edifying the body, Ephesians. 4.12. His Warrant to both, is one; and His Authority,
Commissionating both, is one, and both are gifts for the Churches good.

The second thing in this verse, is, The Commission John gets. 1. In general,
to write what he saw. 2. More particularly, to send it to the seven Churches.

1. Write what thou see: that is, not this Vision only, which thou have seen;
but all the Words and Circumstances which thou have seen, or shall see and
hear: And so it is his first warrant to write this Revelation, and send it to
the Churches: it points at the Authority, on which the written Word is founded;
it depends not on men, but on Jesus Christ that gives warrant to write: and we
should look on the Bible, and every Chapter thereof as by Christ's direction
written to us.

2. The matter he should write is restricted, Write, not every thing that
pleases thee, but what thou see: to point out the guiding and inspiration of
the Spirit in these holy Men, who were Penmen of the Scripture; they spoke and
wrote, as they were inspired and guided by the holy Ghost.

3. It shows, that there is need, and it is requisite, that men have a
particular Commission to carry the Word to People: not only a Commission, in
general, to write, or, to carry the Gospel; but for every particular message.
Not that men should be anxious, or perplexed, about their Warrant, or
Commission, in an extraordinary way; but to weigh well the Time, Place,
Persons, and such Circumstances as may clear their Commission in an ordinary
way, there being some things to be written and sent to one Church by Christ's
Warrant, which are not so to another; every Church has their particular
Message and Commission renewed.

2. More particularly, what he should do with it, when it is written in a Book;
Send it to the seven Churches, that is, John, this Revelation is not to ly
beside thee; but it is for the benefit of the Church: send it therefore to the
seven Churches in Asia. 1. Because most famous in that time; and because near
to Patmos, where he was; and because it is probable John had some particular
relation to them: and their need presently required it. This Book of the
Revelation, is sent for the benefit of the Church: and therefore ought to be
welcomed thankfully, as a rich Jewel.

We showed before, why these Churches were called seven, and not the Church in
Asia, verse. 4. and say no more of it now. These Churches, are particularly
named. We shall not stand on a Geographicall description of the Places.
Ephesus, is spoken of at large, Act. 19.20. This Church and Smyrna, were in
that part of Asia the less, called Ionia; Pergamos, in that part, called
Aetolia; Thyatira, Sardis, and Philadelphia, in Lydia; and Laodicea, in that
part, called Caira, or, Caria: which not being profitable to you to insist
upon, we shall take some general considerations from the words and so proceed.

And, 1. It would be considered why these Churches, are designed from the name
of the Cities wherein they were. We rather speak a word to this: because we
find Churches in the New Testament, named by Towns. It Is true, the Churches in
Galatia, are also named; but most frequently they are named by Cities, as the
Church at Jerusalem, the Church at Rome, the Church at Corinth, etc. And Titus
is to ordain Elders in every City, by Paul's appointment: which was for the
City; and it is like also, for the edification of these about, God making the
Gospel spread from Cities to Countries about, as it is said, The Word spread
from Ephesus to all Asia, though there were other Churches beside these, that
were within the walls of these Towns. The reasons of this, we conceive to be,
1. Because the Cities, or Towns, were most famous for their populousness; and
were well furnished with Officers: and there was most occasion of getting a
Harvest of Souls in them, by spreading the Net of the Gospel among them, in
respect of which accidental and politic considerations, which belong not to
the essence of a Church, some Cities being more famous and able to keep the
word of truth, and make it furth-coming to other Churches. It is not
un-agreeable to Scripture, to have particular respect to Cities, and Churches
in them, as they may further the work of the Gospel. 2. Because in these great
Cities, and Places of concourse, the Ministers and Officers of the Church, who
served in the work of the Lord, and went round in a circuit in the Churches
about, had their most ordinary residence, as it would seem; and that their
fixed, collegiat meetings and combinations were there. 1. Because we find no
particular Congregations mentioned, but only the Church at such a Town written
unto, though there was many particular Congregations about; and these Cities
kept not the Word within themselves. 2. Where they are mentioned, as the Church
at Jerusalem: it takes in not only these within the walls; but all the
Churches in Judea: so Corinth, takes in Cenchrea, etc.

2. Consider those Churches as once given to Idolatry: Ephesus, was famous, or
rather, infamous for that, Acts 19. yet now Christ esteems them all Churches,
bestows an Epistle upon them, holding out, 1. His love. 2. The power of His
Grace and Gospel. 3. The soveraignity and freeness of His Grace, breaking in
on the kingdom of sin and Satan amongst them; and that Christ can winn in
Churches to Himself, out of the most profane heathennish and Idolatrous cities
and people.

3. Consider, These cities are respected by Christ: and it is not because they
are cities; but because they are Churches: that which makes them to be
preferred before others, is the Churches in them: And this is it that makes
places carry respect with Jesus Christ, more than all the glancing victories
and glory of the world.

4. Consider them, as they are some of them more, some of them less; yet, none
of them, are called less or more Churches. Ephesus, where were many thousands,
is but a Church, as Smyrna, and other lesser towns are: the reason is, the
Scripture goes not upon multitude, and external considerations of that kind;
but upon the unity that is among Ministers, and Officers, which is not
astricted to one particular Congregation: and where it is, it makes an union
among many, as amongst few; and amongst few, as amongst many.

5. Consider, That the number of these Churches is according to the places
where they were fixed, and where the members did inhabit: which shows, that
Parochial marches by bounds or towns in convenient lying, is not unsuitable;
but consonant to Scripture: wherefore the Church of Ephesus, or, of any certain
place, includes all the Professors living there, they are accounted of that
Church and no other, as providence has put them together: and the Churches are
divided as they live sundry. No indweller of Ephesus, is accounted of the
Church of Smyrna, or contrarily; order in this, being well consistent with the
Gospel: and as we will not find mention made in Scripture of two Churches, in
one place, what ever the number be, (save when they are after subdivided, as 1
Cor. 14.) So we will not find any Saint spoken of, as belonging to any
Congregation, but as they dwell: and the Church at such a place, and Saints of
such a place, are still taken to be of a like extent.

6. Consider, Some of them were more corrupt, others of them were more pure;
yet, he writes an Epistle to them all: some has a name that they are living,
when they are dead; some are fallen from their first love; some have in them
those that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans; some are lukewarm, etc. Yet,
they are all of them owned as Churches, and written to. 1. Because our Lord
looks on them, as having that which made them to have the essence of Visible
Churches: and in so far, He gives them the name, though many defects were in
them: and therefore intitles them so. He stands not to give Laodicea the title
of a Church to Him, which many, it may be, would scarcely count worthy the name
of Christians. 2. Because our Lords way, is not at first to give up with
Churches, and Persons, who are joined to Him in Church-relations; but to press
upon them to be forthcoming to their obligations: He says not, ye are no
Churches; but reckons them Churches: and on that ground, founds His promises,
threatenings and directions; and gives them reproofs for what is wrong, and His
advice to amend the same: an excellent way of dealing, to have Churches
answerable to their obligation, and not to cast them off. Rejection is the last
thing used, when neither threatenings, promises, reproofs, nor directions have
place to do them good. And we may say it on the bye, it is Christ's prerogative
to remove Candlesticks, and dissolve ties between Him and Churches.

7. Consider, These Churches as they are now, comparing them with what they
were once: Golden-Candlesticks; now dens for Mahomet: the Godhead of Christ
once written of to them; now trampled on. Which shows, 1. How doleful a thing
it is to despise warnings. 2. To what a hight Churches defection may come to:
when there is not a healing in time; when falling from the first love is not
taken heed to, it may come to make a Church no Church. These Churches were once
as glorious as ever Glasgow was, and more, Paul writing to sundry of them, and
here John to them all; yet, for contempt of the Gospel, God breaks the stays
of beauty and bands, and they are no Churches to Him. Tremble to think upon it.

8. Consider, That John now in prison writes: the Church is obliged to John's
imprisonment. We now have more writings by the Apostles Epistles from their
prisons, than we have from their liberty, God making this good use of man's
malice.

9. He repeats his commission, not only in general, but to every Church, as
their peculiar message was, that he might bear out his commission in his
dealing with them; and that they might know the warrant they had to hear him.
Neither Ministers ought to speak, or people to hear, except they be warranded:
there is an unwarrantablenesse in hearing, as there is in speaking, Prove.
19.27. And people would make conscience in hearing, that it be not done
indifferently; and there would not be indifferent access for all to Preach,
nor for hearing, but as the Lord warrands.

LECTURE VI.
Verse. 12. And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. And being turned,
I saw seven golden candlesticks.

13. And in the midst of the seven candlesticks, one like unto the Son of man,
clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden
girdle.

14. His head, and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow, and his
eyes were as a flame of fire.

15. And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace: --


THe second circumstance, or step, of the first part of the Vision, is what
John did, verse. 12. or his carriage when he heard the voice, spoken of before,
verse. 10. I turned to see the voice that spoke: a voice is not properly the
object of sight; but it is two ways to be understood. 1. Either John turned
him, that is, gave pains more clearly to perceive and understand that which was
spoken: for, seeing, in Scripture, is often so taken, for a more clear
up-taking and understanding of a thing: and so the meaning is, John having
heard the voice behind him, he lends to his ear to take it up better. Or, 2. It
may look to John's desire, to see him that spoke: and so he turned, not to see
the voice; but the speaker: and on the back of this, the heavenly Vision is
represented to him. And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks. Follows
what John saw upon his turning about; he gets this Vision. Folks that go about
the use of the means seriously, minding edification, they readily profit.

Let us speak to that which properly is the Vision. It holds out, or, there are
holden forth in it, three things. 1. The Church, is holden out under the
similitude of a Candlestick; or, the seven Churches of Asia, under the
similitude of seven golden Candlesticks: so they are expounded, verse. 20. 2.
The Ministers of the Churches, are holden out under the similitude of seven
Stars, verse. 16. So are they expounded in the 20. verse. also. We shall forbear
any further exposition, or speaking of them, till we come to that place. The
main thing in the Vision, is, Our Lord Jesus, represented these ways. First,
in His Offices. Secondly, In His excellent qualifications for His discharging
these Offices. Thirdly, In His care of His Churches, and actual executing of
His Offices, and exercising of His qualifications for the good of His Churches
and Ministers: He is among the one, walking; and holding the other in His hand;
and has a sword, going out of His mouth, for the good of both.

Quest. 1. Whether is it Christ that appears and speaks here, or not? The
reason of the doubt, is from verse. 1. Where it is said, Jesus Christ sent and
signified these things by his angel.

Answ. It is He that appears and speaks here to John, who gave him the
Commission to write: and certainly, it was no Angel that gave John Commission
to write and send it to the seven Churches; but it is Jesus Christ, who
intitles Himself before, to be the first and the last: no Angel can give
Commission, nor dare take upon him these titles and styles, but Jesus Christ
only. 2. It Is clear also to be Christ, from the parts of the description, and
from the particular charge that Christ is holden out to have, to wit, in having
a care of the Churches, in holding the Stars in His hand, and sending a sword
out of His mouth. Who can do these things but Christ? 3. From the seven
Epistles, which begin with some part of this description, as belonging to Him:
He is still styled by some part of it, Chap. 2. and 3.

Quest. 2. Whether does Jesus Christ appear here really in His Man-head? or, Is
it only a representation of Him in a Vision, for signifying and holding forth
the excellent properties and qualifications that are in Him, as sometime God
appeared of old to weak man, condescending to his capacity for his comfort, as
Dan. 7.9. and sometime Christ, as Dan. 10.5. to which this Vision seems to
relate?

Answ. We take it not for any real apparition of Christ in His Humanity, or as
He was Man, conceived in and born of the Virgin Mary, crucified, dead and
buried, and in that nature risen again and ascended; but we take it only to be
a representation, or vision of the glorious properties and qualifications, and
stately Majesty of the Son of God, who was, and is, and is to come, the first,
and the last: who as He is God, so also was and is Man; but does not now appear
in His Humane nature, but as God. Reason, 1. Because in substance it is the
same Vision that we find, Dan. 7.9. and 10.5. where God, and Christ, as God,
are holden out under the same expressions: and if these expressions cannot be
applied in these places to signify the parts of a Humane body (which God has
not, for He is a Spirit) there can be no reason why the same expressions here,
should be applied to the parts of a body. 2. It Is clear also, if we look to the
end, which Jesus Christ has before Him in this representation: He being to
direct seven Epistles to the seven Churches in Asia, He sets out Himself by
some excellent properties, to ground the faith of His People, and move them to
reverence, receive, and give obedience to what He writs unto them. 3. Look
through all this Vision, it cannot be applied literally; the seven Churches,
cannot be seven Candlesticks; the seven Ministers, cannot be seven Stars, etc.
but it is to evidence the excellent qualifications that are in Christ, under
these representations: and therefore what some would draw from this, or other
representations of this kind, concerning Christ's Body on earth, or the
ubiquitie of His Humanity, or bodily presence with His Churches, or, for
portracting of His Body (as Winckelmannus and other Lutherans alleged) has no
ground from this place; but rather the just contrary: if Christ appeared after
His Ascension, no other ways than He did before His Incarnation, He would take
away all carnal thoughts of His bodily presence on earth. 4. It Is said, One
like unto the Son of Man: and this holds out, He was not indeed Man in this
Vision; but appeared to John, as He did to Daniel; some way representing
Himself so. But, 5. The application and exposition of many of these
expressions, Chap. 2. and 3. holding forth His eyes, to signify His
Omniscience and the like, will show the absurdity of this. But come to the
three parts of the description, more particularly: wherein, as we said, 1. We
have his Offices and Authority, 2. His qualifications for executing these
Offices. 3. His care of His Churches, and His actual executing of His Offices,
and exercising of His qualifications for the good of them, and His Ministers.

First, His Offices and Authority are represented; His Kingly and Princely
Offices, under His Garments; His Prophetical Office, by the Sword that
proceeds out of His mouth.

Long garments, were especially used by two sorts of Persons, Kings and
Priests. Exodus 28.29. Aaron, the high Priest, and His Sons, have holy Garments
appointed them; and the high Priest was to have a long Robe curiously sewed and
embroidered: so also, long Garments, were for a sign of Authority and
reverence; and Christ casts that up to the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.5.
Mark 12.38. And Christ was clothed with a purple Robe; which was a special
Robe, designing great men from others, though they did it in derision to Him.

He is girt about the paps with a golden girdle. A girdle has two uses, 1. It
was used for neating the long Robe; for binding it up, that it might not be
cumbersome to men in their employment, Luke 17.8. Gird thy self and serve me.
2. A golden girdle signifies Authority and Eminence; so the girdles of Kings
signified, Isa. 22.21. when Eliakim is constituted a Ruler, it is said, I will
cloth him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle: and what is meant
by that, is expounded in the following words, I will commit the Government into
his hand, and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the
house of Judah, and I will lay the key of the house of David upon his shoulder:
he shall open, and none shall shut, etc. This girdle of Christ's, is spoken of,
Isa. 11.5. Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness
the girdle of his reins.

The expression holds out these three things, which we conceive to be
understood by it. 1. The Authority and warrantablenesse of our Lord Jesus
Christ His Kingly and Princely Office, as that which follows, does of His
Prophetical Office: hereby letting us know, that our Lord Jesus His being in
heaven and in glory, has not made Him lay by His Offices, or the executing of
them; but He remains King and Priest for ever, Psalm 110. even in heaven He
bears His Offices to His Churches. 2. That our Lord Jesus Christ, not only
bears these Offices; but, in an excellent and glorious manner: there is no such
King, no such Priest, no such Prophet as He: so that whatsoever belongs to any
of His Offices, or any part of any of them, He would have His people looking to
Him as eminent therein: He is a King ruling in Righteousness, stately in
Majesty and dominion; a Priest, that continues for ever, and has an
unchangeable Priesthood; and, is able to save all them, to the uttermost, that
come unto God by Him, seeing He lives for ever to make intercession for them:
and, such an high Priest becomes us, who is holy, and harmless, undefiled,
separated from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, Heb. 7.24, 25, 26. He
is a Prophet, such as has no equal: none teaches like Him. Therefore it
becomes us not only, not to have low thoughts of Christ, as bearing those
Offices; but to think of Him as being eminent and glorious in them, and all
that concerns them. 3. It holds out, that our Lord Jesus His stateliness and
glory, does not mar, nor hinder Him in the application of His Offices, and
executing them for the good of His Church: but, for as stately as He is, for
Authority, having on His long robe, and being girded with a golden girdle; yet,
His garment is so truced and girded, as He is fitted for His employment, and to
make use of His Offices, for the benefit of souls (See John 13. v. 3.) as ever
He did when He was on earth. Christ's greatness and glory, is so far from
unfitting Him for the discharge of His Offices, that He has robes compacted,
and Himself so fitted, as He may handsomely go about the discharge of them,
being still girded, though the girdle be of gold.

The second part of the description, verse. 14 is His qualifications for His
Offices, set out under the particular parts of a body, First, His head and His
hair were like wool: this would not agree to Christ's Manhead in all appearance,
He not having come to that age, at which men use to become white haired. It is
an application of, or an allusion to that of Dan. 7.9. if not taken out of it.
And the reason of the allusion, is, to set out, 1. The Eternity of Christ's
Godhead: that though He was, and is Man; yet, before the world was, He was, and
is the Eternal God, without beginning, that whiteness of the hair, being
spoken of God, to set out His Eternity: He is not from yesterday, as poor
creatures are; but from everlasting, though His Eternity makes no change nor
alteration on Him, as age does on men. 2. It sets out our Lord Jesus His wisdom
and experience, and the reverence that is due to Him: He is set out as one
having gray hairs, being eminently endued with wisdom and experience, as old
men use to be in comparison of others, and as these of younger years usually
are not. Therefore, Dan. 7.9. He is called, the ancient of days, which
expounds His appearing with white hairs. Isa. 11.2. The Spirit of the Lord
rests upon Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord.

The second part of this qualification, is, in His eyes: His eyes were as a
flame of fire. He is also thus set forth, Dan. 10.6. These eyes, point out the
omniscience of Christ, who, as God, sees every thing: and they are said to be
as a flame of fire, partly, because of their peircing nature: that as all
things are naked before Him and bare; so He sees thoroughly, in through and out
through them all. All things are lying open, and, as it were, imbowelled before
His eyes, Heb. 4. And, partly, because of the dreadfulnesse, and terriblenesse
that will arise from His omniscience to the wicked of the world: His, and His
Churches enemies, nothing will be more terrible to them, nor a glance of
Christ's eye, whereby he can destroy worlds of them, as when he looked down on
Sodom and Gomorrah, fire and brimston followed His eye, and destroyed them.

The third part of His description, is verse. 15. His feet like unto fine
brass: this is excellent brass, glittering brass, nearest unto gold, as
being some way mixed with it: and these feet of brass, point out not only His
power, but especially His ways, counsels, and dispensations toward His people
in ordering of His Churches, Gods paths and ways being the manner of His
guiding of the world, So Christ's feet do signify His stepping up and down in
His Church, ordering all things well, wisely, and holily to His glorious ends:
and consequently, His dispensations, whereby He makes His presence manifest
among His People. 2. These feet, are said to be like unto fine brass, as if
they burned in a furnace: to point out, 1. That all His dispensations are pure
and perfect. 2. Excellent and firm, solid and durable: there is no prevailing
by the gates of hell against them. They are pure, spotless and clean: no
iniquity is in them, Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is the Rock, His work is perfect: for, all
His ways are judgment: a God of Truth, and without iniquity, just and right
is He. We think this to be the meaning here: His ways in His Church, His
stepping up and down in it, are pure and spotless, firm and solid: all
on-lookers cannot mark a spot in them; they cannot be mended, or bettered, nor
hindered, He so sickerly sets them down. It serves to hold forth the
stateliness of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to bring our hearts to a holy awe
and reverence of Him, O, that folks knew what He were, they would walk in more
awe and reverence, before and with Him, who is such a stately Person I Love,
reverence, and admire Jesus: there is no such stately and lovely Person in the
world; submit to Him, He will do no wrong. Contend not with Him: for, on He
will go, so sickerly sets He down His steps, like pillars of brass. The
reasons of these expositions, will appear more, in the Inscriptions of the
Epistles, chap. 2. and 3.

LECTURE VII.
Verse. 15. -- And his voice as the sound of many waters.

16. And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a
sharp two-edged sword: and his countenance was as the Sun shines in his
strength.


I Told you, that this Vision does not represent the Body of our Lord Jesus, or
His humane nature; but it is to point out His divine qualifications, wherewith
He was furnished as God-Man in one Person, for the good of His Church. And
these things spoken of, as parts of a body, bear out some resemblance and
analogy of these qualifications, that are in Him, far beyond any thing that
can be conceived.

The fourth property or qualification, is, his voice: which is said to be as
the sound of many waters. It was said in the 10. verse. to be a great voice,
like a trumpet; here it is said to be like the sound of many waters, both high
and great, heard afar off, and very terrible and dreadful. By His voice, in
Scripture is understood mainly two things: both which may well relate to this
resemblance. 1. His effectual willing and commanding of things to be, as it is
said, He spoke and it was done, He commanded and it stood fast, (Genesis 1.) Let
there be light, and it was light: for, Christ as God, has not a voice
properly; but the voice, being that by which a man signifies his command and
will, and being here attributed to Christ as God, It is to point out His
effectual willing, and bringing that forth which He would have done: and so
points at the effectualnesse of Christ's government. There is nothing called for
by Him, but it comes to pass; nothing commanded, but is done, and that with a
word. 2. It Is taken for the manifestation of Gods terriblenesse and majesty,
Psalm. 18.13. The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the highest gave His
voice; hailstones and coals of fire. In which sense, it is applied to the
thunder; because, by it He manifests His power, and shows Himself terrible.
Hence there is so much spoken of His voice, Psalm. 29.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The
voice of the Lord, etc. To show not only the powerful effects of the voice of
God in the thunder, and the way it produces its effects; but the terriblenesse
and majesty of God who has such a voice, that, as it is Hag. 2.6. Can shake
heaven and earth: which is to point out His dreadfulnesse and terriblenesse,
against the enemies of His Church. If He speaks the word, they evanish: one
word of this King will make the stoutest Tyrants to quake, as is clear from
Scripture, and the story of former times.

A fifth qualification, is, verse. 16. He had in his right hand seven stars. The
seven Stars are expounded in the last verse, to be the Ministers of the
Churches. And the reasons of it we forbear, till we come to that: only here,
our Lord Jesus is said to have a right hand, that is, power, and skill, and
activity in exercising His power: for, the right hand, is the strongest hand,
and that by which men skilfully, and dexterously go about the bringing to pass
of that which they would be at: He has not power and fury, but power and
skill; and with power and skill He manages all His matters. Believers have not
a handlesse Mediator, (to speak so) He has hands, as well as feet. But more of
this in the third thing, contained in this description.

Sixthly, He is described further, Out of his mouth went a two edged sword:
whereby is meaned the Word of God, especially the Gospel: His voice, spoken of
before, is more general, relating to His universal power and sovereignty over
all the World: This relates more particularly, to the written and Preached
Word, called The sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6. and
sharper then a two edged sword, dividing betwixt the joints and the marrow, the
soul and the spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart, Heb. 4. The Word is compared to a sword, and a two edged sword, for
these reasons. 1. Because of the power of it: it has a discerning, peircing,
penetrating power with it, to come in on hearts; and to discover the thoughts
and intents of the heart, when Christ blesses it, and makes it strik at the
roots of corruption, it will humble the proudest heart, and quicken the deadest
spirit, and pierce through the Soul and Conscience of the most obdured person,
as Act. 2. Peter's Preaching did prick his hearers. This is the saving and
proper effect of the Word, when it Anatomizes folks, and lays open their
thoughts, their security, pride, formality, etc. and strikes at the root of the
body of death, to kill it, and be its death. 2. Because of the effect it has
among carnal hearers and hypocrites: in which respect, we think it is
especially looked on here, as afterward in the Epistle to Pergamos, Chap. 2.
verse. 12.16. I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. This sword,
when rightly handled, proves a torture to the wicked men in the world, when it
discovers their rottenesse: so it is said of the two faithful Witnesses, Revel.
11.10. that they tormented them that dwelt on the earth; the Word of God was so
sharp in their mouths, that it did hew ( Hos. 6.5.) their minds and
consciences, and galled them at the heart; so ( Act. 7.) it is said, Stephens
hearers were cut in their heart, and gnashed upon him with their teeth; they
could not abide the plainness and evidence of the Word, accompanied with
power. 3. Because it has a further cutting virtue to wicked men, when it
proves through Gods Justice, plaguing to their hearts and minds, and has an
isntrumental efficacy for their slaying, when God draws out the sentence, and
gives the Word an edge, and makes it cut, and, in His Justice, to promove their
destruction, Isa. 11.4. With the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked, 1
King. 19.17. Him that escapes the sword of Iehu, shall Elisha slay; and Hos.
6.5. I hewed them by my Prophets, and slew them by the words of my mouth,
through Gods pronouncing of sharp threatenings, and their corruption abusing the
threatenings, it becomes their death. 2. This sword, is said to proceed out of
his mouth: to point out where- from the force, efficacy, and power of the Word
comes, when it pierces: It Is not the Word, as it is written, or spoken by
men's mouth; but as it proceeds out of Christ's mouth, which makes it
profitable or convincing: and it is this which makes sinners guilt so great,
and tormenteth hypocrites when He adds weight with it, to thwart their
corruption, and they repine against it.

The last qualification, is, His countenance was as the Sun shines in his
strength: whereby is meaned the love that He shows to His People, and the
Glory and Majesty that is in Himself, Psalm. 4.6. Lord lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us, that is, the manifestation of thy love. And Psalm. 80. the
causing of His face to shine, is several times spoken of. And this favor and
stately Majesty in Christ, is compared to the Sun shining: not as in the
morning, nor at even, nor under a cloud; but in his strength. 1. Because of the
glorious majesty that is in it, as Chap. 5.15. of the Song, His countenance is
as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars: there is an excellency and beauty in it
that dazels and obscures all the excellency and beauty of the World, even as
the light of the Sun obscures the Stars. 2. Because of the lightsomnesse of it:
for, Christ is to Believers, as the Sun is to the World, Ioh. 1.9. He is that
true light, that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world. Light, both
for direction and consolation: and that is a third reason of the similitude.
His countenance is as the Sun shining in his strength, for the refreshingnesse
of it. Psalm. 4.6, 7. His countenance makes the heart more glad than corn, and
wine, and worldly comforts whatsoever. 4. His countenance is so compared, from
the effectual influence it has on Believers growth: even as the Sun has
influence on the growing of corns, grass, trees, herbs, and all things in the
inferior world: so Christ's countenance has influence on Believers growth in
all things. Therefore, Mal. 4.2. It Is said, The Sun of righteousness shall
arise with healing under His wings to such as fear His Name, and they shall go
forth and grow up as calves in the stall. His presence and favor, has a real
and effectual influence on all that are united to Him, as the sun in his
strength, has on herbs and plants. We point but at these things, which are
infinite in themselves. O that necessity of union with Christ! O the
excellency of that condition of being near to Him! He is our light: there is
no living without Him; and how lightsom is it, to walk with Him, and to dwell
in Him?

The third thing in the description, is, Christ's actual exercising of His
Offices and qualifications for the good of His Churches and Ministers (which
are the objects about which His care is especially exercised) holden out in
these two. 1. He walks among the golden Candlesticks. And, 2. He keeps the
Stars in His right hand, that is His Work and great employment, as verse. 13,
16. and chap. 2. verse. 1.

1. His walking among the golden Candlesticks, points out, 1. His special
presence in His Church: though He be omnipresent through all the world; yet He
has a special manifestation of His presence in His Church: and there is a
special relation between Him and them, as it is spoken of Israel, Psalm. 147.19.
compared with Deuteronomy. 4.7. What nation so great that has God so near them in all
things, etc? He is near to His Church in a singular manner, in the special
effects of His presence. 2. It points out His special care of His Church; He
chooses His Church as the pleasantest place in all the world to walk in; and
He takes pleasure there, as in His Garden and Gallerie: His common providence
is extended to all the world; but He takes special notice, and has a special
care of His Church above all the world. Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, I
will water it every moment; lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. See
Isa. 43.3, 4. 3. It points out His special taking notice of, and observing the
carriage of His Church and of all within the same: He knows all the world,
and the thoughts, words, and actions of every one, all projects, counsels, and
events before they come; but in a special manner He takes notice of all His
Church, how the Work of Grace thriveth in His people; what fruit His Ordinances
have among them, who are making progress, who are backsliding, what is the
particular posture of every soul, to sned off luxuriant branches, to purge out
what is corrupt, to help forward what is right, to prevent any prejudice may
come unto them; to foresee and provide for any thing, as it may be for their
good. Which shows, 1. What a great benefit it is to be a Member of this Church:
if it be a mercy to be under His special and singular care, it must be no small
privilege and benefit to be a Member of His Church. 2. It lets us see what
manner of persons we ought to be, who have Christ's presence so near us, nearer
than all the world beside: when ever we are in the Ordinances, we would take up
Christ, as walking amongst the midst of us; and in all our conversation,
apprehend Him at our ear: it both calls for holiness from us, and lays
watchfulness on us, knowing how narrowly He takes notice of us. 3. It points
out, how inexcusable, the faults and failings of these who live in the Church,
are. Christ walks among them; and yet they stand not awe of Him: the signs of
His presence are always with them; and yet they take no notice of them: the
nearer the signs of His presence, and His special care be, the greater is our
sin, if it have not influence on us. 4. It points at Christ's tenderness and
care, for the comfort of them that dare not trust themselves, but commit
themselves to Him and trust to His care and tenderness: He sees well to all
His Churches, and every particular persons condition; and is never from them:
His being in heaven, has not made Him to lay by His care of His people. This
were a great consolation, if we would singly make use of it. Matthew. 28. Lo, I
am with you to the end of the world; and He keeps His promise.

The other word, His holding the Stars in His right hand, holds out His care of
His Ministers: the meaning is, that as He walks in the midst of the Churches,
and takes special care of them; so He takes a special care of the Ministers of
these seven Churches, and so of the Ministers of all the Churches. And under
this is holden out, 1. The difficulty of the Ministers station: they are not
able to stand their alone, except they be upholden by Christ: partly, because
of the malice and opposition of men, and Devils that by wicked men seek to
ruin and overturn the Church and Work of God in their hands; the venting of
their malice begins at them: and partly, because of the greatness of the
burden and charge, that lies on them: and partly also from their own
infirmities, etc. 2. It points out the Lords special care of them, according to
their station, strait, and charge: as their charge is great, and their
difficulties great and many; so He exercises His power for their direction,
defense and protection: He has care of all the world; but more especially of
His Churches: but for His Churches sake, He has, most of all, a special care
of His Ministers, who are called the Messengers of the Churches and the Glory
of Christ, 1 Cor. 8. they being the men that He makes use of for the handling
of His Sword, and subduing of souls to Him. They often meet with little
estimation from men, and walk among many snares and dangers: therefore He holds
out His care, and the application of His power, especially, to encourage and
strengthen them to duty in the midst of these snares and difficulties. 3. By
His holding them in His right hand, he points at that dependency that Ministers
ought to have on Jesus Christ: they should go about their duty, as in His hand;
lippening to His strength and power, rather than to ought in themselves, for
the performing of the task committed to them.

1. This is for special consolation in evil times, that Christ has such a care
of His Ministers and Churches: let the Devil pluck again and again to have a
Ministry down, sometimes by force, sometimes by slight, it will not be, they are
stars, and in Christ's hand: sooner will Stars be plucked from heaven, than they
from Him.

2. Christ's care of His Church, kyths in caring for His Ministers: The right
care of the one, is carried along with the right care of the other: and it is
not a right care of Churches, where there is not a respect to Ministers: Christ
knows the good and the ill of the one, stands and falls with the good and ill
of the other: there is such a connection between them, and such a sibnesse, they
are so interested the one in the other, that according as the one is, so is the
other: ordinarily, if the Minister be carnal and secure; so is the flock: and if
the Minister be in a lively temper; there will also be some life among the
flock. And if we speak in reference to those who have enmity at the Church,
hatred against the Church is vented, and begineth at hatred against the
Ministry. It Is impossible to be careful of Christ's Church and despise and
hate His Ministers, or overturn a Ministry.

3. It shows, that there is a respect due to them that Christ puts in this
place: and where Christ has put respect, it becomes us to put respect also:
there should be a sympathy with them, and a reverencing of them, if it were
for no more but for this cause, that he keeps them in His right hand: respect
to Him, should make respect to them: It Is a strange Religion, to profess
respect to Churches and Saints, and show so little to Ministers: Christ did
never so.

LECTURE VIII.
Verse. 17. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead: and he laid his
right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not, I am the first and the last.

18. I am he that lives, and was dead: and behold, I am alive for evermore,
Amen, --


YE have heard of this Vision, which John saw: the Lord begins with it at
the entry of this task of writing this Book of the Revelation, to imprint on
him a stamp and impression of His own excellency, as a preparation and fitting
of him for the Work; even as He began with Isaiah, chap. 6. and with Ezekiel
chap. 1. Bearing out, by these Visions, a representation of His Glory and
Majesty, thereb^ to fit and qualify them for their duty: for, they are fittest
to bear Gods message, and to describe Him to others, that are thus prepared,
and qualified, and have some reverence and awe of God imprinted on their own
hearts.

From the 17. verse. and forward to the end, we have some consequents, that
followed this Vision, or, some circumstances for the edification of the Church,
for clearing of the Vision before mentioned, and for making way for John's
writing of what he saw. And they are four in number. 1. The effect, which the
Vision had on John, in the beginning of verse. 17. for as stately and lovingly
as Jesus Christ represented Himself, he could not bear it; but faints when he
sees Him, and he falls at His feet as dead. 2. A consolation proposed by our
Lord to John, which has several steps, in the latter part of verse. 17. and
18. wherein as John kythed weakness, so Christ kythed much love, tenderness,
and skilfulnesse in applying an effectual remedy, for curing the distemper
John was into. 3. A repetition of John's Commission and Warrant to write, verse.
19. And 4. An explication of that part of the Vision, concerning the meaning of
the seven golden Candlesticks, and the Stars, verse. 20.

1. And when I saw him, I fell down at his feet as dead, This is the first
consequent or effect of the Vision. I fell down as dead: that is, I was
benumbed (as it were) and dammished with the sight of the excellent Majesty and
Glory that I saw in Him, and I was put out of capacity to act the acts of body
or mind, as if I had been dead; I could no more exercise, or act the acts of a
living man, than a dead man can, as Daniel, Chap. 10.8.9. And it has been
often seen in the best of Gods Children, when more than ordinary
representations of God have been let forth, they have become as dead men, unfit
for action. And it proceeds from two grounds. 1. From the exceeding great
distance that is betwixt the infinite Majesty of God, and finite creatures: the
brightness of the Glory, Excellency, and Majesty of God the Creator, burdeneth
and over-burdeneth the weakness and infirmity of the best of creatures: for,
if the eyes of creatures be that weak, that they cannot look on the Sun, what
wonder that flesh and blood is not able to look on the Sun of Righteousness.
This new wine, is too strong for our old bottles. 2. From the fear of a begun
quarrel, and grounds of a continued quarrel then apprehended, making not only
a disproportion, through infirmity, betwixt the Majesty of God and the
creature, which is so many ways defective to comprehend Him; but also making a
disconformity through sin, and so a fear to appear before Him: which makes the
creature fear undoing, as in Isa. 6. Woe is me, I am undone; for I am a man of
unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the Lord of hosts: For, though before the
Fall, when God and Adam were friends, he could have endured God to speak to
him; yet, after the Fall, the appearance of God is terrible unto Him: when he
hears His voice, he is afraid, and runs and hides himself. And there is some
thing of this fear, that sticks to the best; a fear that rises from the
sight of sin, which nearness to God does discover. And it is like that some
thing of both these grounds were in John, as may be gathered from our Lords
application of the remedy, and the grounds whereupon He goes in comforting him,
He lays his hand on him, and strengthens him, and and says, fear not, etc.
whereby it seems. 1. John conceived, from a distemper of mind, Christ would
reckon with him, and with Peter, Luke 5.8. fears (as a sinful and profain
person in his own account) his being so near such a Glorious and Holy Majesty.
And 2. This distemper of mind kyths, and has influence on his body, and makes
him fall down at His feet: not out of reverence, to worship Him; but being
overswayed with the excessivenesse of fear, that mastered and overcame him, he
cannot stand up, but falls down as dead.

1. This sets out to us the great disproportion, that is betwixt creatures and
the Majesty of God: the beloved Disciple John, cannot stand before Him when he
kyths; but falls down as dead. Isa. 40.15, 17. and 41.11, 12, 24. All Nations
are as nothing before Him, or as the dust in the balance; a little nearness
to God, should leave a stamp of humility, and an impression of the Majesty and
excellency of God upon us. This is one of the fountain Graces, humility, and a
holy awe of the Majesty of God: and this is the way to come to it, to get a
right sight of that excellent Majesty that is in Him. 2. Reverence and admire
Gods wise and well ordered governing of this World, especially these things
that concern His Church and People. Wonder that God has carved out such a way
in the works of Creation and Providence, and in the dispensation of the Gospel,
and mysteries of Salvation suitable to our weakness; and so as there may be
communion kept with Him, Job. 26.9. It is made one of the stately steps of His
power, that He boldeth back the face of his throne, and spreads his cloud
upon it: He draws the vail of the firmament before His Throne, to keep His
Glory from breaking forth, and eating up men: And in the dispensation of the
Gospel, He has chosen the Ministry of weak men, to reveal His mind by them to
us: and speaks not immediately Himself; because we could not endure it: if ye
heard Him once speak, as He did on mount Sinai, ye would say as Israel did, L^^
not God speak to us l^st we die. And this way of revealing Himself, should be
so far from making us cast at it, that it should make us wonder at His
condescendency in hedging up of Himself (as it were) for our good. 3. It lets
us see how much we are in His reverence, that deals so tenderly with us, when a
little glimpse of His Glory, a looking of His eye, a drawing by of the vail,
would kill us, and make us as if we had never been. 4. It shows us also, that
humility and reverence even in the best of Gods People, is often ready to
degenerate into servile fear and discouragement. The worshipping of Jesus
Christ in humble reverence, was a duty called for from John; yet this distemper
of excessive fear was not called for: such is our weakness, and the
slipperines^e of our walking that hardly can we keep the right path; but deviat
to one side or other: our faith is ready to degenerate into presumption; and
our humility to fainting and despondency of spirit; and our fear, to
discouragement, heartlesnesse, and distrust; our corruption is ready to abuse
any thing: for though there be no excess in these graces; Yet there may be in
us excess in the exercise thereof, by reason of the corruption which is in us.

The 2. thing, is Christ's tender care of John under this fit: When he falls at
his feet as dead, He comforts him: and this is set down in three steps. 1. He
laid his right hand upon him, as a sign of His kindlinesse, for his
encouragement. 2. Gives him a general word of exhortation, for his comfort,
fear not. 3. He gives him three general grounds why he should not fear, to
support his faith. Observe, in general, Our Lord Jesus His exceeding
tenderness of folks, especially in their fits of fainting and discouragement,
which arises through their mistaking, or wrong uptaking of Him. First, It
points at the exceeding tenderness and effectualnesse of His care, that on the
back of this fit, lays on His hand, and says, fear not; that takes him at
this nick of his distemper, and raises him. Secondly, what is the great ground
of consolation that is proposed, it is a holding forth of Himself, I am the
first and the last. And it lets us see when folks scares at Christ, and
discourages and faints through their mistaking of Him, there is no such way of
curing that distemper and mistake, as by a right uptaking of Him. The Note has
these two branches. 1. That the great ground of our mistaking of Christ, is our
ignorance of Him, in His Offices and worth. 2. That the right curing of that
mistake, is the right knowledge and uptaking of Him. 3. It says this, that
when souls are fainted and discouraged, Christ is both the Cure and the Curer:
He must lay on His hand, and speak the word; He is the Cure that is applied,
and the Physician that applies it; He touches, and speaks, and the Cure
follows. This also shows. 1. That there are some kind of bodily exercises,
that arise from a distemper of the mind, that so faints and weakeneth the body,
that none can cure but Christ: and this of discouragement and fainting, is one.
2. It shows to Believers their necessity of having the word out of Christ's
mouth for their encouragement, err they can shake off discouragement: He has
gotten the tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in season to the weary soul:
if He were more waited on in Ordinances; and if the word were taken as from His
mouth, we should come better speed than we do, and profit more by the
Ordinances. 3. More particularly, His right hand is His Power: and His laying
it on John, is not any personal touch; but an inward strengthening and
up-stirring, as Daniel, Dan. 10.10. Behold, an hand touched me, which set me
upon my knees, that is, some power for my strengthening and comfortable
up-stirring. And Psalm. 138.3. David says, In the day when I cried, thou
answeredst me: and strengthnedst me with strength in my soul, which is the
communicating of inward strength, to keep him unsinking under the sad condition
he was in. 1. It points out what our need is: our weakness and discouragement
is often such, that we have need not only of comfort, but of strength. 2. It
points at Christ's way of dealing with souls, that will sometimes strengthen,
ere He comfort; first lay on His hand, and then let the word of comfort, fear
not, come behind; He sees this meet, and its a main evidence of Christ's
tenderness, faithfulness and wisdom, that takes this way with His People.

The second step of Christ's care, is, His saying, fear not: a word that is
often used and repeated in the Prophets, especially, Isa. 41.43.44. and 56.
Chapters. Obs. 1. There is an excessive fear that God allows not in His
People: every thing that passes for fear and humility, should not be admitted.
Christ says to John, fear not: which has three marks from his experience. 1.
It Is a degenerating fear that breeds mistakes of Christ, and scares them at
Him; that weakens and faints them in their fellowship with Him. Christ allows
not John's fear to the marring of that. 2. It makes folks incapable of hearing
or receiving a message from Christ: so that when He speaks, they are
benumbed, senseless and dead, having ears, but hear not: and it locketh them
so up, that no word takes hold of them. Christ allows not this in John. 3.
It disables, obstructs and marreth in the discharge of that duty that Christ
calls to. When John is called to write the Vision, he falls as dead:
therefore, Christ says, fear not; but rise up and write: thou art called to
reverence and fear me; but to such a fear as may stand well with thy duty, and
further thee, and does not hinder thee in it. And we would learn not to fear,
in so far as it works any of these effects. Obs. 2. When fear exceeds,
degenerates, and grows excessive in these three spoken of, our Lord allows
it no more than He does proud security: only Jesus Christ, is much more tender
of souls under the one, nor He is under the other; yet, let us not please our
selves in these excessive fits, as if we were in no hazard. Obs. 3. It faith
that folks would be tender in dealing with souls under such distempers, knowing
there is a great difference betwixt these, who are under carnal presumption,
and others, under fainting.

The third step of Christ's care, is, in giving John grounds of consolation to
warrant his faith: and they are three. The first, is from His own Godhead, I
am the first and the last: I am God that speaks to thee; I was before the
world, and will continue when the world shall be ended, the eternal God, a
singular property of God, and a demonstration of Christ's Godhead: therefore
would He say, thou need not fear, John: I am not an enemy, nor a stranger,
or terrible spirit; but God: and that may sustain one in friendship with God:
and it is also a proof, that the Vision before, was a Vision of Christ, as God.

2. The second ground, is, the union of His Godhead and Man-head, in one
Person; and His suffering in His Man-head, united to His Godhead, I am he that
lives, and was dead: and behold I am alive for evermore. In the Original, it
is otherwise, and better for the understanding of the words, I am the living,
and I was made dead, and behold, I live for evermore. I am the living, that is,
I am the living God, who had life from all Eternity of my self, and gave life
to all creatures that have life, as it is, Ioh. 5.26. As the Father has life
in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself: and I that
was, and is this living God, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, was made dead,
that is, I became Man, was made of a Woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4.
pointing out the true Mediator (God-Man in one Person) His taking on the nature
of man; and satisfiing the Justice of God, in undergoing the wrath of His
Father; and in subjecting Himself to the death of the Cross, for the sins of
His own Elect: both Natures are joined in one Person; yet, it was not as God
that he died, though the Person that was God, died. And behold, I live for
evermore, Amen: in as far, as I was once dead, as Man, now I am alive, and
shall live for evermore. And this last expression, has two words put to it, to
point out its excellency. 1. Behold, I live: pointing at His Resurrection, and
the consolation that flows from it to Believers; I have overcome death, and
live; and so I live, as I shall live for ever, for the benefit of Believers in
me. That is of special consolation to us, our life being linked to Christ's
life, who is God Man and our Mediator: because He lives, we shall live also,
Ioh. 14.19. His life is a pledge and pawn of ours. 2. Amen, or Verily: an
asseveration to confirm the truth of His Resurrection, and to put all the world
out of doubt of His living, not only as God, but as God and Man in one Person.
Be assured ye have a living Christ.

The third ground, is, And I have the keys of hell and death: to point out His
absolute soveraignity, as Mediator in the state of Humiliation, and Exaltation:
therefore fear not, John: for I have the keys of hell, and orders even what
concerns them. The keys, are the sign of Government, Isa. 22.21. It Is spoken of
Eliakim, a type of Christ, I will commit the Government into his hand: and then
follows, the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder. The
meaning is, I have absolute soveraignity and dominion over heaven and hell; I
deliver and carry to heaven whom I please, none go there, but those whom I take
in: and hell prevails not, at its own will; but is under my dominion: for, I
have supreme power over hell and death: Not that Christ's dominion is limited to
these; but, because hell and death are the two things that Believers most fear.
He tells that they need not fear them: for they are both His Vassals: the devil
bears not the keys; but He bears them Himself. These are the grounds of
consolation, that are given to John: and they are strengthening grounds of
faith and salvation to all Believers.

Observe, 1. Our Lord Jesus, is God; the first and the last; He that was born
of the Virgin Marie: and so a true Man, is God; He that was crucified, dead and
buried, is God. This is one of the Articles of our Faith: and this place of
Scripture, is to be looked on, as a proof of it, against all the most cavilling
enemies of our Lords Deity: He that died, was, and is, the first and the last;
and the incommunicable Attributes of the Godhead agree to Him.

2. This is proposed, as a ground of consolation to John and all Believers. And
it has a world of consolation in it, as 1. Not only that there is a God; but
that our Lord Jesus Christ, is God; and that, notwithstanding His being God,
yet He has loved sinners so well, that He took on man's nature; and in that
nature, died for them; and that He, who wooes sinners, and offers to marry
them, is God, and yet is very tender to them and of them: which is no small
consolation. And it shows also, that He is faithful and powerful to perform
His promise to Believers: so there is not a design of enemies laid from the
beginning to this day; but He has a hand beyond it. 2. That folks may expect
good of God: seeing Christ is God, can Believers look for hard dealing from Him?
He is absolute in His sovereignty and dominion, yet swaying it for the good of
Believers. What would folks have more for a ground of consolation in times of
confusion, than this? let the world go as it will, our Lord Jesus, is God, and
wisely orders all. 3. It says this, that folks when their discouragements
prevail, as they are ready to mistake Christ, so they are ready to reflect on
His Godhead, as if He were not faithful, or powerful, or wise, or tender
enough. 4. The solid cure of fear and fainting, is, to be acquainted with
Christ as God: the ignorance of Christ is the ground of their being anxious,
impatient, and dammished with faithless fears, 1 Ioh. 5.4, 5.

From the second ground, I am living and was dead, Observe, 1, That this
Eternal Son of God became Man, else He could not have died; He that was God,
was also true Man: and this is another ground of our Faith, or, a confirmation
of an Article of it. 2. That Jesus Christ, in His Man-head, satisfied Justice:
for, He was dead, He laid down His life, and that willingly: No man takes my
life from me, but I lay it down, and take it up again. 3. That Jesus Christ is
God and Man, having two distinct Natures in one Person; for, in the one Nature,
He is living; and in the other Nature, He that was living became dead; yet it is
but one Person, that was both living and dead: some things (as is ordinary) are
attributed to the Person, that agree but to one of the Natures, as ( Acts 20.
28.) God is said to have purchased His Church with His own Blood: not that the
Godhead could suffer, but He that was God, suffered: so of the Man Christ, it
may be said, that He is Omnipotent, yet not as man, but the Person that was,
and is Man, is Omnipotent: so the Person that is God, died, though not as God,
but in respect of His humane nature, and as He was Man. These phrases from
Christ's own mouth, do both clear and confirm our Faith.

And behold I am alive for evermore. Then 1. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who died
once, shall die no more. 2. He who died out of love to His people, is risen and
exalted to heavenly glory and dignity, and bears the Office of Mediator, for
the consolation of His people for evermore. 3. His exaltation makes Him no
less mindful, nor less affectionate, and tender of Believers in Him: for,
John might have thought, that now there was a distance and dryness come in
between Christ and Him, especially considered as God; but He tells John, He
lives for his comfort: and that he may expect, that He who gave life to all,
and laid down His life for him, and other Believers, would be tender of Him and
of His life.

Which lets us see, 1. That the price of Believers Redemption, is paid. 2.
That it is paid by a Brother, that had a humane nature, and was like us in all
things except sin. 3. That Christ, who is God, is also Man; and that, to put us
in a capacity of living. 4. See here Christ's Resurrection and victory over
death; so that the bargain is completed and finished: and consequently, that
Believers shall rise and live for ever through Him. Every word here, is bigg
with consolation to us, if we know, how to suck at it.

LECTURE IX.
Verse. 18. -- And have the keys of hell and of death.

19. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall be hereafter.

20. The mystery of the seven Stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the
seven golden Candlesticks. The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven
Churches: and the seven Candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven Churches.


THe Lord is now comforting John, 1. From His Natures, or, Person. 2. From His
dying and victory over death. 3. From His Office, which, as Mediator, He
executes; instanced especially over hell and death, for these reasons, 1.
Because hell and death, were the last enemies Christ had to subdue, as if He
said, I have gotten power over the greatest enemies; and consequently, I have
power over the rest: and so it points at the greatness and universality of His
power, as Mediator, He being made head over all things to the Church, and
having all things put under Him, both which are in heaven, and which are in
earth, and which are under the earth, that at the Name of Jesus every knee
should bow. 2. For the comfort of His people. Particularly, for the comfort of
John: because now, John was affrighted with the Majesty of God and the
challenges of his own sinfulness, and was overcharged with fear: therefore
Christ says to him, fear not hell nor death, John, for I have the keys of
both, and can dispose so of them, as they shall not hurt thee; so guarding him
and His people against fears and down-casting, which may flow from the
apprehension of hell and death, which are the main things that the wakened
person, cast down at Christ's feet, does fear.

1. From our Lords repeating these grounds of consolation for John's
encouragement, in general, Observe, That when fear grows excessive, and
degenerates, even in these that should least mistake Jesus Christ, it is not
easily removed; but will take one ground of encouragement and confirmation
after another, ere the soul be erected. This is clear from the many Arguments,
and the repeating of them, to remove John's fear: for, Christ does nothing
idely: so apprehensive and jealous is flesh, when the Majesty of God kythes,
and the sense of sin, and challenges for sin are wakened, and the creatures
infirmity and weakness is discovered, and so strong is misbelief, That the
souls of these who are most tenderly dealt with, (and readily none was more
tenderly dealt with nor John, the beloved Disciple who lay in Christ's bosom)
are hardly raised up to comfort and confidence. This flows partly, from the
pronenesse of our nature to mistake Christ, and sink in discouragement: and
partly, through our weakness and sinfulness; so that the worth of Christ,
gets no credit in the general, far less in our paticular, at such a nick of
time as this is, when discouragement prevails: a thing that experience
teaches, and that souls would walk in fear of, at such times; a temper like
unto which we may see, Psalm. 77. My sore did run in the night, my soul refused
comfort.

The second general, is this, That it is no great hazard for a discouraged soul
to be laid at Christ's feet: it is a good posture, when a soul cannot bear the
weight of a difficulty, to throw it self down before Him. Christ is tender to
these, and though souls sin in giving way to excessive fear, through the
apprehension of wrath and guilt; yet our Lord deals gently with them; when the
reed is bruised, He will not break it; when the flax is but smoking, He will
not quench it; when the ewes are with young, He softly drives them, and carries
the lambs in His bosom, and suits His tenderness in reference to them, Isa.
40.11. If any be in such a condition, it were good to believe this: Christ's
tenderness in such a case when the soul is laid low, is abundantly clear in
this one instance.

Thirdly, More particularly. Observe, 1. That Believers may have apprehensions
and fears of hell and death; or, the fears of hell and death may sease and be
excessive in them: therefore Christ guards against it, which otherwise were not
needful.

Obs. 2. Much of this fear proceeds from the ignorance of Christs' Natures,
Person, and Offices, or, from the ignorance of Him in the administration of
these His Offices. Therefore when He comes to comfort John, He holds out His
Offices, and lets Him know that life and death are at His disposing. There is
some secret mistake of Christ, and some strange mould of Christ in the mind,
where excessive fear prevails: therefore it is often said, fear not, it is I,
be not afraid: and through the following Epistles to the Churches, He ever
tells what He is, with some property.

Obs. 3. That our Lord Jesus Christ, has the absolute guiding and
administration of what concerns His People; yea, has their greatest enemies at
His command; He lets into hell and death, and keeps out whom He pleases, He
gives orders in all.

Obs. 4. That there is no greater consolation to Gods People in time of their
fears of hell and death, than to know that our Lord Jesus has the keys of
both, and all in both, that devils will not winn out of the pit, till He open
the door, nor lengthen their chain one link, but as He lets it out, Rev.
20.4.14.

5. Lay all these together, what needs John fear? If evil spirits act by
Christ's orders, and the most wicked in hell or earth cannot exceed their
orders, what needs there be fears? seeing Christ keep the keys of the devils
house, and has orders given, and employment carved out to them, as acurately
as He has to men on earth, good or bad; for death and hell are His servants,
and go not their own errands, but His; and therefore dare not exceed their
Commission, yea, they must not, nor cannot, what ever malice they have in
prosecuting His order: What ground then of fear is there? And so it may serve
to comfort us against the evils of our outward and inward condition: there is
nothing comes in Church, or Commonwealth, but as He orders it, who is faithful
in all the house of God, as a son. It were good if our meeting together had
this fruit to get the faith of His Soveraignity sealed up in our hearts. If
folks would choose a good Friend, Patron, or Master, He is the Party: stick to
Him, and fear nothing.

Verse. 19. Follows the third thing, and it is some circumstances, that make
way for John's writting what he saw, or, our Lords repeating and enlarging of
John's Commission. This Commission is so often repeated, to tell, 1. How
punctual He would have John in keeping himself by his Commission, neither
altering nor diminishing it, nor doing any thing less or more, but what he had
Commission for. 2. To show on what ground this word depends, and the Authority
of it: it is not to be accounted authentic, because John wrote it simply, or
because the Church accounts it so; but because John at Christ's command wrote
it: Christ will have the Warrant and Authority of His Word discernable, and out
of question, especially what is contained in this Revelation: We will not find
the Warrant of any so often repeated, as the Warrant to write this. 4. It may
be for this reason, John's former fainting and fagging might have made him
forget his errand: therefore, He will repeat it to him: to tell that
discouraging and fainting must not mar folk in their duty; but they would
always labor so to compose their spirits, as the duty they are called to may
not be neglected: and though they may be surprised with fear and fainting; yet,
they would up, and fall to work again. We may consider the reasons of this
repetition more fully afterward.

That which He commands Him to write, does more accurately and distinctly
divide this Book, nor he did formerly, verse. 11. So that these words, are the
compendious division of the Book and Prophecy that follows. And we take it to
be a division of it, in three sorts of things. 1. The things which thou have
seen. 2. The things which are. 3. The things which shall be hereafter; or
otherwise, the first branch comprehends the second also: and so it is divided
in two.

1. The things which thou have seen, that is, the things that in thy time have
happened, or fallen forth since the Gospel began, the History of the Gospel in
its rise and victories to this time: And we expone it thus, and do not refer it
only to the particular Vision spoken of before, for two reasons, 1. Because,
These things which thou have seen, hold forth the subject matter of the Book,
as well as the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter. And
the things which thou have seen are distinguished from the things which are,
and the things which shall be hereafter: they must therefore be of one sort.
And so, the things which thou have seen, relate to the time past; the things
which are, to the time present, as the things which shall be hereafter, to the
time to come. 2. Because, comparing these words with verse. 11. we will find a
clear difference: for in verse. 11. it is said in the singular number, What thou
see, write in a Book, and send it to the seven Churches: which looks to the
particular Vision, spoken of there, or to the following Visions; looking on the
Revelation, as one Vision with so many parts; but here, it is written, the
things, in the plural; and which thou have seen, in the preterite time, that
is, write the things which are past; to distinguish them from things present
and to come: and so we expound these things, of the things past, from the rise
of the Gospel to this time, according to the scope of this Prophecy.

2. The things which are, that is, the present estat of the Churches, in the
two following Chapters: which holds forth the state of these Churches, as they
were for the time.

3. The things which shall be hereafter, or, which must be hereafter, point at
the Story and State of the Church from John's time to the second coming of
Christ: for, from the rise and beginning of the Church here, it ends not, till
it bring the Church Militant to Glory, and put the wicked in the bottomless
pit, Chap. 20. and 22. I mark it, because it serves to be a key to the rest of
the Story. And this division, shows, 1. That we are not to seek in this Book
of the Revelation, things that were before Christ's time, as some needlessly draw
it to the four Monarchies. 2. That the things contained in this Book, relate
not to a generation or two only; but to things falling out in the Church to the
end of the world: for, though some little things before Christ's time, be hinted
at in this Book; yet they are not brought in, as principal Prophecies, but as
useful, to expound these principal Prophecies, as when Rome is spoken of (
Chap. 17.) and its bypast Governments under the name of Babylon, it is brought
in, to clear what is meaned by the whore which John saw.

Again, Two things further, are observable here, 1. Our Lord Jesus His care and
respect to His Church, that will acquaint her with things past, present, and to
come, for their comfort and edification, So well would He have them provided
with lessons, and guarded against all times, and what ever difficulties may
come. 2. Being now to enter to the story, which He is to write, He divides it
ere He begin, both to make way for clearness in the thing, and for
distinctnesse in the uptaking of it; to make it the more intelligible to them
to whom He writes, and to all that should read it, He draws it all up to
three heads. And there is a profitable use to be made of this for men, in
speaking and writing, to be methodicall and orderly: our Lords way of writing,
is no friend to confusion, nor enemy to order, if so be, order be made
subservient to edification, and not to curiosity, such is Christ's order here;
and to that scope does that recapitulation serve, Heb. 6.1. and 8.1. And so are
the writings of Paul often, most exact in this.

Verse. 20. This verse contains an explication of the mystery, spoken of
before in the Vision, which John saw: at least of so much of it, as is useful
and needful to be known: as usually He leaves always somewhat at the back of
the Vision, to be a key to open the rest; So this serves to open somewhat that
is past; something that is spoken in the seven Epistles to the Angels, and
several times hereafter. There is something to be supplied here, while He
says, The mystery of the seven Stars which thou saw, that is, I will show
thee, or, I will tell thee the mystery of the seven Stars, etc. as He says,
Revel. 17. I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, that is, I will let thee
know what it means: Jesus Christ being the best Interpreter of His own mind,
condescendeth to open up so much of the mystery as was useful and needful, 1.
He expounds the Stars: and then, 2. the Candlesticks.

1. He expounds the Stars: The seven Stars, are the Angels of the seven
Churches, that is, the seven Stars signify, mean, and represent the Angels, or
Ministers, or Officers of the seven Churches: for, it is a thing ordinary, to
call Ministers, Angels, Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and
the people should seek the Law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the
Lord of Hosts. In the Original, it is, For he is the Angel of the Lord of
Hosts. So, Judges 2.1. it is said, an Angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to
Bochim: the word in the Original, is, a messenger came up; one, particularly
sent for that earand. Ministers are called Angels, 1. For Gods special
employing them about His holy things, beyond others. 2. Because of that their
sanctified station: to put them in mind, that they should be in their
conversation, Angelical. 3. To make them to be received as Angels by others:
that is the dignity due to them. By Angels here, is not meant some more eminent
nor another in these Churches, such as the Lord Bishop; but by Angels, we
understand all the Bishops and Presbyters that were over these Churches. 1.
Because, when it is said, the seven Stars, are the Angels of the seven
Churches, it speaks of them indefinitly, whether they be more or fewer; and he
faith not, they are the seven Angels of the seven Churches, as it says, the
seven Candlesticks, are the seven Churches; but supposes, that the number is
not so exact in the one as in the other: for, if the number of Ministers were
definite, as of the Churches, Why should the manner of speech be different? nor
says it, the eminent Angels of the Seven Churches; but indefinitly, they are
the Angels of the seven Churches. As Philip. 1. He writes to the Bishops and
Deacons, supposing a plurality of such in one Town, less than Ephesus, or
others mentioned here. Therefore, 2. It is not to be expounded of one man, as
if some one man in each of these Churches, had had the pre-eminence, because
our Lord writing to some of these Churches, and directing the Epistle to the
Angel, speaks of them as more; As when He writes to Smyrna, chapter 2. verse.
10. He says, Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Behold, the
devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried: which must
relate primarily, to the Ministers in Smyrna: and supposes more Ministers than
one; and that in directing the Epistle to the Angel of such a Church, he
understood the whole collective body of Ministers and Church Officers, that
afterward He distributes in more individual persons. See the Notes there, and on
chap. 2. verse. 24. where the Church in Thyatira, is distributed in three, 1. In
these, who are polluted Members thereof. 2. In these, who were free of these
pollutions called the rest. 3. In the Ministers, who are styled You, (...), as
distinct from the other two; yet All in the plural number.

3. What is then to be understood by Angel of Ephesus (and so of the rest) we
may learn from Acts 20.17. with 28. where Paul having the same business to do
on the matter, in recommending the care of that Church to some, for preventing
ills which He foresaw to be coming, He calls not One, but the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus: and gives not to One, the charge or name of Bishop; but to
All of them He commits it. Therefore, seeing Paul comprehends all in his
Sermon under that name (...), verse. 28. (and would by writ, as well as word,
done it) we must so expound John to do also, though he write in a more obscure
style, as best agrees with this Prophecy. For this Argument is sure, These
that John wrote to, under the name of the Angel of Ephesus, (and so of other
Churches) are these who have the oversight of, and authority over, these
Churches; But these are clear to be many Elders, or Bishops; Acts 20. etc.
Ergo, etc. Therefore take we the style Angel, to be collective, i.e. to the
Angels (seeing the style, as also the matter agrees to all) or Ministers of
such a Church: as suppose one were writing to a City, governed by a number of
Magistrates, in an Aristocratick Government, might it not be directed to the
Magistrate of such a City, and yet no particular person be pointed at, but the
whole be collectively understood? and so we conceive it here. Even as, by one
beast, chap. 13. etc. or head, chap. 17. he does express a Civil Government,
to wit, of Rome, before it was Monarchick; so may he be understood to do, by
the figurative title Angel here, though it be in the singular number;
Considering with all, that the things charged on this Angel, or required of
him, are such as agree not to one; but to the collective body, of
Church Officers together. Beside, more Ministers there were than one in those
Churches: that is certain. Either then they must be comprehended under the
title of Angel, or else taken in as contradistinguished from them with the rest
of the Church; But that will be found absurd, that the Church and her guides
should be some way contradistinguished, and yet Ministers not to fall under
that distinction: for, Stars they must be, that is, Angels; or Candlesticks,
that is, amongst the people, as distinguished from the Stars; But the last
cannot be. Therefore of necessity, the first must be understood. We conceive
then, as by Church, or Candlestick, is understood many Professors or Churches,
(for under Church here, such who thus plead, will grant more particular Churches
to be comprehended: for, say they, they are Diocesian Churches) in an united
way of worshipping or Government; So, by Angel, many Church-guids in an united
way of Governing may be understood. Ministers are called Stars, for these
reasons. 1. To signify and point out the eminence and dignity of the Office,
that it is a glorious and shineing Office. 2. To point out what is the
especial end of this Office; It is to give light: as the use of Stars is, to
give light to the world; so it is Ministers main employment, to shine and give
light to others; to make the world which is a dark night, to be lightsome. In
which sense, Mat. 5.14. It Is said, They are the light of the world. 3. It is to
signify, that they are but subservient lights: Our Lord Jesus is the Sun of
Righteousness, that Light, that great Light; and Ministers are lesser lights.
4. It is to point out the way how Ministers become lightsome. Stars receive
their light from the Sun, and by virtue of that borrowed light are made
lightsome; so Ministers, are made lightsome, and shine to give others light, by
virtue of the light that they receive from Christ: they are lights, but their
light is Star light, a borrowed light: and ecclipses betwixt Jesus Christ and
them, will darken them, seeing they have no light, but what they receive from
Him. This would learn Ministers and People a right uptaking of the nature of
this Office, and keep off contrary extremes, that both respectively are subject
unto.

The second part is expounded, the seven Candlesticks, are the seven Churches,
as before he expounded the seven Stars to be the Angels of the seven Churches.
The Churches are called Candlesticks, for these Reasons. 1. Because the
Candlestick is that which properly the light is set into: and it is fitted for
receiving of light, though it have none of its own; so the visible Church, is
that wherein Christ Jesus sets His lights, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in
the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, etc. The Church is, as it were,
the Candlestick to the Candle, the proper seat of the Apostles, Prophets and
Ministers after them. 2. Though the Candlestick give no light; yet it makes the
light set on it to be the more useful to others, as Mat. 5.14. Ye are the
light of the world: a city set on a hill cannot be hid: neither do men light a
candle to put it under a bushel, but on a Candlestick, that it may give light
to all that are in the house: So Ministers are set in the Church; and their
setting in the Church, is the way whereby God preserves light, ordinarily, and
makes it shine. And so, the excellent comely order of the visible Church, kyths
in this, that it is like a City set on a hill. And hence the Church is called
the pillar and ground of the truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. The light of the Truth being
set in the Church, as on a pillar to make it kyth the more, and be seen the
further, that others may fall in love with it. And laying both these together,
the Ministers being Lights, and the Churches Candlesticks, it holds out a
near and sib relation betwixt Ministers and People, as if the People were dark
without Ministers; and the Ministers would not shine far, nor be useful, if
they had not Churches to bear them up. We ought not to strain this similitude
too far, as if Churches might be Churches without Ministers, much less before
Ministers be set in them, as a Candlestick still is a Candlestick, without a
light, but certainly, very dark. That is not the scope; but it is to show that
in Constitute Churches, what is Christ's esteem, both of Ministers and People,
and what is the mutual relation that stands betwixt them, each to other. We
know that the Church organized, is but one body, whereof the Pastors are a
principal part; and that these derogate not to the other relations betwixt
Ministers and People, as to be Fathers to them, to beget them, to nourish them,
as a Nurse does in giving suck; to be Mothers, traveling in birth with them:
in which respect, particular Churches, and Christians have their being from
Ministers, as such instruments who has begotten them by the immortal seed of
the Word.

2. Golden Candlesticks, 1. To point out comparatively, the excellency of the
Visible Church, above all other Societies in the World; and positively, the
excellency that is among the Churches: as gold is the most excellent metal;
so the Church is the choice and waill of all the World beside: it is Gods
Garden. 2. To let us see what is Believers duty, and what all the members of
the Church are obliged to, they ought to be as gold that will abide the trial,
and has no dross. The Church of Christ should be thoroughly sincere, as gold:
to be like every sort of metal, will not be enough.

Quest. How can these Churches be called gold, seeing many of them are of so
little worth, that they could scarce abide the trial, as Pergamos, Thyatira,
Sardis, etc. and Laodicea is so corrupt that she has no commendation at all?

Answ. Our Lord Jesus designs the Visible Church, or Churches, not according
to the plurality; but according to the better part: and when there is any gold,
He counts by it: even as one may call an heap, a heap of corn, though the
greatest part be chafe. 3. There is something essential to the Church as
Visible, which makes them get this denomination: for, the Visible Church has a
comparative excellency beyond others that are without; and Jesus Christ looking
not to what they were, but to the nature of a Visible Church, He calls them
golden Candlesticks, even as He calls the Ministers Stars, though there were
some among them of little worth, as that Angel of Laodicea: because by virtue
of their Office they were so: So the Churches written to, by the Apostles, are
called Saints, and Holy, in so far, as by virtue of their profession and
Church-state-relation that they stood in to God, they were so. 3. He designs
them so by virtue of their obligation, to let them see what they should be, and
were obliged to be. This is a main reason why the Church of the Jews, is called
a Holy people: not for any great holiness that often was amongst them all; but
because they were separated from other People, to be a peculiar People to Him:
in which respect, the children of Believers, are called holy, 1 Cor. 7. which
is not to be understood of any personal holiness; but of a holiness in
respect of a federall or Covenant relation: in which respect, they are
separated from the rest of the world, who have not an external right to such
Church Priviledges. Thus, both stock and branches are holy, and no otherwise,
Romans 11.

Which lets us see, 1. What respect Jesus Christ has to His Churches and
Ministers. 2. That the Scriptures way of expounding it self, is to expound one
place by another: one verse or phrase, darkly set down in one place, by an
other, more full and clear in an other place. 3. Particularly, how to expound
the word are, or is, the seven Stars: are, that is, they signify and
represent: a word often used, Genesis 41.26. The seven good kine, are seven years,
etc. So the Lamb, is the Passover, and Mat. 26.26. Take eat, this is my body,
This cup is my blood, etc. which expressions hold out no Transubstantiation, or
transmutation, or turning of one substance into another, more than what is said
here imports that the Ministers were transubstantiated in Stars, or the
Churches in Candlesticks, or contrarily; But it is a mysterious, and
Sacramental way of speaking, to set forth the thing signified, or represented,
by giving the name thereof to the sign, which represents it. And this is in
many places to be adverted unto.

Concerning a Calling to the Ministry, and clearness therein.
THis command of writing, was particularly set down, verse. 11. Here again, it is
renewed; and afterward, Chap. 2. and Chap. 3. is seven times repeated, with
respect to every Church he writes unto: which certainly is to show, of what
concernment clearness of a Call is, and that both in general, and particular;
and is done amongst other reasons for this end, to clear ^ohn in his Call, and
to warrant the People in their receiving of his Message. From which we may
gather this, That a Minister that takes on him to edify a Church in the name
of the Lord, had need to be clear of his Call thereunto from the Lord: it is not
the general that we now insist on, to wit, that there is such a peculiar
Calling, or, that none but the Lord can authorize for it; but it is especially
concerning that clearness which every Minister ought to have in his Call, that
with holy boldness he may go about the work, having peace in himself (what
ever he may meet with in it) as one who has not run, whereas the Lord did not
send him, Ier. 23.21. That this is exceedingly requisite to a Minister, we
suppose will be out of question to all who know that Ministers are but
Ambassadors; and so for them to want clearness of the Lords Call, is to be
uncertain whether they have a Commission or not: and therefore they who look
not to it, can neither have that confidence of the Lords owning them, or
accepting of them in their duty, except there be some satisfaction herein, to
wit, that the Lord has sent them, or does send them. It will be a pusling
question to many one day, Man, who made thee a Minister? Who gave thee
Commission to treat for Christ? And although others may have peace in the
use-making of such a man's Ministry; yet himself can have none, he being ever
liable to this question, Friend, how enteredst thou hither? and how obtained
thou this honor? Doubtless from the defect of this trial, it is, in part,
that many thrust themselves into the work at first, whose after-carriage and
way proves them never to have been sent, ^ which they durst not have done, had
they walked by this rule of waiting for a Commission thereto. And on the other
hand, some really called to the Ministry, are yet kept in a kind of bondage,
both as to their duty and their peace; because it is not clear to them that it
is so: for, although the being of a Minister and his Calling, simply depends
not on his clearness of his Call: as the being of a Believer does not
necessarily infer that he must know himself to be a Believer; yet, no question,
as a Believers particular comfort depends on the clearness of his interest,
for which cause he should study it; so a Ministers confidence and quietness in
his particular Ministry, does much depend on this, that he be clear in his Call
to be a Minister: for which cause, they who look there-away, or are entered
therein, would humbly enquire for nothing more than this, that they be clear
that they have Christ's Commission for their engageing. And although it be
impossible to be particular, or fully satisfying in this, so as to meet with
all the difficulties that may occurr; but Christian prudence and tenderness
will still find matter of exercise in the deciding thereof; Yet, having this
occasion here, (which is also frequent in this Book) we may, once for all, say
a word in the general to what may give a Minister clearness in his Calling:
which we may take up in a five-fold consideration. 1. Of a Ministers Call to
that work, in general. 2. To a particular People. 3. In carrying a particular
Message to that People. 4. What is required of him as to writing for the
benefit of the Church. 5. And what respect People ought to have to Gods calling
of a man, in their hearing and reading.

For the first, we say, 1. That Ministers would soberly endeavor satisfaction
at their entry, if they be called to that work or not; and begin with that:
This is certain, that it is not indifferent, whether men betake them to this
Calling or an other: for God has not indifferently dispensed His talents: nor
has He left men to that liberty, to choose as they will; but wills them to
continue and abide in that calling whereto they are called; and not which they
have chosen themselves: yea, that a man have some knowledge or affection to
that work of the Ministry, will not prove him to be called, although all that
is externally needful for his promoving therein did concur; for that will not
prove a Call to an other Charge or Trust; and so not to this: and no question,
it being a desirable thing in it self to be a Messenger for Jesus Christ to His
Church, many may desire the office of a Bishop, and be approven of God in their
look there-away; and yet indeed never be called of God actually to it, as
experience may confirm.

Secondly, When we speak of a Call in any of the former respects, it is not to
be understood, that men now are to look for an immediate and extraordinary
Call, as John and the Apostles had, That were as unwarrantable as to look for
an extraordinary measure of gifts, such as they were furnished with, and that
in an immediate way; but it is that as extraordinary Officers had extraordinary
and immediate evidences of their Call (for so it required) so Ministers and
ordinary Office-bearers, that are called in a mediate way, would seek for such
evidences, as mediately may satisfy them: for, the mediate calling of the
Church, according to Christ's Ordinance, is Christ's Call, as that more immediate
was: and therefore, Act. 20.28. and elsewhere, these Elders and Pastors of
Ephesus (who yet, no question, had but such a Call as these that were chosen by
the People, and ordained by the Presbytery, Act. 14.23. and 1 Timothy 4.14.) are
said to be set over the Flock by the holy Ghost: and so Pastors and Teachers,
who are to be continued in the Church by a mediate way of man's transmitting it
to others, as Paul's word is, 2 Timothy 2.2. are yet accounted a gift of Christ's to
His Church, as the Offices of Apostles, Evangelists, etc. are, Ephesians. 4.11.

Thirdly, In this inquiry, the great stresse would not be laid on a man's own
inclination, or a supposed impulse, which yet may be but the inclination. That
being sound to flow from, on to go along with rational grounds, may have its
own weight; but otherwise, not: for we see often men more affectionately
inclining to what they should not, than to what they should. Hence many run who
are not sent; whose inclinations certainly lead them to it: and others again,
that are most convincingly called, have yet difficulty to go over their
inclinations, as does appear in Moses, Jeremiah and Jonah, at least in his Call
to Niniveh. And our hearts being deceitful, and we ready to account the
motions of our own spirits to be better than they are, There is need, whether
in the general, or in the particular Call, to be wary here.

More particularly, we conceive, that both in general, and with relation to a
particular place for the clearing of a Ministers Call, respect is to be had to
these four: which may be satisfying as to his peace, when they concur.

1. A man's Gift, is the great differencing Character of a Call, though it be
not of it self, constitutive of a Call, that is, that one be in some measure
(...), or, apt to teach a this being infallibly true, that whom the Lord
designs for any employment in His House, if it were but to make Curtains,
Sockets, etc. to the Ark, Hewill some way fit, and make them suitable to it: and
this is as the Seal whereby He evinceth in the hearts of Hearers, that he who
treats, is His Authorized Ambassador.

2. To clear a man to exercise his Gift: it must not only be a Gift, but found
and declared to be so, by these to whom the trial of Gifts is committed by
Jesus Christ: for, it is not the having a Gift, that makes a Call; yea, nor
that which makes it a public Gift, or to be acknowledged as such; but it is
the orderly Authoritative mission, that follows upon that Gift: in which
respect, the exercise of the Gift, and the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, are put together, 1 Timothy 4.14. even though it seems that he had
knowledge and Gifts before. If it were not thus, what a confusion would there
be in the Church of Christ, more than in any Commonwealth? Where it is not Gifts
that constitutes a Magistrate, or an Officer; but the orderly calling of a
person thereunto by such as have Authority: which ought also singularly to be
observed here. And the Lord has appointed this, not only for the public order
of His house, which is exceedingly prised by Him; but also for the particular
clearing of the person that is to be designed. Thus, I conceive, a person that
is at some doubt about his Gift, and possibly thinking it fit to edify; yet,
upon supposition that it be found otherwise by these to whom the Spirits, or
Gifts, ought to be subjected, he may have peace in abstaining, what ever his
own thoughts be: because the Lord has not made these his rule. Hence also, on
the other hand, some who may esteem their Gift unfit for edifying of the
Church; yet if it be found otherwise by these whose place leads them to decide,
and whose conscience will make them tender in it, they ought, and may with
peace yield: whereas, if there were no Authoritative trial, what a torture
would it be to some to have the weight wholly lying on themselves? and what a
door would be open to the most self-confident persons on the other hand? Yea,
were it not thus, there would be no need of the trial of Gifts, enjoined, 1
Cor. 14.29, 31. which being in extraordinary gifted Prophets, it is much more to
be respected in ordinary Ministers: neither were there use for so many precepts
to try, and so many characters how to discern them that are fitted for, or
called to the Ministry; whereof, to be apt to teach, is a main one, if there
were not weight to be laid on the probation, and determination of a
Presbytery, who are to count to God for their decision in such a case, and are
not left to indifferency or arbitrarinesse therein.

3. For a man's peace, beside the former two, singleness in himself is
necessary, without which, both the former two will not sustain him against a
challenge: except there be a testimony here, that conscience to duty, and
obedience to Gods Call made him yield to it; that Gods glory, and promoving of
the Work of the edifying of Christ's Body, was his end; and that his taking up
of Christ's mind, to be calling him to follow this Call, was his motive that
made him betake himself to this Calling and not to another, and that upon
deliberation and search made, to discern the mind of God. Where these three
concur, to wit, a Gift, and that orderly approven, with the hearts yielding to
the Call, upon that account, to do Christ service in that, more than in an
other station, because it apprehends him to call to that employment and not to
another, we conceive there is good ground of peace, so as there cannot be a
torturing challenge upon this occasion: for, although men entrusted to try, are
not infallible in discerning of Gifts; yet, when use is made of this way, as
Christ's Ordinance, for attaining satisfaction in this matter of a Call, it is
not like that His Ordinance will be a snare to any: and if triers of Gifts
should mistake; yet may it be expected, that either the Lord will discover it
timously some other way to the person concerned, or graciously some other way
pity him, who did yield only out of respect to his Call as it was supposed by
him. And who knows also, but Gifts may follow by Gods blessing upon Labors,
when He so clears a Call, if the Question only be there? As one may have peace
in a Magistracy, when singly it is embraced out of the conscience of Gods Call,
although it may be they who had hand in his election did unfitly make choice of
such a person. And though this singleness be not simply necessary to the being
of a Call; (for, there may be a Call without it, as in Judas) yet, it is simply
necessary for the man's peace that accepts it.

4. We take in here the considerations of Gods providence, and the concurrence
of His dispensations: which, though they will not determine a Call simply, nor
make a thing lawful to one, which is not in it self lawful; yet, in positive
duties, they may do much to cast the balance in swaying a man to one Calling
beyond another; as suppose one has means and ways in providence provided for
his education, which others have not; or, he has been led to study, conscience
puts at him to take some calling, and it may be, points at this, at lest so
far as to make proof of it: all doors for other Callings are shut upon him, so
that he must betake himself to this, or languish in doing of nothing: sometimes
others may be made use of to put at him, and the mind is kept in disquiet while
he essayeth any other thing: reason here shows, such and such like things
concurring, may have so much weight as to encourage one to follow this motion,
and may confirm him when this goes along with the former three, or has them
following upon it.

If there were more particular enquiry called for concerning that impulse of
the Spirit, which may be in one, in reference to the Ministry, how to discern
it? and what weight to lay on it? We confess that it is hard to decide
therein: the operations of the Lords Spirit being mysteries, and often seeming
unreasonable to men; as also the deceits of our own hearts are deep, and not
easily reached: Yet, for helping in this, we may say, That it is not unusual to
the Lord, to pouse one by His Spirit, when He minds to have him to the
Ministry; and thereby to stir the heart of one, more than another, and more to
this Calling than another, though in all, or at all times, not in the same
measure. This in experience has been found, and God has afterward sealed it
to have been of him: and by this, many have been brought to the Ministry, who
have been profitable in it; who, had not this been, would never have thought on
it, or have been persuaded thereto by others. And seeing the Calling of the
Ministry is in an especial and peculiar way from God, and eminently His choice
herein does appear, it is not inconsistent with His sovereignty and interest
therein, that he use this mean or way of an inward impulse. And although what
is expressly spoken of this in Scripture be for the most part in reference to
extraordinary Officers, and that in an extraordinary manner; yet by proportion
may an ordinary impulse be gathered from that as concurring in the sending of
ordinary Officers, as there is an ordinary motion of the Spirit acknowledged in
other lawful duties. Yet, 1. Advert, that this impulse of the Spirit, is not in
all alike or equally discernable. The Lord sometimes will thrust one forth by a
more inward impulse; and will draw others by more external means: Hence it will
be found, that if the thing be of God, where the way is most improbable, and
there be fewest encouragements and least outward drawing, there the inward
thrust is the more strong: because by it the Lord does supply the want of that
weight, which these outward helps might have on Him. And again, where outward
things do more convincingly concur, as that a man is purposly, as it were,
educated in reference to that end, provided for, and encouraged by others in
the undertaking thereof, etc. In these, although the end may be single, yet
often is the inward impulse less discernable: because the Lord has provided
other means to draw them forth, which do supply that: neither is he to be
astricted to one way of proceeding in this. 2. Advert, that this impulse may
be, when yet it is not discerned, either because it is not taken heed unto; or,
because the inclination may be prejudged, and the person not discern the
language thereof. Or, because the Lord may make it ascend by the steps and
degrees, as it were, at first withdrawing the mind only from some design that
it was set upon; and it may not be positively at first known what he aims at:
And, Secondly, He may incline the heart to, and bring it in love with reading,
and studying, and other means which afterward he may make use of in reference
to this end; and yet possibly hide from the person that which he aims at by
this. Thirdly, He may make a stir inwardly in the heart, making it some way
disquiet in every other thing, and restless in whatsoever it turns it self
to, as not being its proper work; that thereby He may constrain it to look some
other-where. Fourthly, When this is done, He may make the person content to
essay the trial of his Gift, if so be by that he may attain quietness, and yet
still the person be but trying what the language of that impulse may mean, and
not be distinctly clear of the result. And, the Lord does wisely follow this
order, partly, to draw on the person by steps, who might otherwise be scared,
if all were presented to him together: and partly, that in due order he might
effectuate his point, and train up the instrument to a fitness for the work he
is to call him to, whereas, if he had persuasion of Gods calling of him to the
Ministry at first, before any acquired fitness for the same, he might be in
hazard to slight the means, and precipitate in the thing, which the Lord
allows not: partly also he does it, to keep such in dependence on Him for
through-bearing in every step, one after another; so that although at first,
one be not clear that God calls him to the Ministry it self, yet if he be so
far clear, as that He calls him to forbear such an other Calling, to follow
such a Study, to essay trials, etc. he ought to yield to that, waiting for what
God may further reveal to him. Therefore, 3. Advert, that difference ought to
be made between an impulse to the study of Divinity, and an impulse to the
Ministry: one may really be stirred to the first, and ought to account it so,
and so far to yield, without disputing what may follow; as we may see in many,
who in the study of Divinity, and in trials have given good proof of Gods
approving them in going that length, and yet he has thought meet by death, or
otherwise to prevent their being entered actually to the Ministry; which
declares that they were never called thereunto: as therefore, by any impulse,
one cannot warrantably conclude that he is certainly to live so long; so can be
not certainly gather, that he is called to be actually a Minister, which
supposes the former: and therefore certainty in this, is not to be at first
enquired for, or expected; but so much is to be rested in, as may give the
conscience quietness in the present step, supposing that death should prevent
an other: this being the Lords way, that the further one follow His Call, it
will be clearer unto him a like one that ascends by degrees, he is still in
capacity to behold the further. Yet, 4. Advert, that every impulse, which may
be to the Calling of the Ministry, is not to be accounted an impulse of the
Spirit of God; or, as his moving either to the studying of Divinity, or the
following of the Ministry, as we may see in the multitude of false Prophets of
old, and in the experience of later times, wherein many have, and do run, whom
the Lord never sent. And considering the nature of our spirits, and the way
that the devil may have in the seducing of some, and jumbling of others: this
needs not to be thought strange. The great difficulty then will be, how to
discern the voice of the Spirit of God in this particular, from the voice of
our own spirits, or of the devil, in this respect, transforming himself into
Angel of light, and sometimes even driving honest hearts to the attempting of
this as a good thing, who yet may not be called thereunto of God indeed.

To help then in the trial of this, Consider,

1. That that which is an impulse of the Lords Spirit, does more compose and
sanctify the whole frame of the inward man, it being that same Spirit which is
the Spirit of Grace and supplication: therefore the more sensibly he pouse, the
more sensibly are these effects; and the more composed and sanctified a heart
be, the more clear and distinct will that impulse of the Spirit be: because
then the heart is more impartial to discern the same. And although this impulse
of the Spirit be but a common work, which may be in a hypocrite, and so always
has not this sanctifying efficacy with it, yet, we conceive where one, out of
conscience, reflecteth on it, to try whither it be of God or not, there can be
no conclusion drawn from it to quiet the conscience in the acknowledgment
thereof, except it be found to be like His Spirit in the effects of it.

2. That this impulse of the Spirit, is not backed with the assistance of our
spirits; but some way it constrains them to yield to it, even contrary to
their own inclination, So that it moves and carries a man over the thoughts
of gain, reproach, credit or loss, over his inability and unfitness; which
are never more discovered than when this impulse is strongest and most
distinct, as we may see in the examples of Moses, Jeremiah, etc. whereas
motions from our own spirits, do often lessen the difficulties, and hide the
unfitness and inability that is within us, and readily ground themselves upon
some supposed ability or probability, more than there is apparent reason for.

3. That Gods Spirit moves by spiritual motives like himself, as the promoving
of Gods glory, the edification of His people, the preventing of a challenge, by
giving obedience to Him, and such like: whereas other motions have ends and
motives like themselves, as in the false prophets and other teachers in the New
Testament may be seen; who fed not the flock, but themselves, and served not
the Lord Christ, but their own bellies, and sought their own credit, ease, etc.
yea, even Judas, though extraordinarily moved by the Spirit; yet it is like that
was not the motive which prevailed with him to yield; but some carnal motive,
whether gain, credit or such like, as is held forth in the Gospel.

4. That the motion of the Lords Spirit, is, in its nature, kindly; and in its
way, regular, according to the rule of the Spirit in the Word, that is, it does
not drive the heart violently as the Devils injections do, nor does it
precipitat in the following and persuing of what it moves to; but, as having
the command of the heart, he moves natively, without making the spirit
confused, and He presses the prosecuting of what He moves unto, orderly, it
being the same Spirit that has laid down a rule to walk by in the Word, and
now stirs within the heart: and therefore, the inward impulse, cannot but be
answerable to the outward rule. Hence also the spirits motion, is submissive to
the way of trial, appointed in the Word, and is not absolute or peremptory:
whereas motions from our selves, or from the devil, are headstrong, and
irregular, aiming at the end or thing, without respect to the way prescribed
for attaining it; or, at least, do not so heartily approve of the one as of the
other; especially if it be thwarted in its design by them.

5. That this motion of the Spirit puts to the use of all means that lead to
the end, as well as to the end it self, that is, reading, studying, praying, or
what may fit one for that end: for, the Spirit never divides the end and the
means: and Paul's word to Timothy, subjoyning that precept, give thy self to
reading, to that other of his fulfilling his Ministry, does confirm this:
whereas, when these are divided, there can be no claim made to a motion of the
Spirit of God.

6. Consider, that the impulse of the Spirit, is a fitting, gifting impulse,
and carrying along with it a capacity in some measure for, and a suitableness
to, the thing that it calls to. Hence, in the Scripture, the Call of the
Spirit, and the Gifts of the Spirit go together. And this last, is given as the
evidence of the first, and in this respect, although there may be an impulse to
the study of Divinity without the Call of the Spirit unto the Ministry; yet
can that never be counted an impulse of the Spirit actually to enter the
Ministry, where this gifting of the Spirit is not: for, it can never be
instanced in all the Word of God, that His Spirit sent any, but his Call was
sealed by His Gifting of them. And so, in effect, the trying of this impulse,
so as one may have satisfaction therein, will for the most part resolve in the
trial of those two formerly mentioned, to wit, the fitness of ones Gift to
teach. Secondly, The singleness and sincerity of the motive whereby one is
swayed to follow the impulse: for, although the Spirit may move; yet if it be
some carnal ground that persuades the person to yield to that which the Spirit
moves unto, it can be no ground of peace. These two then are at least, as to a
man's peace, the sine quibus non, in the trial of this impulse; so that without
them, he cannot conclude himself to be called actually to enter the Ministry,
or have peace in the undertaking thereof.

To speak a word then to what weight is to be laid on this impulse: Concerning
it, we say,

1. That if all things beside concur to the fitting and qualifying of a
Minister, this is not simply to be accounted a sine quo non in ones
undertaking: Because, 1. There may be some impulse, though we discern it not.
2. Because there are more clear grounds to gather Gods mind from, as the
effects of the Spirit fitting one with Gifts for the charge, and other grounds
laid down, whereupon weight may more safely be laid, than upon any inward
apprehending, or not apprehending of the Spirits motion, which is never given
to us in any thing, as the alone rule of obedience; and we must suppose the
motion of the Spirit to h^ where these Gifts are, seeing as the impulse has
always the Gifts with it, so we may gather the impulse from the Gifts.

2. We say, that where other things concur not, no impulse is to be accounted a
sufficient evidence of a Call to the Ministry simply, upon the grounds
formerly given: yet, 3. A distinct native, sanctifying impulse, may be a Call
to use means, and to wait on in Gods way for attaining of fitness in a
submissive manner, seeking rather to know what God intends, than as being
absolutely determined in respect of the end. 4. Although Gifts, singleness of
heart, and an impulse concur together; yet will not these constitute a
Minister, though they may evidence a Call to the Ministry, and warrant one to
step in, when a door is opened to them: because neither of these, do include an
Authoritative Commission for him to treat, although they do put him in a
capacity to be sent as an Ambassador of Christ, when he shall be Authorized.
Hence it is, that in the case of Deacons, Act. 6. who are by Gifts fitted for
their Office; and of Bishops, Tit, 1.7.8 and 9. who are, in the respects there
set down, to be found qualified for their employment; yet is the Authoritative
ordaining of both, mentioned, as that which did constitute them Officers in
these respective stations. Lastly, we say, that yet this impulse, when all
concur with it, may have its own cumulative weight, for the strengthening of one
that has it, to the undertaking of this Charge, when the Lord in His ordinary
way opens the door unto him.

To shut up this part of the discourse, we conceive, that it were useful to
the Church, and conducing exceedingly for the clearing of Entrants to the
Ministry, that there were some choice and way of trial, both of such as might
be presently found fit to enter the Ministry, and also of others that might be
advised to study in reference thereunto; and that it might not be left unto men
themselves alone, whether they will offer themselves to trial in reference to
that Charge or not. For so, many may, and no question do, smother good Gifts
which might be useful, thereby prejudging the Church thereof, who by this
grave convincing, and (ere it fail) Authoritative way, might be brought forth,
and would more easily be made to yield thereunto, when the burden thereof were
not wholly left on themselves; whereas now, partly, from shame and modesty,
partly, from custom, and undervaluing of the Ministry, none ordinarily who
otherwise have a temporal being, or any place, do betake themselves to this
Calling; and it is hard to say that either none such are gifted for it, or that
such Gifts should be lost. And by this, on the other side, we suppose, that
many who do now design themselves to the Ministry, (because none but such as
take that way are called thereto) would be ashamed to thrust forth themselves;
and so the Church might have access a great deal better to the providing of
her self with able and qualified Ministers; whereas now she is, almost,
confined in her choice to a number that give themselves, or at most, are
designed by their Parents, or possibly constrained by necessity to follow such
a study. It Is true, this way the Lord may provide His House, and may so engage
those whom He minds to make use of; yet certainly, it looks not so like, in an
ordinary way, for attaining of edification as the other: and considering that
the Church as such, is one body, and so ought to make use of every member, and
any member, as may most conduce for the good of the whole body. There is no
question, but the Church might call a member, upon supposition of his
qualifications, to trial, and (being found conform, to what was supposed)
might appoint him to the Ministry: and that member ought to yield to both,
from that duty that lies on every member in reference to the whole body, which
is to be preferred to any particular member's interest: and this without
respect to men's outward condition or place; providing their being employed in
this station, may be more useful to the Church, and the edification of Christ's
Body, than their being employed in no Calling at all, or in any other Calling.
This being also to be granted, that some men may be so useful in, and fit for
public civil Callings, as that thereby the Church may be benefited so far,
that it will not be meet in every case, and in every person, to use this power,
yet such extraordinary cases being laid aside, no doubt ordinarily it were
useful: And seeing all Incorporations and Commonwealths have this liberty to
call, and employ their members, without respect to their own inclinations, so
as it may be most behovefull for the good of the Body; this which nature
teaches, and experience has confirmed in them, cannot be denied to the
Church, which is a Body, and has its own policy given to it by Jesus Christ
for the building up of it self. This way is also agreeable to Scripture; and to
the practice of the Primitive times: none can say that the Church did not
choose her Elders and Deacons, and other Officers out of all her members
ind^fferently, as she thought fit, Act. 6. seven men fitly qualified are to be
looked out amongst all the People; so in Paul's practice through the Acts; and
in his directions to Timothy, and Titus: such only are not to be chosen, who
offer themselves to it; but indifferently, such as may be best qualified, are
to be enquired for; and when found, what ever they be, to be called and
ordained to the Ministry. By all which, it appears like the Apostolic way to
enquire for men that may be found qualified for the Ministry: and also, that
shuning, or repining to enter the Ministry in any person found qualified for
it, and thus called to it, has never been supposed as allowable by the
Apostles; but it was looked upon as a duty, for those that were so called, to
obey, as it was the duty of others to enquire for such. To this also, may that
exhortation of Peter relate, 1 Epist. 5. Chap. and 2. verse. Feed the flock of
God which is amongst you, taking the oversight thereof not by constraint, but
willingly, etc. whereby it would seem, that he is pressing obedience from those
that were called, that willingly they should undertake the oversight of Gods
flock. Which words, if well considered, would pinch exceedingly a tender
Conscience of any man, if a Call were thus pressed upon him. And indeed, if it
were at men's option arbitrarily to refuse such a Call, the directions that are
given to People and Ministers for searching out, calling and ordaining such,
were to no purpose; for thus they might all be frustrated. We do not say this
to prejudge the laudable way of training up Students in reference to this end,
it seems that even amongst the Jews, these who were to teach the People, were
numerous, and as it were in Colleges, trained up with the Prophets, and these
who were able to teach them. The Apostles also were not defective in training
of young men in reference to this, which shows the laudablenesse of that way.
And although the main part thereof be not to be placed in Scholastic debates;
yet is training necessary, which in the meanest Calling is found useful: and
therefore, not justly to be denied here. We would only say, 1. That there would
be some choice made in the designing of Youths for that Study: so that in an
orderly way, some might be so trained, and not have liberty otherwise to
withdraw; and others timeously advised to look to some other employment. 2. We
would not have Elections bounded and limited to that number, so as either any
whosoever thus trained up, might certainly be supposed as capable of being
Ministers, or as if no Congregation or Presbytery might fix their eye upon, or
give a Call unto any other. This way of calling was long continued in the
Primitive Church, as we may see in the example of Ambrose, who being a Senator
and President (although not yet Baptized) nevertheless, because of his known
ability, piety, and prudence, was unexpectedly, and unanimously called to be
Bishop of Millan: and notwithstanding of his great oppositnesse thereto, was at
length so pressed as he was made to yield: and after proved a notable
instrument in the Church of Christ. And it is remarked, that the good Emperor
Valentinian, did exceedingly rejoice, when he heard it, blessing God that had
led him to choose one to take care of bodies, who was accounted fit to take
care of souls. Theoderet. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 6. The like is recorded by
Euagrius. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 6. Of one Euphraimius, who, while he was Governor
of the East, was chosen to be Bishop of Antioch, which the Author calls seeds
Apostolica. This is also the established Doctrine of our Church in the first
Book of Discipline, in that head that concerns Prophesying and interpreting
Scripture, whereof these are the words, Moreover men in whom is supposed to be
any Gift, which might edify the Church, if they were employed, must be charged
by the Ministers and Elders to join themselves with the Session and company of
interpreters, to the end that the Kirk may judge whither they be able to serve
to Gods glory and the profit of the Kirk, in the vocation of Ministers or not.
And, if any be found disobedient, and not willing to communicate the Gifts and
special graces of God with their brethren, after sufficient admonition,
Discipline must proceed against them, provided that the civil Magistrate concur
with the judgment and election of the Kirk: for no man may be permitted, as
best pleases him, to live within the Kirk of God; but every man must be
constrained by fraternal admonition, and correction, to bestow his labors,
when of the Kirk he is required, to the edification of others. Which if it were
zealously followed, might by Gods blessing prove both profitable, and
honorable to the Church.

To say something to the second head proposed, to wit, of a man's clearness to
the Ministry of a particular Congregation, we suppose that this also is
necessary for his peace, seeing there is no reason that men ought arbitrarily to
walk herein, but accordingly as they are called of God to one place and not to
another: therefore we see that in John's commission, the general is not only
expressed; but particularly, he is instructed in reference to such and such
particular Churches: and according to this, we see in the History of the Acts,
that some were ordered to Preach in one place, and some in another; and Acts
13. Paul and Silas in their leaving Antioch, and going to the Gentiles, were
not only called by word, but confirmed and authorized by the laying on of
hands; and we doubt not but this general also will be granted. For helping to
clearness therein, The former general rules, are also to be applied with
special respect to the particular case, As, 1. It is to be tried, if the Gift
be not only suitable to edification in general, but to the edification of that
people in particular: so that if when their case, dispositions, qualifications,
etc. and his gifts, disposition, and other fitness, both in reference to his
public Ministry in Doctrine and Discipline, as also to his induments in
reference to his private conversation (yea, their very corruptions and
infirmities being compared together) If, I say, such a man may, in well
grounded reason, be looked upon as qualified for the edifying of such a people:
In this comparison also, respect would be had even to the more public state of
the Church: so as a man's fitness would not only be tried with respect to the
Congregation it self; but with respect to other things. 2. This fitness would
be found and determined to be so, by these whose place it is to try Gifts, even
in this respect. 3. The trysting of providence is to be observed; as, the rise
of the Call, if it proceed from no natural or carnal end? if no other door be
opened elsewhere to him who is called, he may the more warrantably step in
there, if no probable settling of that Congregation appear otherwise than by
him, so as his refusing might occasion a detriment to that place? If things
look so as he have an esteem without prejudice in the hearts of that people; so
as he may probably expect to be looked on as a Minister, and to have the Word
without prejudice received fom him in that place? also if without carnal
respects his heart be made to incline that way, or if unexpectedly and over
many difficulties the people have pitched on him and adhered to him? These, and
such like, may have their own weight, so as to help to gather this conclusion,
That probably such a man's Ministry may be useful and profitable in such a
place: Neither is the advice of sober and unbyassed men, Ministers and others,
to be neglected; seeing often they may see more in a man's particular case, nor
he can discern himself: and that is often found to be a mean made use of by God,
for manifesting of His mind in such cases. Again, if there be any competition
of places, so as one be sought by more Congregations at once, the cafe is here
somewhat different, supposing the man to be equally fitted for several places;
otherwise greater suitableness to the one, nor to the other, where it is
palpable, does cast the balance. In deciding what to choose in this
competition, there is much need of singleness and deniednesse to all outward
and carnal things, both in him that is fought, and in them who seek, and in all
others interessed; this being a great ill to suffer carnalnesse and contentions
to steal in, even in persuit for a good Minister. Neither is there great weight
to be laid upon prioritie or posterioritie in the applications that are made,
the matter it self and causes which may be given for the last and for the
first, can only satisfy the conscience as to the great scope of the Ministry,
to wit, the edification of the Church: seeing a man is obliged to look to
edification in his Ministry, and so to settle, where probably that may be best
attained, and not as an occasion may be, first, or last moved to him: and it
were good that both he who is called, and they who call, would submit all
interests, and be regulated by this. We conceive also, that the decision of
this, does not mainly or principally lie upon the person himself: for, as he is
not simply to judge, whether his Gifts be meet for the Ministry in general, or
for the edification of such a people in particular; so neither comparatively is
he to decide, whether it be more conducing for edification, that he embrace one
Call rather than another; but this is to be done rather by these, whose place
leads them indifferently to look to the general good of the Church. This then
is the great rule to decide by, whether his Ministry, considered complexly in
all circumstances, may most conduce to the edification of Christ's body by the
accepting of this or that charge, when all things are singly and impartially
weighed and compared together? so as in the result, it may, upon good grounds,
be made to appear, that the one will prove a greater furtherance to the
perfecting of the saints, and enlargement of Christ's Kingdom than the other: as
if his Ministry in one place, may be profitable to more souls than in an other:
and that not only with a respect to the particular Congregation; but as it may
have influence to the preventing or suppressing of some general evils, or the
promoving of some general good in more Congregations beside: If his Ministry
may probably have more acceptance and fruit in one place, than in an other; if
by some present circumstance, the planting of one place be more needful, and
the delay thereof be more dangerous than in another, which seems more
difficult than the place in competition therewith; if the man find, after some
trial, his liberty greater, his bowels more stirred, and his mouth more opened
as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 6. in reference to one more than another; if the
harmonious judgment of single and uninteressed faithful men prefer the one, as
more edifying, to the other; and many such like, whereby Christian prudence,
after the inquiring of the Lords mind, may find the general end of edification
to sway more on the one side than on the other, accordingly conscience is to
determine that to be Gods Call, and the person is to yield: for, although in
every case these could not sway a man warrantably and simply in respect of his
Call; yet, where the competition is in a case, that is almost equal on both
sides, they may have place to cast the balance.

For the third, That when a man is cleared in reference to a particular Charge,
there does remain yet a necessity of clearing him in reference to a particular
message to that Charge: for, as the condition of every Congregation, is not
alike; so is not one way to be followed with all. Hence we see that John has a
particular and several message in reference to these seven Churches, though all
agree in the one general scope, to wit, their edification. This is not to
awaken at every time an anxious dispute, what matter to Preach; But, 1. To
consider what particular faults have need to be reproved; what Truths have need
especially to be cleared; what duties are especially to be pressed, as being
most slighted amongst them; what snares they are most in hazard of, and need
most to be warned against, and so accordingly to insist: for, though all duties
be good, and all sins be to be eschewed; yet do we see in the Word, that
sometimes, and in some places, some are more insisted on than others, upon the
former grounds. 2. The necessary Truths of the Gospel, as they tend to
instruct, convince, convert, comfort, etc. which are the great task of a
Minister, are necessary to all people; yet in the pressing of instruction and
conviction, more than consolation; or, again, consolation and healing
applications, more than sharper threatenings and reproofs, That is to be
regulated according to the temper and case of the people, as also the manner of
proposing and following of them, according as may among such prove most
edifying, as the Lord, in these seven Epistles, does more sharply or more
mildly deal with them to whom he writes. But because there may be occasion to
touch this on the 10. Chapter, and here we have already exceeded our bounds, we
shall say no more of it, but shall say somewhat particularly to writing, and
the peoples use-making thereof.

Concerning Writing.
IN reference to this, we say,

1. That men may by writing, communicate what light God gives them, for the
good of the Church. It Is true, the Gospel was at first spread and planted by
Preaching, that is more properly the mean of conversion. It Is true also that
all the Apostles Preached; but all did not write: yet we will find, that the
Apostles made great use of writing, for the informing, reproving,
strengthening, and every way edifying of Churches and Persons brought to the
faith; for, they wrote these Epistles, not only as Scripture, for the Church in
general, but also for the edifying of such persons, in particular, and for
clearing of such and such particular Doubts, or Truths, which the state of such
times, or Churches did most call for. There is reason also for this, if we
consider, 1. The relation that is amongst all the members of the Catholic
Church, whereby all are tied, to be edifying one to another, etc. 2. The end
wherefore God has given men Gifts, which is to profit withal: and yet, 3.
That a man cannot by word make his Gift forthcoming in the extent that he is
obliged; there is therefore a necessity of using writing for that end, it being
a singular gift of God for promoving edification. It Is upon this ground, as we
said, that many Epistles are written, to be useful; where the Writers could not
be, and when they were to be gone. It Is upon this ground also, we conceive,
that many Psalms, and Songs (as that of Hezeksahs. Isa. 38.) are committed to
writing by the Authors: that by it their Case or G^ft might be made useful to
others, for their instruction, as the Titles of sundry Psalms bear.

This way, for many Ages, has been blessed, for the good of the Church of
Christ, who have reason to bless God, that put it in the hearts of many
Ancients and others, thus to be profitable in the Church. And it may be, some
able men have been but too sparing to make their talent forthcoming that way
to others. And as we may conclude, that Ministers may Preach the Gospel who are
called, because the Apostles did it, even though Ministers are not gifted with
infallibility of Preaching, as they were, because that was for edifying the
Body, so may we conclude, that men called to it, may write for the edification
of the Church, although they be not gifted with infallibility in their writing.

2. We gather from this, that none should take on them to write any thing, as
the Lords mind, for the edification of the Church, without a Call to it: I mean
not an extraordinary Call, as John had; but this I mean, that as there is an
ordinary Call needful, to the Preaching of the Gospel, (and we may conclude
from Gods extraordinary way of calling the Apostles to Preach, the necessity of
an ordinary Call) So, in the general, that same consequence will hold in
respect of writing, for such an end. And if we look through the Scripture, we
will find a Call for Writing, as well as for Preaching; and readily he who was
called to the first, was also called to the second, as being a Prophet of the
Lord. Though this particular we do not absolutely and simply press, seeing men
may be called to write, and not be fitted to Preach; yet I conceive, Solomon is
called the Preacher from his writing. And to warrant writing, we would conceive
so much to be necessary as may, 1. Satisfy the man himself, as to his being
called to such an eminent duty by God, and therefore there must be somewhat to
hold out to Him, that it is Gods mind he should undertake such a task. 2. That
men walk not by their own satisfaction alone; but that there may be so much, as
to convince others, that God put them on that work: and therefore though we
would not press an authoritative mission to write, as to Preach; yet,
considering that John's warrant to write, is also a warrant to others to make
use of it, and that people would have a warrant for making use of writings, as
well as a man for his writing, There is some orderly thing necessary, as to
point out to the man his duty in writing, for his peace; so also to point out
to others their duty in use-making of it. So that neither any that pleases may
write (but he would give some reason, beside his pleasure) nor would every one
use the writings of all, as they please.

Reason 1. A Call is necessary for every thing; and men in lawful duties are
to walk by it: otherwise, all lawful duties would lie upon all men as their
calling, or be at their pleasure: which stands not with Gods putting the task,
even of particulars, into men's hands.

2. To write of the holy things of God, is to take on us, to tell what God
thinks, and what is His will, which is a most concerning thing; especially to
do it solemnly in writ, lest it prove, at least, a taking of Gods Name in vain;
when without a Call we do it.

3. This may clear it, That neither public Preaching, nor private edification
by word, can be discharged rightly, but when men walk according to Gods Call in
these, which is also necessary in writing.

4. There is no promise to be guided in it, or of success to it, without some
clearness of a Call to it; and so it cannot be comfortably undertaken nor
prosecuted.

5. All the Saints had their Call to write, who took that way: hence some
Apostles have written, others not; some Saints have recorded their case, others
not. The reason of this difference is, because some were called to write, and
others otherwise employed; else we must say, they failed who wrote not. Neither
will it simply warrant one, that he writes truththere was doubtless truth in
the Preaching of the Sons of Thunder, and also of the Son of consolation; yet
God thought it not good to call them all to write. And experience has often
made this truth out, that many have taken on them to write, whose writings have
been exceeding hurtful to the Church; so that had all men walked by a Call in
writing, there had been fewer errors, at least they had not come unto such an
height; and the Church would have been free of many subtle Disputations, that
have more prejudged than advanced Godliness in it. As therefore some may fail
in not writing, when they are called to it, so others may in going about it,
whiles they are not called to it.

If we might enquire in the general (for particulars cannot be pitched on)
what may evidence a Call to write? We shall show, 1. What is not needful. 2.
What will not satisfy and be sufficient. And 3. What is needful and may be
satisfying.

1. An extraordinary Call by revelation, or immediate impulse of the Spirit,
such as John and the Apostles had, is not needful: It might make a Writer as
well as a Preacher to be suspected, if they should pretend to any such Call.

2. We think not an authoritative mission in the person who is writer, simply
needful: One may be fitted to edify by writing, whose Gifts lead not to
edify by Preaching: yet ought not the Church to be frustrate of the benefit of
his Gift.

3. We think not a pressing inclination simply necessary; seeing often,
inclination thwarts with duty; and men's modesty, laziness or other respects,
may much divert the inclination, as in Moses, Jeremiah and others, when called
to Gods Work.

4. We think it not necessary, that there be any singular or extraordinary
measure of Gifts beyond others: Some may be called to write by particular
providence, when others of more understanding may be spared; even as some may
be called to Preach, and others of more learning and ability, are passed by.

On the contrary, It will not be sufficient to evidence a Call to write. 1. To
have an inclination. 2. To have Gifts: Or, 3. To be found in truth: Nor, 4. To
have a good meaning and end. These will not serve in other duties; and so
neither in this, without respect had to the particulars after mentioned.

That a man therefore may have peace, as to his undertaking, we conceive there
is a concurrance of several things needful, to be observed: As, 1. There is a
necessity of a single end, to wit, Gods glory, others edification; and in part
may come in, his own exoneration, as to such a duty. It Is not self-seeking, nor
getting of a name, nor strengthening such a particular party or opinion, that
will give one peace in this matter. 2. It is necessary, not only that the thing
be truth; but that it be edifying, profitable, and pertinent, at such a time:
Gods Call to any thing, does ever time it, and tryst it well, as most
subservient to the scope of edification. Hence, that which is Error, or
impertinent, can never plead a Call in writing, more than in preaching; yea, we
conceive, the writing of many light, frothie subjects, or of speculative
janglings, and contentions about words, is exceedingly contrary to edification,
which ought to be the end and also the rule of our practice in writing. 3.
Besides these, there are circumstances in the concurrence of providence
trysting together, in reference to the person writing, to the subject written
of, the time wherein and occasion whereupon, and such like: which being
observed, may contribute to give some light in the thing. As,

1. If the person be called publicly to edify the Church; if he be of that
weight, as his testimony may prove profitable in the Church, for the
strengthening and confirming of others, or the like considerations; though no
new thing be brought forth by him: which ground, as a moral reason, Luke gives
to Theophilus of his writing the Gospel, Luke 1.1.

2. Considerations may be drawn from the subject. As, 1. If it be a necessary
point, that is controverted. 2. If the Scripture opened be dark, and obscure;
and possibly not many satisfyingly writing of it. 3. If the way of handling it,
be such, as gives any new advantage to truth; or, to the opening of that
Scripture, (though it be not so accurate every way) that is, if the manner be
more plain, or more short, or more full; or, touching at some things, others
have passed, or clearing what they have mistaken, or confirming, what they
asserted only, or such like cases wherein they may contribute, and be useful,
for the understanding of what is already written; or occasion others, to form
and mould their invention, and what God has given them, for better advantage
to others; seeing some has the faculty of inventing, others of improving what
is invented: thus both are made use of, for one end, when they are brought
forth together: even as in building, some are useful for plotting, or
contriving, some for digging stones, some for hewing, others for laying by
square and line; yet must be furnished by the former: So is it also in an
edifying way of writing, every one have not all; yet should none refuse to
contribute their part.

3. The time would be considered, if such a truth be presently controverted, or
such a subject necessary to be spoken unto now; if such a persons interposing
may be useful, if such a duty be neglected, or if such a Scripture be not made
use of, and the like. These may have their weight to put folks to it, even
though they should say little more than what is said by others: because then
all are called, to put to their hand to help; that is the time of it. And there
is this advantage, that when many do write, it serves not only to confirm and
strengthen what another has said, but it occasions some to read that subject,
that readily would never have read it, had not such a man written thereon,
seeing another book of that subject might possibly never have come to their
hands: and withal, this is advantageous when more are engaged in the same
subject. This consideration is alleged by Bellar, praefa. in Tom. prim. out of
Augustine, as a reason to put men to write, who were not of the most excellent
parts; that it was edifying, and better than nothing; yea, that it was
beseeming at such a time, to see many armed in the Camp of Christ, against His
adversaries, although all be not leaders and captains.

4. Occasion also may be, from Gods putting one to have thoughts of such a
subject when others are otherwise taken up, some not having access to be
edifying otherwise; as when occasion of study is given, and the thing by
public delivery, or secret communication is known to others, and called for by
them to be made public: or that they would set themselves to it, God giving
occasion of health, quietness, means, etc. for it: the thing getting
approbation from such as are single, and intelligent, judging such a thing
useful; in this the spirits of Gods servants would be subject to others. Such
considerations are frequently mentioned by worthy men, in their prefaces to
their Books. And it is observed in Vita Pellicani, as swaying him to publish his
writings, though not accounted (by himself at least) to be of accurate
learning, that, mediocriter and simpliciter scripta, mediocriter doctis
placitura videns, and quod illorum major sit capia, quam, eximie doctorum,
gratificari petentibus voluit. For, as the most learned Preachings, do not
always edify most; so neither is it in writing: and though (as a learned man
observes in a preface) that which is accurate, edifieth most intensively, and
best explaineth the thing; yet often, what is more popular, edifieth most
extensively, and proves profitable to many more who are but of ordinary reach.

Of Reading, and Hearing.
IN the last place, it is also clear, that people are not indifferently and
without warrant to read or hear, except they know that they be warranted
therein: for, this command of writing, is not only ins^rted, for the confirming
of John in his Call to write, but also tends to warrant these who are written
unto, confidently to receive and make use of what is written. And it follows
upon the former: for, if a Call be necessary, to speak or write in the Name of
the Lord, then ought also people some way to be clear, that in their reading
and hearing they may be walking according to Gods rule and call to them in
reading what He calls them to read, seeing men cannot be supposed to be left
to arbitrarinesse therein. Hence it is, that where the Lord disowneth the
commissionating of such to teach, and accounts them guilty for running whom he
has not sent, and that either by writ or word, as may appear, by Ier. 23. and
29. verse. 24. etc. So also does he reprove the people that do countenance such
in their hearing or reading, while as their Call is not evidenced to be of Him.
Hence so frequently, both in the Old and New Testament, are we commanded not to
countenance such, but to beware of them; and that must reach the reading of
their writing as well as conversing with their persons, the one being
dangerous, as the other is: for, one of these two must necessarily follow,
supposing them not to be called of God thereto.

1. Either they are ensnared by such and such errors, as others take on them
to vent; and they are brought to give heed to lies in stead of truth: and so
though reading and hearing be good in it self; yet that wise advice of Solomon,
Prove. 19.27. does here take place, Cease, my son, to hear instruction, that
causes to err from the words of knowledge. This effect is frequent, the Lord
thereby in His secret Justice punishing the lightness and curiosity of
presumptuous persons, that dare hazard upon any snare. Hence it is that so
often that lightness and indifferency in the practice of reading and hearing
such as are not called, has with it an itching after some new Doctrine, and a
secret discontent with sound Doctrine, which puts them to this, to heap up
teachers to themselves, which is said, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 1. to show the
difference that is betwixt Teachers sent of God, and such as People choose to
make so to themselves, without His warrant, And, 2. It shows what ordinarily
does accompany that itching practice, verse. 4. They turn away their ears from
truth, and are turned to fables: for, as it is ordinarily a lusting to vent
some strange Doctrine, which does make men write or Preach without Gods Call
thereunto; so it is an itching after some such thing, or at least a loathing of
sound simplicity, that makes people thus bestow their time in the reading or
hearing of such. And if no such thing be at first sensible; yet does such
persons tempt the Lord to give them up unto it.

2. Or if this follow not, we are sure that it shall no way prove useful unto
(...) followers thereof, as that word ( Ier. 23.38.) i^, I sons them not, nor
commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at all. And seeing
edification is Gods gift, can it be expected but in His way? or can that be
accounted His way, which He has not warranted? At best, it puts, 1. The
person in the hazard of a snare, which has taken many off their feet, which
sometime seemed to be strong: and can they pray unto the Lord that they may not
be led into temptation, when they do cast themselves into the snare? 2. It
carries offense along with it, in reference to the party who runs unsent, it
proves a strengthening and confirming of him, and so a partaking of his sin: in
reference to others, it either strengthens them, by that example, to cast
themselves in that (...); which possibly may be their ruin; or, it grieves
them and makes them sad who are tender of such things; or, gives occasion to
make all difference of that kind to be thought light of. All which should be
eschewed: at least it does this, it diverth men from that which might be more
profitable, and to which they might expect a blessing which they have not a
promise of, nor can expect in this.

And seeing reading is a special mean of edification, if well employed, and a
great step to destruction when otherwise, as experience does prove, people who
are commanded to watch, and to choose that which is most excellent, cannot be
left in an indifferency in this; yea, the spending of our time rightly being
the improving of a special talent, which, in reading many things, may be
exceedingly misspent, if not hurtfully abused: Christian wisdom therefore is
mainly called-for in this, that a right choice may be made. Especially,
considering, that it is but little time that many can spend in reading;
therefore by a wrong choice they incapacitate themselves from reading that
which may be more profitable for their case and station. And also, seeing every
one has not that ability to discern poison from good food, there must be
therefore a necessity that people regulate their Christian liberty in this
rightly, lest it become loosnesse, and turn to be a snare. Also, though some,
whom God has furnished with Gifts, and by their place and station calls them
to convince gainsayers, may, and are called to acquaint themselves with
writings of all kind; yet ought not all to take that liberty to themselves,
more than they durst hazard publicly to debate with adversaries of any kind;
seeing the strength and weight of their errors are stuffed into their writings,
and we are no less unable to encounter there writ than their word.

In matter of hearing, it is not so hard to discern who are to be accounted to
speak without Gods commission: because ordinarily, such have either no
warrantable Call at all, (no not in the outward form; and so cannot be
accounted but to run unsent) or, by palpable defection from the truth, and
commission given them in that Call, they have forfeited their commission, and
so no more are to be accounted ambassadors to Christ, or watchmen of His
flock, than a watchman of the city, is to be accounted an observer thereof,
when he has publicly made defection to the enemy, and taken on with him. For
we are here to rest in the external Call, and not to dispute that which is
inward: because it passes our reach; and Christ has furnished His House with
external Ordinances, for the warranding of His peoples peace in reference to
these things: there is therefore great difference to be placed here between one
that is called, and one whom we think not worthy to be called: it is the first
that warrands hearing, whereof we may afterward have some occasion to speak.

It is more difficult to give directions in reference to reading: yet, seeing
that now God has furnished His people with many useful books, that in
experience have been found to be such, we may for the help of the weaker
propose these general directions. 1. That they would spend their time in the
reading of such books, as judicious tender Christians have found good of
before, or shall recommend to them: such as (so to say) have been tried and
tasted, and therefore may be, as good food in which there is no hazard, meddled
with. And there is no difficulty here: for, such and such books are commonly
esteemed such, and it is easy to attain to the knowledge of them. 2. Some
respect may be had to the Author so far as may help to a decision in this,
whether such and such a book may be made use of, if it be known to be his? that
if by other writings, preaching, or otherwise he be known to be sound and
serious, such a book, may with the more confidence be hazarded upon: It is for
this that frequently the names of Authors are inserted in their writings, as is
done by John frequently in this Book. For, though no man's name ought to bear
such sway with any, as to make them digest any thing without trial, because it
comes from him; yet it may give to one, freedom to make use of the writings of
such, rather than of another, of whom there is no such ground of confidence. 3.
Where Books and Authors are noted by the judicious and Godly to be dangerous
and unprofitable, and in experience have been found to have been so to others,
distance would be kept with such; lest we find the proof thereof by our own
experience, which we would not learn from others. 4. Where Books and Authors
are both unknown, we conceive that it is more safe for private persons for a
time to abstain the reading of them, until it be found what they are by some
others who may more judiciously discern the same, and in the mean time to spend
that time in the reading of such as unquestionably are profitable: because by
this we lose no time, and this may be done in faith, knowing that we are not
hazarding our selves upon a tentation, which by reading the other, that is
unknown to us, cannot be. And seeing men usually take this way in making choice
of Physicians for the body, who are in experience found by others to be
skillful and useful, rather than to hazard on any who are yet unknown and have
given no such proof; wisdom would say, that no less should be required in the
making use of Physicians or remedies that tend to our spiritual edification,
it being of no less concernment than the other. And if these things were
observed in writing, reading, and hearing respectively (as they may be applied
in cases) the Church of Christ might be preserved from many Errors and
offenses, which by this liberty is occasioned; and many persons saved from much
hurtful, and unprofitable labor, both in writing and reading.

LECTURE 1.
CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. UNto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write, These things says he
that holds the seven Stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks:

2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
bear them which are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are Apostles,
and are not, and have found them liars:

3. And have born, and have patience, and for my Names sake have labored, and
have not fainted.


Follows now the particular Epistles to the seven Churches, wherein our Lord
makes them know how privy He is to their actions, ill or good, commending the
one and reproving the other; with some promises and threatenings, intermixed.
There are some things common to all these Epistles; some things peculiar to the
Churches He writes unto, as they are commended only, as Philadelphia and
Smyrna; or discommended only, as Laodicea; or somewhat of both, as the other
four.

1. It Is common to all, to have their Epistles agreeing in the form, though
different in the matter: As, 1. to be divided in an inscription, comprehending
the party to whom and from whom, 2. A narration, or body, comprehending the
particular message Christ sends to them. 3. A conclusion, comprehending some
promise to the over-comers; and an advertisment to all hearers to profit.

2. All are directed to the Angels, or the Ministers, of the Churches, and not
to the Churches themselves immediately, though the first direction, ( Chap. 1.
verse. 11.) be to them. And in the close of every Epistle, it is said, what the
Spirit says to the Churches. If any ask how the Churches and Angels, or
Church-guides, are so indifferently and promiscuously named? Answ. For these
reasons. 1. Because the Church and the collective body of Officers are so
exceeding near of kin each to other, and in their interests, so interwoven,
that, in the Scripture phrase, to write unto the Church, and to write unto her
Officers, are one; as to tell unto the Church, Mat. 18. and to tell unto the
Church Officers, are one. 2. Because the Church is virtually comprehended (to
speak so) under her Officers, who are not only the special members, but also
the representers of that body: and and as one, writing to an Incorporation, or
Burgh, and directing his letters to the Magistrate thereof, may be said to
write unto the Burgh; even so it is here: for, though Ministers in respect of
their Authority and Administration of the Ordinances, do not represent the
Church, but Jesus Christ, whose Ambassadors they are; yet in respect of their
united way of acting together, and their sympathizing with all the members, and
their joint interest in all the affairs belonging to the members, and the
reciprocal sharing that is between them and the members, of all good or evil
temperatures, they may well be said to represent the Church, whose servants
they are for Christ's sake: even as the Magistrate, acting in his duty,
represents God; yet in some sense also may be said to represent the people.
3. Because there is ordinarily a great sutablenesse and likeness between the
Minister and people of that Church whereof he is Minister; he lukewarm, and
they are lukewarm; he lively, and readily it is so with them, as we will see in
all the seven Epistles following: and therefore the writing unto and describing
of one, does by consequence include both; especially, considering that whether
the Churches estate be good, or ill, the Minister has much influence on it:
and therefore, both in reproofs and commendations, the first word is directed
to him. 4. Because the order Christ has instituted in His Church, does so
require: he reveals not His mind immediately to the people; but first to His
Ministers, and by them to the Church: for, our Lords way, is orderly, so as may
prevent confusion in His Church: which is done, not by putting it in the hands
of people; but by putting His Ministers to it in these things which concern
their station, and these being such things as belong peculiarly to Ministers to
be amended, in the Epistles therefore does He particularly direct it to them.

3. All the titles given to Christ, are for the most part taken out of the
Vision, chap. 1. only they are chosen and pitched on as may best serve the
scope of every Epistle; as the Lord is to discover their case, or, accordingly
to threaten or promise, the title is wailed which is most suitable to that end:
as here, Christ's presence, care, and sovereignty over His Churches and
Ministers, are laid down, when He is to discover a secret fault in them, and to
threaten the un-churching of them for it, there being ordinarily in every
Epistle two titles, one respecting the case of the Church written unto, the
other the promise or threatening which is annexed: and therefore are they, upon
the matter, often in plain terms resumed in the close of the Epistle, which
may give some insight in the meaning of them.

4. It Is common to them all, to begin with this word, I know thy works: that so
there may not only be an evidence of Christ's Godhead; but also to remove all
exception, which might be made against His testimony. We take it to look
ordinarily, not so much to His approbation, as to His Omniscience, simply:
because it is indifferently made the ground of reproof, as well as of the
commendation: and therefore is used in the Epistle to Laodicea, where no
commendation is given.

For more particular use-making of these Epistles, Consider, 1. the immediate
scope of them, which is to stir up the seven Churches, according to their
several conditions, to hold fast what was right, and to amend what was wrong,
having in them the discovery of the then estate of those Churches, and some
warnings suitable to that end: and so they are not in a Prophetical way
primarily to represent particular Churches in ages following: Yet, 2. Are they
useful in a special manner to other Churches, being doctrinally applied to
their case, as the Lord applies the words of Isaiah 29.13. Matthew. 15.7.
Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophecy of you, etc. while as Isaia's words do
principally respect the people in his own time; yet may they be applied to all
Hypocrites in such a case, as if it had been intentionally spoken of them: so
may it be here in the application of them to particular Churches, in the like
cases: yea, to particular persons, according to the common close, He that has
ears to hear, let him hear, etc. And the Epistles may be so much the more
useful in application, than other Scriptures: because in one mapp they
comprehend together the complex case of a Church, with the particular
directions, reproofs, and encouragements, which befits the case. 3. The
Epistles being directed to both, the Angels and Churches, to the one mediately,
to the other immediately, as we show, we would beware of confounding the
directions and matter contained in them as equally agreeing to both, as also,
of too rigide separating of them; as if what principally belonged to the
Minister, did no way belong to the people, and contrarily; but to look what may
agree to either, without confounding of stations or sexes. As in all other
Scriptures we take directions in things belonging to Magistrates, to be given
to them, and so to others in all several stations respectively; so here, what
belongs to Ministers, apply it to them: as for instance, preaching, and
judicial trial of corrupt men; that, so far as it is authoritative, belongs to
Officers: yet so far as people have access in their stations to promove such
ends (as many ways they may) in so far it belongs to them, and so in other
cases.

Verse. 2. Follows the body of the Epistle (for, the inscription is opened,
chap. 1. except what concerns the application of it to the estate of this
Church) and it has several steps in it,

1. A general word, which is the ground of our Lords pronouncing His censure, I
know thy works, to hold out His Omniscience without approbation or
commendation. The meaning is, I know all thy works inward and outward; thy form
and way of Administration of all things in the Church, all thy outward carriage
in things, the things themselves, and thy frame in going about them, the matter
and manner of doing them, and the end thou had before thee in them; and I
know them perfectly, exactly, and thoroughly; a thing that in the entry to His
service and every other thing, we would look to and bear in mind, that Christ
is acquainted with all our carriage, and every thing that escapes us. And this
being often repeated, it says, that Christ counts this a main part of His
message, to have souls convinced of His perfect and through knowledge of their
works.

He proceeds to the commendation, verse. 2, 3. The commendation is, 1. shortly
set down: And, 2. more particularly explained: primarily, it is applicable to
the Angel; but secundarily to others. It Is shortly set down in three steps in
the words, thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear them that
are evil. Having told them in the general, that He knew all their works, good
and evil, He tells the particular works he commends, 1. Their labor: the Word
in the Original, is (...), the labor which is properly applied to Ministers in
their Ministerial work: It Is that word, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule
well be counted worthy of double honor, especially these who labor in the
Word and Doctrine; And, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Know them which labor among you, and
are over you in the Lord; and it is a word that sets out the great carfulness
and painfulnesse of the Ministry: and being spoken especially to the Angels,
the meaning is, I know thy painfulnesse and care in the work of the Ministry,
committed to thee, especially thy painfulnesse in Preaching, although
proportionably we are to look upon Christ's taking notice of; and approving the
carriage of the several members of this Church in reference to their duty. 2.
Their patience: this respects their suffering: labor in duty, and submission
in suffering, go well together. I know (says He) very well all the persecution
and suffering thou art under, all the ill will of some within, all the malice
of others without, against thee, and all the troubles thou has met with from
Satan and his instruments, and how patiently, submissively and constantly thou
has born them all. The 3. thing whereby they are commended (and it relates
especially to the Ministers) is, their zeal in executing Discipline, They could
not bear them which were evil: and therefore, for as patient as they were under
crosses; yet they were stout, courageous, and zealous against corrupt men; by
trying, censuring, and giving no toleration to them. And this He also points
at, with a commendation.

2. He explicateth more fully these three steps; beginning at the last, first:
and so goes backward through the three. 1. He begins at and explicateth
their zeal, in not bearing with corrupt men, Thou have tried them which say
they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them liars. Wherein these three
particulars are explained, 1. Who the ill men were whom they could not bear,
even false teachers, that took upon them to call themselves Apostles, as if
they had been endued with an infallible Spirit, and had an universal charge.
And it is set out, as a part of their zeal and commendation, that these false
teachers, that pretended to such a Commission, and to be so forward for Christ,
were yet put to proof and trial by them. 2. The orderlinesse of their
proceeding, is commended, that they took not things by guess, nor upon
hearsay, but tried them: they first tried their doctrine by the touchston; and
then by the doctrine, whether they who preached it were of Christ or not, or
had a call and commission from Him: it holds out an exact and judicial way of
proceeding and trial of them, both in their doctrine and call. 3. That as they
were not indeed Apostles, though they called themselves Apostles; so they found
them out to be what they were, liars and deluders of the people, especially in
alleging a commission from Christ, when they had none. And this being a main
part of the commendation of the Angel, and of his exercise, it is most largely
insisted on.

Verse. 3. He explaineth their patience, and have born, and have patience: their
hearing, looks to the sufferings they met with from the false Apostles, in the
prosecuting of their trial: wherein they met with many afflictions; yet they
endured to prosecute their duty as good Soldiers do. 2 Timothy 4.2, 3. And have
patience: which relates to the quiet and patient manner of their suffering
affliction. It is nothing to suffer, when folk cannot eschew it; but they
suffered patiently in the doing of their duty, and continued in patient
suffering. 3. He commends and explains their labor; For my names sake, thou
have labored and not fainted: which first words, for my names sake, will agree
well to the word going before; and so is the ground of their submission and
patience under crosses: or, it may look to the words following; and so the
meaning is, for zeal to my glory thou have endured all this pains; for my names
sake, thou have been at pains in doing, and have overcome all rubs in the way.
And have not fainted: that is, thou have not been wearied of, nor scared or
boasted from, thy duty; nor made to desert it for all the suffering thou have
met with, but respect to my Name, has made thee persevere. So then, their
labor, as it was spoken of before, points at their painfulnesse; and here it
respects their singleness, that it was not in a way of self-seeking, but for
His Names sake. 2. That it was constant and continuing: they were carried on
without interruption in prosecuting their zealous intention.

If it be asked here, how such as call themselves Apostles, or do count
themselves not subject to the Discipline of a particular Church (as these who
pretended to be Apostles behoved to do) can be orderly proceeded against by
Church trial and censure, especially of a particular Church?

Answ. 1. There is no Apostle nor Angel, in the preaching of the Gospel, that
is altogether above trial: they are, as such, above erring in Doctrine; yet
may and should their Doctrine be tried according to the Word, Act. 17.11. Gal.
1.8. Because, even Apostles are but Ambassadors, and are not Lords over the
Faith of Gods People, but helpers of their joy, 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Pet. 5.3. etc.
Secondly, Apostles in the guiding of a constitute Church, oftentimes used not
their extraordinary Authority, as acting by themselves by virtue of their
infallibility; but jointly with others, in an ordinary way, clearing and
confirming their Doctrine and practices from Scripture, and Gods Call,
warranting them in that particular, as appears by Peter's apology, Act. 11. and
Paul with the rest of the Apostles their proceeding, Act. 15. In which two
respects, it is suitable for Believers, to try the Spirits, 1 Ioh. 4.1. Thirdly,
We say, that no presumptuous title assumed by ones self, nor any irregular
walking, as belonging to no Church, or not to such and such a particular
Church, can exempt any member of the Catholic Church from trial, and, if need
require, from censure of the particular Church, where such person, or persons,
shall reside; which we shall confirm from these reasons. 1. Not from trial:
because in so far the Doctrine and practices of the Apostles themselves (who
were not fixed members of any particular Congregation for their Membership, and
their Office behoved to be of equal extent) were subject to trial, that it
might be known whether they were of God or not, as is said. Yea, 2. Neither
from censure (supposing it possible that they should err, and them actually to
have erred) as we may see by Paul's supposition, Gal. 1.8. If I preach another
Gospel, etc. and also by Paul's open rebuking of Peter when he was to be blamed,
Gal. 2.14. 3. This same practice may confirm it, the Church rulers of Ephesus
were not scared by that title, nor yet by their not having Membership among
them (as it seems such could not have, being readily strangers, and thereby
having the greater access to give out themselves for the thing they were not)
yet they went on to try and censure, which is particularly commended in them by
Jesus Christ. 4. It may be confirmed from that power that Christ has given to
His Church Officers for edification, and for preserving the Church committed to
them from infection, which would seem to be defective, if men had liberty
(under the former pretexts) to vent error and commit scandalous practices, for
the ensnaring of others, in Churches whereof they were not properly members:
and though it might be said, that simply such persons were not under the trial
and censure of such a Church; yet eatenus and in that respect, as it is
necessary, for the good of that Church, to have these persons tried and
censured, they do fall under their authority; and warrantably it is put forth
for putting some note on them, for the preventing and removing of offenses from
the People. 5. It may be confirmed from the unity of the Catholic Church
visible, by which any member thereof (if no particular thing impede) may claim
the privileges of a member by communion in public Ordinances of Word and
Sacraments in whatsoever Church, though he be no particular member thereof: and
therefore a pari he ought also to be liable to the Discipline of Christ in any
particular Church, where he shall fall to be: (seeing that claiming the
privileges of a Church, and submission to the Ordinances thereof, are in
themselves reciprocal) and though some profane wretch renounce his own
privilege; yet that makes not the Church to loss hers; but so long as he
continues a member of the Catholic visible Church, as long is he under
censures of the Church, which are put forth in particular Congregations. 6. It
may be confirmed from the absurdities, that otherwise would follow, As, 1.
There might be a scandalous member of the Catholic visible Church, who could
not be reached by Church-censure. 2. One Christian might offend and stumble
another: and telling to the Church, would be no remedy to it, Mat. 18. if no
particular Church had power over such a one, which is contrary to Christ's
scope. 3. A door would be opened to a loose liberty within Christ's House: for,
in such a case, men could neither be censured, nor cast out of the Church, nor
in any Ecclesiastical way, be compelled to take on Church Membership, or live
regularly in the Church; by this, there might be some Christians sick and
needing this cure of Discipline, to whom it could not be applied; by this the
ordinance of Discipline would not be of equal extent with the Sacrament of
Baptism: All which, are absurd.

Observe, 1. Christ would have us always walking in the sense of His
Omniscience, which makes him begin all these Epistles with this, I know thy
works: a profitable, but a difficult Truth to be believed by Christians.

2. Christ is an unprejudged witness, and should be esteemed so by His Church;
He bears testimony unto them, as He takes notice of their good, as well as
their evil.

3. Such as Christ never called, may take on them highest titles in the Church,
pretend confidently to a most immediate Call, carry fair, and gain respect, and
have some gifts for that end, as it seems these had who called themselves
Apostles.

4. That diligence in duty, and difficulty in the performance of it, often go
together: to do, and to bear, are often joined: two things that in our
resolution and practice we would not sunder; and if it were believed, we would
not scare at the very shadow of suffering in, or following upon, our duty as we
do.

5. Patience in suffering, and impatience against corruptions and corrupt men,
can well stand together. This people is said to bear and suffer; and yet it is
said, they could not bear: the reason is, because their patient suffering, or
bearing, in the one word, relates to their enduring of crosses; and their not
bearing, or suffering, in the other word, relates to corrupt men, and their
zeal against them. It were a good thing to knit these two together, not to let
our zeal wear away our patience, nor our patience prejudge our zeal. There is a
kind of zeal that puts folks always to do, to the end they may shun suffering,
that is not good; and there is a sort of patience and meekness that wants zeal
and sharpness in reference to the purging of Christ's House; a patience that
can bear with ill men: and this is no more to be commended than the former.
This Angel is commended that he eschewed both, and had both patience and zeal
in exercise, running in their right channel, and put forth toward the right
objects: and would God these were more seen and discernable in our practice;
the one would make our zeal to shine, and the other would make our patience and
humility, praiseworthy: and if they be not joined, our zeal shall be carnal,
and our patience, lukewarm; and neither of these will be commended of Christ.

6. There is no name, privilege, or title, that should scare people,
especially the Ministers of God, from searching or trying corrupt men, that
bring corrupt Doctrine, pretending a Commission from Christ when they have
none, though they should have the pretext of Ministers and Apostles, and had
never so great gifts (for very like these men who took this name to themselves
wanted not gifts) or so smooth a carriage to insinuate themselves on people,
and to commend their presumption to them: for, it was commendable zeal in this
Angel, to try them, and discover them.

7. If folks will put to proof and trial many things and persons that have
fair names, they will be found very unlike the names they take. It is a time
wherein we had need not to take every thing on trust from all persons, though
their gifts were great, and they had big titles and names; but humbly and
soberly to wait on God for light and direction, searching and trying both men's
carriage and Doctrine, and the Commission they pretend to in carrying of it.

8. Where an immediate Call is pretended unto, and great titles assumed,
ordinarily it is to carry on some strange Doctrine or design, and is therefore
to be suspected by the people of God, 2 Cor. 11. verse. 13.

9. The censuring of corrupt unsent Ministers, is a most difficult task, what
from their nature, and sometimes from their parts; what from the addictednesse
of many unto them, Yet it is a special duty: and although it be often
difficult to follow, and be mistaken by many others; Yet that it is acceptable
before Jesus Christ, may appear from these considerations,

1. That the Scripture holds forth no kind of persons as more abominable in
themselves, and more hateful to Him; for which cause, they are called dogs,
and dumb dogs that cannot bark, Isa. 56.10. Salt without savor, wolves,
idol-shepherds, such as feed themselves, and kill his flock, blind guids, etc.
Hence it is that there are not more sad expostulations with complaints of, or
threatenings pronounced against any, than against these: Our blessed Lord Jesus
multiplies woes unto such in a more terrible manner than was usual to Him,
Mat. 23. 2. There is no kind of persons that prove more dishonorable to our
Lord Jesus, and to His Gospel than such: these make the Law to be despised,
Mal. 2. and the Sacrifices and Ordinances to be counted vile and contemptible,
1 Samuel 2. Such especially open the mouths of profane men against Religion, and
the Author thereof, and exceedingly derogate from the authority of Him they
pretend to have sent them, and to the Embassage they are sent with, while as
they look so unlike Him. And upon this account it is amongst others, that such
particular directions for the singular qualifying of Church Officers, are given
in Scripture: and the censuring of such, and that by Christ's own Authority,
vindicateth Him, which cannot be but honorable and acceptable to Him. 3. The
scandalous miscarriages and unfaithfulness of Ministers bring a special blot
upon all Religion, as if it were but mere hypocrisy and tended to the
fostering of such ills: and profane men are exceedingly strengthened in such
Atheistical apprehensions, when these ills are not taken notice of, and
censured by Church Authority: whereas by this severity in the exercise of
Discipline, the faults are seen to be in persons and not in Religion, or the
Ordinances thereof. 4. There is no such contempt done to our Lord Jesus, as for
one to pretend to have Commission from Him; and yet to be running unsent by
Him; or, having gotten Commission, to miscarry by unfaithfulness in it: this
is a betraying of trust, and cannot but be looked on as a high contempt against
Him. 5. As there is a suitableness in the censuring of such Church Officers to
Christ's mind, so there does appear in the same a tenderness of, and zeal unto
His Glory. Hence it is, that His most zealous servants, as Elias, Paul, (yea,
and Himself when on earth) did set themselves most against that generation. 6.
There is no sort of men more hurtful to the Church, by obstructing Christ's end
in His Ordinances, to wit, the edification of His People: for, such profit them
not at all, Ier. 23. yea, they stand in the way of their profiting, sometimes
by corrupt Doctrine; sometimes by example; sometimes by sadning and weakening
of these who look more tenderly to the practice of Godliness: and if no-other
way; yet by filling the room, and so standing in the way of the peoples being
provided with such as might be helpful and faithful. Now, considering the
great respect that our Lord Jesus has to the edification of His People; and
considering the weight that He has placed upon this Ministry, as a mean for
promoving of that end, and withal, the great obstruction that follows to that
end, when this mean disappoints, it cannot but be accounted acceptable to Him
to remove such an obstruction. Yea, 7. Considering that there is nothing He
commends more than mutual love to His Disciples, and there is nothing wherein
love can appear more to them, than in seeking their spiritual edification,
which was that wherein His own love eminently kythed; and there is nothing
wherein this kind of love kythes more to Him or them, than that they be fed
with knowledge and understanding, by Pastors according to His own heart,
according to His word to Peter, Peter, loves thou me? then feed my lambs: it
cannot therefore but be looked on by Him as acceptable service. And indeed, if
it be commendable to relieve a neighbors beast from hazard, when there is a
slothful shepherd; or to relieve the bodily life from temporal hazard, how
much more must it be commendable to prevent the eternal hazard of immortal
souls, which by corrupt Ministers cannot but be in hazard? 8. There is nothing
that more rejoices and hardneth corrupt men, than when they are like People,
like Priest, and have Pastors according to their own heart; and there is
nothing that they are more provoked and displeased with, than the censuring of
such: yea, even men who have no respect almost to Religion at all, yet abhor
and oppose the censuring of such, as if it were a piece of Religion (or rather
of opposition to Religion) to do so; which certainly shows that the following
of this trial, must be a main furtherance to Godliness, and comes near the
Kingdom of Christ. 9. Not only is there an obstruction to Godliness by such,
but they have a main influence upon the advancing of prophanity, and the
kingdom of the devil, as if professedly they had confederated with him against
Christ. Hence it is said, that from them does prophanity go out to the whole
Land, Ier. 23. And they are called Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11. as
Ambassadors employed by him in his service. And where it is thus, not only are
scandalous practices committed, but avowed, as it were in contempt of
Godliness, and of faithful Ministers, who seriously study the promoving of
it. Hence it is, that often there is a kind of stated enimity against
faithfulness and faithful men, not only amongst such Ministers themselves,
but in their Congregations and Followers; which shows the prejudice that
comes by them, and so the necessity of removing them.

It may now look like cruelty (it may be) rigidly to pursue such, and like pity
to spare them which may much be applauded unto by many: yet if we could
consider what hazard may come to immortal souls in a short time by the want of
a powerful Ministry, much more by the having of corrupt men, either in Life
or Doctrine in that station, and what thoughts souls will have of that cruel
pity in the day of Judgment: we are persuaded horror would affect the hearts
of these who are concerned; considering how many are palpably in hazard through
defect in this: Can it be thought that Christ's ordaining of a Ministry was
only to have men bearing such a name, and not to have such as effectually and
seriously would promove His design? and can that be expected, whilst men unfit
for it, or unworthy of that calling possess the room? and if it be a
deplorable condition to have Congregations desolate without the Ordinances, and
living like Heathens, or as sheep without a Shepherd, or blind men without a
Guide, is it any less, yea, is it not much more lamentable to have such as
rather mar than further the main design? which breeds confidence and
security in some natural men, occasioneth prophanity and loosnesse in others,
and almost serves to no end, but to keep such a Congregation from one that may
guide them, and them from knowing their want, or hazard: and in sum to
obstruct, and put in a nonentry, their edification, more than if none were
there at all: for, Christ's way appointed for edifying of His Church, is not
only to have the form of Ordinances, by men supplying these places; but to have
such as may by His approbation follow His way of attaining His end. We conceive
that the regulating of the entry of Church Officers, so that none but such as
are thereby approven may be admitted, and of the trial of these who are in,
that such who carry themselves unworthily may be removed, is one of the main
ends why Churchauthority is given by Jesus Christ for the edification of His
Body, as the special directions to Timothy and Titus, which do regulate
Church Officers, especially in the admission and accusation of Elders, do
demonstrate; and if this main point be neglected by Churchofficers, it may
justly provoke God to weaken, if not to break that Authority to them, and to
make them and it in their hands justly to become despiseable, which nothing
furthers more than the admitting and permitting of corrupt and unmeet Officers
to be in the Church. And if people delight to have it so, and fret at any thing
which may amend it, much more if they affect the continuance thereof, and
concur to the supporting of such, it may be that the Lord give them a fill of
their own ways; and by error, confusion, or some other way, so bring it about
in His just Judgment, that either they shall have no face of Ordinances at
all, or have the carcass of them as a snare and a curse unto them, who
received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved, but contented
themselves to have the shape and form of Christ's Ordinances only among them
without respect to the end for which He appointed them. That zealous and
pungent discourse, which Mr. Baxter has to this purpose in the close of his
Agreement, is most weighty and convincing; and the matter thereof, so far as
concerns this, worthy to be considered. All which is still to be understood of
such legal trialls as are followed on solid grounds, and in an orderly
circumspect manner; for such was this trial of the false Apostles, by the
Angel or Elders of the Church of Ephesus, which usually is cited by Divines to
confirm the power of the Church in censuring her Officers.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 4. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left
thy first love.

5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.


OUr Lord Jesus is the faithful and true witness, who impartially testifies,
both of what is right, and what is wrong in His Church: we have heard His
commendation, showing what was right; He began at that, to make way for the
other part of His testimony, which is to discover what was wrong; and it is
set down, verse. 4.1. More generally by a transition from the commendation,
Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, that is, though all these things
be true, and thou be commendable in them, and I commend thee for them; yet,
there is a nevertheless added; that is not all, there are somethings wrong
which I also take notice of, and will quarrel for, though there be many things
right. This shows, 1. our Lord Jesus His impartiality in taking notice of all,
good and ill. And, 2. It shows the extent of duty which consists in an
universal respect to all His commands; and failing in somethings, may be as a
dead fly in a box of ointment, to mar the savor of the rest. And, 3. That
it is meet for Believers to know their whole estate, their ill as well as their
good: both are useful to them to be known, and both are represented by our Lord
Jesus unto them; His commending of them, alters not what is justly reprovable,
His reproof prejudges them not in what is commendable: this way Believers ought
to take in reference to themselves. 4. It shows, that even Believers should
take a reproof, as well as a commendation, especially when it comes from our
Lord Jesus His mouth; yea, though in many things they be right, yet should a
reproof, notwithstanding thereof, be digested in any thing wherein they are
wrong.

2. The particular reproved, is set down, thou have fallen from thy first love.
1. By love here is not understood the object beloved, as it is said of widows, 1 Timothy 5.12. who had cast off their first faith; it was not so here: there was no
public defection in matter of Doctrine, as the commendation preceding clears.
Nor, 2. is it necessary here to be understood principally of a decay of love in
the habit it self, but in the exercise and fruits thereof, as is clear by the
opposition following, do the first works: which points out the fault reproved,
to have consisted in the neglect of these, which is again removed by the
performing of them; though we think there is a suitablnesse between the habit
and its fruits, as it is with the one, so is it with the other: and few acts
and fruits do evidence the habit thereof to be cold and languishing. 3. Neither
do we understand here by falling from their first love, a total falling from
fruits; but comparatively a falling from some former acts and degrees, or their
vigorous manner of acting from love, as they had wont formerly to do, called
first love here, and afterward, first works. By comparing then this reproof
with the commendation, we conceive, it does include these three, 1. A falling
from those duties, wherein especially true love to God, and charity to others
consisted, that is, they were much in outward reformation, profession and zeal
that way; but wanting inwardly, heart-burning love and affection to God, and so
in some measure were hypocritical; in that their love within was not answerable
to their profession without, but were more taken up in external fruits, than in
the inward exercise of love, in so far agreeing with the Pharisees in that
fault reproved, Luke 11.42. Ye tithe mint, etc. but pass over judgment and
the love of God. 2. As it looks to others, it may say, though there was zeal in
the external Worship of God; yet there was great defect of that love, sympathy
and affection of one of them, with and to another, that should be; this being
ordinary, that love inflamed to Godward, and love one to another, go together:
and therefore as it imports they had fallen from their former warm
impressions of love to God; so also from their kindly affection one to another,
and had fallen in part to be more in Sacrifice, and externals of Worship, than
in Mercy and love one to another, Hos. 6.7. and Matthew. 12.7. The third is, a
decay of love in the manner of doing duties; so that though they continued in
the practice of former duties toward God, and toward others: yet in respect
of love to God, as the principle acting them in such duties or affections
toward others, they had much decayed; and therefore may be charged to have
fallen from their first love, though they continued in the external
performances, because the former native vigor and life in those duties was
decayed. Whence we may gather, that there may be many things commendable in a
Church, or in a person, and yet there may be a secret quarrel between Christ
and them, as Psalm. 78. verse. 34, 35, 36. compared together, do show; yea, that
there may be many things right in a Believer in respect of externals, and yet a
dissatisfaction to Jesus Christ in their secret condition. That this Angel, and
many of these written to in this Church were Believers, this reproof clears,
which supposes them once to have had love; that they have many things
commendable, the former verse is clear; to wit, pure profession of truth,
zealous exercise of discipline, diligence in doing, and laboring, patience in
suffering, honesty in their end, for Christ's names sake, and continuing in all
these without fainting; yet is there a nevertheless added, which may make
hearts to tremble, and not to reckon their condition from external
performances; and ought to put Believers to it, to see how they will free
themselves from this part of the challenge. 2. Our Lord Jesus does especially
take notice of the love of His people, and is much swayed in His commendations
and reproofs according as He finds it in exercise toward Him, and toward
others. 3. Love within may be cold, when folks practices without look very hot,
and upon the matter may be accepted of Christ. 4. Believers often at their
first engaging to Christ, have their love more warm toward Him, and toward
others, than afterward it will be; or, Believers ordinarily slips from that
warmness of affection that accompanies their entry, and becomes more cold in
their affections toward God, and toward others; the first love continues
not. 5. Backsliding and declining from what folk have been, either in
profession or practice, is, and will be a special article of Christ's charge.
Hence is it, that hold fast is so frequently repeated in the following
Epistles: not only to intimate what is our duty; but also to evidence how ill
the Lord takes declining when He finds it among His people, Heb. 10. verse. 38.
If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. 6. Every decay is
a falling, and hu^ts the Work of Grace proportionably as gross commissions do;
and it is as impossible for a man to sit up in the exercise of inward Graces,
and not to hurt them, as for a man to fall from a hight and not be wounded.

Verse. 5. Follows the direction, which our Lord prescribes as the duty
suting their case, and the threatening wherewith He backs it. The direction has
three steps, every one of them making way for another. The 1. is, Remember from
whence thou art fallen, that is, advert and consider how it is with thee, be it
was at the beginning; that so by reflecting upon themselves, and comparing
their present condition with what is past, they might be brought to take up
their own condition. In sum, it implies, that there had been in them an
inadvertencie unto, and forgetfulness of their own condition for a time, which
had made them without challenges slip into, and continue in that backslidden
condition. Unto this, remembering is opposed, which takes in, not only a simple
act of memory, but a sensible exercise of the conscience and affections also,
following upon their reflecting on themselves; like the word, Ezekiel. 16.61. Thou
shall remember thy Ways, etc.

The second part of the direction is, repent; this is the fruit and end of the
former, relating also to what was past, that not only they should look upon
their own ways, but that their eye should affect their heart, for the
upstirring of them in the exercise of Repentance: which includes these two, 1.
A kindly indignation against their sin, and against themselves for their sin,
so as in some part, they avenge God of themselves in the judging and censuring
of themselves in the behalf of God, as it is in 2 Cor. 7.11. 2. It takes in an
inward and outward change of their way for the time to come, which is ever a
fruit of true Repentance; when the party is brought not only to confess, but
to forsake their sin, as the words following clear in the third direction;
which is, do the first works. This relates unto the time to come, that is,
that what once they had been at in the performance of Worship to God, and in
duties one to another in the manner, as well as in the matter, and were now
fallen from (as we hinted at in the reproof) that they should by all means set
themselves to recover the same, this being a native fruit and companion of
Repentance carefully to abstain from the evils, and perform the duties which
they have been most touched with in the challenge. These three go well
together, and notably prescribe the remedy of a soul backslidden from
liveliness to deadness, and directs to the recovery of their former state,
which will not be attained by lazy Prayers, and fainting complaints; but by
serious up-stirring, and exercise of these three, self-searching, repentance,
and practice, and that in the native order as they lie.

More particularly, from the several directions, Observe, 1. That as
forgetfulness of our own condition, and not reflecting on our selves, is the
great cause of much declining and backsliding in heart, and of continuing
therein; so upon the contrary, self examination, and remembering of our own
way, and reflecting on our selves, is a notable mean to prevent decay, and to
entertain a good frame; as also to further the exercise of repentance, and to
recover a frame when it is lost. 2. Believers may fall into that neglect. 3.
When Believers become negligent, they decline in part, though not wholly. 4.
When Believers fall, they are to take the same way for their recovery. 5.
Believers may be under great decay, and yet not take great notice of it, nor
from whence they are fallen; yes, it implies further, that where the decay is
within, and the carriage fair without, (as here) it is hard to get them
convinced of it.

From the second step of the direction, Repent, etc. Obs. 1. That Repentance is
a duty incumbent even to Believers, 1 Ioh. 1.8. 2. That it is called for,
wherever there is sin, even of ommissions, as here. But, 3. Especially where
there is declining. 4. Change of practice, where there has been sin, will not
be sufficient, if repentance for what is past do not accompany it.

From the third step, Do the first Works, Obs. 1. That Believers first works,
are often more commendable, than these which come after. 2. There may be great
difference in the same works on the matter, even of the same person, in Christ's
account. 3. Works, and works livelily gone about, are called for from
Believers: Christ Jesus was no legal Preacher; yet does He require both
Repentance and Works from these Ephesians.

The third thing in this Epistle, is the threatening, or certification,
wherewith this direction is pressed, (which does the more confirm the former
Doctrine) or else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out
of its place, except thou repent: In which words, we are to consider the thing
threatened. 2. The persons threatened. 3. The certification, upon which it is
pronounced. 4. The person threatening. And lastly, The speediness or
suddenness of His performing what He threatened. The thing threatened, is the
removing of the Candlestick out of its place. By Candlestick, Chap. 1. verse.
20. is understood the Church: Therefore by the removing thereof must be
understood the un-Churching of them; So that Ephesus now a Church, and
Candlestick, should have that removed, and not be continued a Church; this is
in effect like that, Zach. 11. of the Lords breaking the two slaves, and
refusing to feed that people any more. This is a sad, though a just threatening,
which may put us to enquire wherefore the Lord thus threatens this Angel, and
Church, beside any other? especially considering they were not the worst, (as
was seen in the commendation,) why then is she threatened? and how usually the
Lord does execute this, shall be spoken unto, when the words are opened.

2. The person threatened, is most especially and immediately the Angel, as is
clear by using of the singular number, thy Candlestick, and I will come to
thee, etc. And with him, we conceive, that the threatening respects most these
who were really Believers in that Church: because especially, the charge of
falling from the first love, and direction of doing the first works agree to
them. The threatening also of removing the Candlestick, would be most laid to
heart by them. Thus Christ usually threatens; Yea, corrects His own, when He
lets others slip, Amos 3.2. Neither does He here so particularly charge and
threaten the Heathens for refusing the Gospel, nor yet the false Apostles, or
Nicolaitans, for open abusing it, as He does this zealous Angel: the reason is,
not because He loves them less; but because their sins come nearer His honor,
and He is more affected with them; and because He minds their good, He
judges and chasteneth them, lest they should be condemned with the world, 1 Corinthians. 11.32. whereas He suspendeth His judging of the rest, and bestows
not a reproof upon them, until judgment altogether surprise them.

3. The certification upon which this great judgment (which is greater than
either Sword, Famine, or Pestilence) is threatened, is, except they repent: by
which we may gather, the necessity of Repentance in it self, and its
acceptance by Jesus Christ, not as if there were any merit in it to deserve,
or any moving impulsive virtue in it to persuade Him to pity (as humiliations
use to persuade men) He is not capable of such motives: nor yet as if He had
any delight in the sadning, and exercising of His People; but that He may show
the peremptory connection between Repentance and Pardon; which in the order of
Salvation He has laid down, thereby to make the sinner know something of the
ill of sin, and worth of grace: which is the reason why the preaching of the
Gospel ordinarily begins with this. By Repentance here, we do not understand
strictly the grace of Repentance, as it is contradistinguished from Faith, much
less any natural or worldly sorrow, which may be in a hypocrite; but we take
it as it comprehends the whole work of Conversion and Faith in Jesus Christ,
as sometimes it is taken, Math. 4.17. compared with Mark 1.15. because it is
proposed here, as the way to prevent wrath which is due for sin, which cannot
be done without faith.

The fourth thing to be considered, is, the person threatening, I will come, I
Jesus Christ who walks among the golden Candlesticks, I the Lord of the
Vineyard, Math. 21.40, 41. This is mentioned, First, To let us see Christ's
absoluteness and soveraignity over His Churches, to dispose of them as He
pleases; that Ministers and People may learn to hold their Church-being of
Him: Secondly, To hold forth Christ's peculiar Authority, in Churching, and
un-Churching; and that peculiarly, this belongs to Him: there is no Man, nor
Enemy, nor Persecution, etc. can loose the relation of a Church in its being,
but Christ Jesus, or they, as ordered by Him.

The fifth is, I will come quickly, yea, and unexpectedly, as the word imports.
This is added to show that Christ's threatenings are in earnest, and that Hearers
would not dally with them. It shows also, how easily He can overturn a
Church, and make no Church of it; He has often gathered Churches quickly, and
can He not dissolve them when they look to be in their prime? Who, having read
the commendation of Ephesus in the former verses, would have expected such a
threatening in the close?

The words now being opened, we may enquire, 1. How this threatening of
un-Churching a Church uses to be executed?

Answer, We conceive it does not necessarily imply the overrunning, wasting and
destroying of such a City or Land, that it should be no City, but that it
should be no Church. Sometimes indeed God will even by such a mean bring about
this thing threatened; But here we take it to hold out some other thing, than if
He had threatened Sword or Pestilence upon them: It is the same upon the matter
with that, Math. 21.43. The kingdom of God shall be taken from them, etc. which
was Christ's word to the Jews, and is especially these ways brought to pass.
The first, is sinful, that is, when a Church fell themselves to false
Doctrine, which overturneth the foundation: in which sense, Hos. 2. the Lord
denies Ephraim to be His Wife, because of her spiritual whoredoms whereby she
had broken her tie: thus a people may be said to un-Church themselves by their
unbelief, confusions and errors (unconsistent with the foundation) according
to that, Isa^. 50.1. And Romans 11. the Jews are said to have broken themselves
off by their unbelief. The second way is penal, that is, when the Gospel has
not fruits among a people, the Lord removes the Light, and His Ordinances from
them, takes down His hedge from about them, and (as it were) sends them a
bill of divorce, refusing to own them afterward as a Church: not by giving
them up to outward enemies oppression (which for a time they may be free of)
but by ratifying their own sentence of rejecting of the Gospel, as it is, Act.
13.46. and thus the Kingdom of God was translated from the Jews; and they
became no Church, when the Gospel was taken from them and sent unto the
Gentiles. A third way may be mixed, partly sinful, partly penal, a people
upon the one side not receiving the love of the Truth; and therefore upon the
other side, God gives them up to strong delusion, whereupon they proceed from
evil to worse in the believing of lies, as it is, 2. These. 2.10. However, this
is certain, this flourishing Church of Ephesus, has now long since been a
proof of this Truth; for, error growing to an hieght, and delusion and
ignorance following upon the back of despising the Gospel, has brought that
Church into the estate that it is now into.

For the second Question, Why the Lord peculiarly threatens the Church of
Ephesus with these punishments?

Answ. It is not because His coffeehouse was more with her than with other
Churches; But, 1. It Is like they thought outward honesty and reformation enough
for their Churchestate, and that there was no cause of fear of un-Churching, so
long as they continued pure in profession, and zealous in purging, etc. And
therefore to beat down this conceit* and to show the necessity of power, as
well as of form, for continuing of a Church Estate* He does subjoyn this
threatening of un-Churching, especially to this Church. 2. Because these here
threatened, would lay more weight on this threatening, and be more affected with
shoring to be un-Churched, than with either Sword or Pestilence, etc. The Lord
therefore applies wisely that which He thinks most conduceable to this end. 3.
It Is like, their outward Church Estate was something thought of by them, and
the external frame of Ordinances in purity, and that of Discipline in vigor,
might be rested on, and too much esteemed of, especially by the Ministers (it
being too ordinary for men to think too much of external forms) The Lord
therefore in this threatening touches the fault that might stick secretly to
them, even in their zealous prosecuting of external reformation. 4. Because He
would have all men knowing the respect He has to sincerity, and the influence
which the exercise or not exercise of grace has upon keeping, or loosing of
external Privileges. Therefore does He so threaten this Church when no
outward cause of such controversy seems to be before men.

If it be asked further, Why this Church is called the Angels? For, Thy, has
reference to the Angel, and by the Candlestick, is meant the Church it self.
Or, 2. How this becomes a threatening to the Minister, it being liker a plague
upon the People? Or, 3. How the People can be plagued for a sin in their
Minister? We shall consider the first by it self, after we have gone through
this Epistle. And now to the second question, we say, This threatening becomes
his plague. 1. Because of his interest in them, and affection to them: nothing
can come on a People, but it affects the Minister; their stroke is his: yea
often it is sorer which is on them, than what is on himself. 2. Cor. 11.29.30.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? was Paul's
touch of the infirmities of the People. 2. It Is the nearest stroke can be on a
Minister, to be stricken in his Charge, or blasted in his Ministry, etc. in
this he is smitten as a Minister, in things peculiar to a Minister: other
strokes are common to all men: yea, thus to be smitten in the un-Churching of
his Flock, is striking at his Crown, and his Joy, 1 Thessalonians. 2. ult. for, a
faithful Minister will so account it. 3. It Is probable, it was some
contentment to him to see things go right in his outward Ministry, Censures to
be weighty, Discipline vigorous, the People to give him credit and countenance,
etc. without reflecting on his own spiritual condition, or aiming at the
inward warming of love in the hearts of his People, but thought all well, and
who but he, that had such a well ordered Church? The Lord therefore threatens
to take that ground of boasting, or self-pleasing from him. It Is a sad thing
when a Minister cannot carry even, when things go well, and cannot look to
himself and the people also, and be humble when he is countenanced: want of
this, spilleth many hopeful beginnings in Ministers hands. And this relation,
thy, is particularly mentioned here, to make the threatening touch him the more;
it is not the Candlestick, but thy Candlestick, which was to be removed. For
there be two things that make a thing to be in esteem with men, and the loss
thereof to affect them. The First is, That it be in it self (...), that is, a
thing lovely and desirable. The second, That it be (...), that is, a thing
which is a man's own; These two going together, That it is both an excellent
thing in the self, and withal a man's own: when once evil befalls that thing,
it does exceedingly press a man. Now both these are here, a golden
Candlestick, there is its excellency in it self, and thy Candlestick, there is
the Angels interest and propriety in it; Both are set down to affect him the
more. And indeed a Church being in its blossoming and rising condition, and all
things seeming to go well therein, even then, to be threatened thus, cannot but
greatly affect the heart of a faithful Minister.

To the third, How can People be punished for Ministers faults?

Answ. If they were altogether innocent, it might seem hard: but when they also
are guilty; yea, and it is like here under the same guilt, there is no wrong,
but it is the correcting of two by one whip, both Minister and People, for their
formality and resting in outward forms, without power. 2. Though People in one
particular be innocent; yet a Ministers fault may occasion a plague on the
People, who are guilty by other sins, even as the fault of a Magistrate, as we
may see in David's numbering the People, and Gods plaguing him in the People for
it, though they were in much, free from that particular sin, and as sheep, what
had they done? So, when a Peoples outward profession, or observance to the
Ministry and Ordinances, become the ground of a Ministers pride, or boast,
they may by some confusion be put through other, and so his pride and glory is
stained, and their hypoc^isie and formality punished; even as on the other
side, a Peoples vanity of their Minister, may have influence on the Lords
blasting of him, that it may be seen, all flesh is grass. Which consideration
ought to make Ministers and People walk respectively one to each other, yet
soberly; left the Lord be provoked against both.

From this threatening, Observe, 1. That no Church or Minister has a lease of a
Church State and the Gospel, if they abuse it. Ephesus is now no Church; yea,
Israel was broken off. 2. It Is one of the greatest threatenings that can be, to
be un-Churched; Sword and Pestilence are not like it. 3. It may surprise a
Church in a very flourishing outward condition, if love be wanting. 4. Nothing
has more influence in procuring of judgment, than coldness in love to God
and others. 5. The estate, good or ill of Gods own People, has most influence
on the continuing or removing of the Gospel. It Is not for the guilt of
Nicolaitaus, or false Prophets, that this is threatened; but for their sin who
once had love. 6. Repentance and diligence has great influence to prevent such
a threatening. 7. Ministers and People may have much influence on one another
good or ill condition; and sometime we may read our own distemper and scourge,
in the distemper of one another.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 6. But this thou have, that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans,
which I also hate.

7. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches,
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the paradise of God.


THe sixth verse contains the last thing that is comprehended in the body of
the Epistle to Ephesus, and it is a kind of mitigation of the sharp reproof and
threatening going before: as He began with a word of commendation, so he will
close with it, and will let them see, that though He had marked their sin, and
reproved them for it; yet He was the same in His love, and had the same
thoughts He began with toward them: and it is in sum, this, for as much wrong
as is in you, and for as much as ye are fallen from your first love, yet there
is some sparkle of zeal in you, ye have this good thing, that the corrupt
doctrine of the Nicolaitans (which began soon to corrupt the simplicity and
purity of the Doctrine of Christ) is hated and abominated by you, even as it is
by Me.

To clear this a little more, we shall speak to these three things. 1. What
these Nicolaitans were. 2. What this hatred was. 3. How it was commendable; or,
what is the ground on which it is commended.

For the 1. We shall consider first what the Nicolaitans were. 2. What was the
occasion and rise of their error, or erroneous Doctrine.

For the first, what they were. There is not much recorded of them in
Scripture; yet it seems from all that is written of them (being compared with
what is written of them in this Chapter) that they were such a sort of
Schismatical Heretics, as had corrupt Doctrine in their mouths, and corrupt
and licentious practices in their conversations. Therefore their deeds are
spoken of in this verse, and their Doctrine, verse. 15. both which are said to
be hated of Christ, there being a suitablnesse between their Doctrine and their
deeds.

For the particulars of their Doctrine and deeds, many are asserted by the
Ancient, but two things mainly are pitched on. 1. In their Doctrine they opened
a door to licentiousness, and maintained, that fornication and adultery were no
sin, and they cried down Matrimonial chastity, though called for and approven
of God. 2. In their practice, without all respect to offense and scandal, they
lived as they lifted, eating things Sacrificed to Idols (a thing much stumbled
at in those days) abusing their Christian liberty to licentiousness and
lousnesse, taking advantage of, and abusing the decree of the Apostles, Acts
15.20. that Christians would abstain from pollutions of Idols, and from
fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood, as if all these things
had been of one and the same nature, as indeed at that time they were, all
necessarily to be abstained from, as if they had been of one nature. These are
granted by all to be the two main things that these Nicolaitans were guilty of:
though there be that add many more, as Epiphanius does: and if we look to the
14. and 15. verse. of this chapter, it is not unlike, that the Lord points at
these two faults: for in the 14. verse, He tells Pergamos, that she had them
that held the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block
before the children of Israel, to eat things Sacrificed unto Idols, and to
commit fornication: and in the 15. verse, So have thou also them that hold the
Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. Where they that maintained the
Doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans are the same: and He means, as Balaam
taught Balac to ensnare the Israelites, by drawing them to their Idol feasts,
and commit fornication with the daughters of Moab; So says the Lord, ye have
the Nicolaitans that follow the same footsteps, and teach the same Doctrine.

2. There is more difference concerning the occasion and rise of this Heresy.
It is commonly and by the most part (if not by all) attributed to that Nicolas,
that ( Acts 6.) is mentioned among the seven Deacons that were chosen to wait
upon the tables, and who gets there a testimony, that he was a man full of the
holy Ghost: but there being various opinions about the occasion and rise of it,
I shall name two that are special, and choose which of the two we think safest.

1. Some write of him, that having fallen from his integrity, and become
dissolute in his practice, he strove to maintain it in his Doctrine (a thing
too common to draw our Doctrine to maintain our practice) and form^^ly taught
this error, and begat many profane followers. Neither (say they) is it like,
that such a vile sin would have been fathered in Scripture on such a man, if he
had been innocent. Others set it down with more mitigation and charity to
Nicolas, thus, That this Nicolas having a beautiful wife, was suspected to
entertain jealousy of her, it is like from some others, Members of the Church;
and being too inadvertant and rash in the way which he took for removing that
suspicion, to make it be seen that he had none, he brought his wife in public,
and holding her forth, said, he cared not who conversed with her, so far was he
from being suspicious of her honesty.

This rash fact, though flowing from a good intention (say they) was abused by
some to patronize the errors formerly mentioned beyond his intention: And they
were called Nicolaitans on this occasion: not because he taught so; but that
they concluded so from that his practice, and fathered what they maintained on
that worthy man; as it is ordinary for corrupt men to father their corrupt
opinions upon, and to shelter themselves under grave and Godly men's names. This
last, in the doubtfulnesse of this case, it being asserted by the most ancient
(to wit, Clemens Alexand.) we rather embrace, partly, because of that man's
commendation, Acts 6. where it is said, he was a man full of the holy Ghost:
and partly, because it is most charitable; and therefore is safest, especially,
where such a testimony is given to the man in Scripture. And for as abominable
as this was, it was for many centuries of years, revived and continued with
many additions in the Church, by Gnostics, Basilides, etc. by those, called
the Saturnians, Carpocratians, and many others, who made a pretext of Nicolas
for their patron. A thing to be wondered at, that so soon after Christ, while
John the beloved Disciple was living, Satan should assault and set upon the
Church with such errors: and yet as wonderful, that after those errors were
refuted by an extraordinary Apostle, speaking from Christ's own mouth, they were
vented and maintained by those Heretics, a symptom of that peartnesse and
impudency that corrupt men are led with, when so soon, at such a time,
contrary to so clear reproofs, men durst vent and abide by such gross things:
O what force and efficacy has the spirit of delusion when it is letten loose!
and what a hight may it come to! Tremble at the beginnings of it: it is hard to
conceive, with what audacity and boldness it will bear it self out, that
though our Lord would write an Epistle from Heaven, delusion will so blind
folks, that they will not question their errors.

The second thing to be spoken unto in this commendation, is, that they hated
the deeds of the Nicolaitans: not their persons simply, but their deeds, and
them as promoving these deeds: though the Church had these men among them, and
was severe in her Discipline; yet the Lord takes notice of this especially,
that she kept a secret, sincere abhorrencie of them in her heart: not only did
not the Angel and Church countenance them, nor only censure them, nor only
forbear their company; but they had such an abhorrencie of their deeds and of
themselves, in carrying on these deeds, that the thinking of them was
abominable; as says David, Psalm. 139.21, 22. Do not I hate them that hate
thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred. And Ps. 119.104. I hate every false
way. So this hatred in reference to these Nicolaitans, was not carnal, or in
reference to their persons simply; but in these three respects especially, 1.
In respect of their deeds and Doctrine, it struck at their deeds as here, and
at their Doctrine, as verse. 15. And, 2. Looking upon them as instruments and
Ministers of Satan, made use of by him for corrupting and poisoning of souls,
and shaming of the Gospel, they abhorred them considered as such, what ever
pity to their persons, or desire to their Salvation they had. 3. As they
conceived them to be hateful to Christ and hated by Him, so did they hate them;
squaring their hatred, as they did conceive Christ to hate.

Observe 1. That there are some things and persons, especially at some times,
that it is not enough for the people of God to abstain from them in their
practice, if there be not an abhorrencie of them in their hearts. The way of
error and corrupt practices that follow on it, should be abhorred, as any other
sin, how gross and scandalous soever; Heresy as murder, and Schism as
witchcraft, Gal. 5.19. and there is good reason for it: for if folk be not
serious in hatred of, and so out of love with the thing, they may soon fall in
the practice of it: and simple abstinence will never be counted sincerity
before God, whose trial is how it stands with the heart and affections, how the
heart is affected or disaffected toward the thing?

2. Our Lord Jesus counts it some mark of sincerity, when there is a single
hatred of the way of error, as it is in it self evil and hateful to, and
hated by Him.

The third thing in this mitigation, is the ground on which their hatred is
commended; It is conformity with Christ, which I also hate, I hate them:
therefore it is commendable in thee to hate them; It Is a sure ground of
commendation, to hate what He hates, and love what He loves. This ground of
commendation, implies two things: 1. That it is well done to hate what Christ
hates. Observe, Gods People should love and hate one thing with Jesus Christ;
they should study to be conform to Him in the exercise of all their passions
and affections. 2. It implies a likeness to Christ's hatred in the nature
thereof, that they hated them as they were hated by Christ, and not as they
were enemies to them. Obs. It Is a good way to square folks hatred and zeal so,
as it degener not into passion: to look to the matter that it be such as is
hated by Christ, and to the manner that it be such as His is, single, and
zealous; and that it be on that account, because hateful to Him: otherwise,
men may carnally and selfishly hate, but without commendation. 3. It implies
also, that corrupt Doctrine is most hateful to Christ Jesus, and should be to
His People.

Verse. 7. Follows the conclusion: wherein we have two things, 1. A general
advertisement, or exhortation common to, and repeated in, all the Epistles, Let
him that has an ear hear. 2. A particular promise for upstirring of them to
wrestle and overcome, To him that overcomes, will I give, etc.

For the exhortation, it is shortly the Lords giving this watchword and warning
to all that are in Ephesus, and all that should hear this Epistle, to observe
what the Spirit says to them. 1. Because, it is of Ephesus concernment as well
as the Angel's. 2. Because it is of particular Believers concernment as well as
the Churches: therefore, He would have all hearers looking on it as
particularly spoken to them. 3. Because usually all hear not. 4. Yet these that
have ears should hear.

The scope implies these three Notes. 1. The Lord supponeth here, that every
one this Word comes unto, will not have hearing ears, they will not hear this
Word so as to lay weight on it, and give themselves up to it. 2. It implies
that folk that have any conviction, wakening, or life, sitting them for
hearing, should especially be busy in improving the Word heard; To you it is
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not
given, etc. It would become Believers (what ever others do) to be busy laying
up some promises, directions, reproofs, threatenings, etc. it is mainly for their
use written and taught, to make the man of God perfect. 3. It implies that
hearers would labor so to make use of the Word spoken (to whomsoever it be
first spoken,) as if it were particularly and especially spoken to them: this
being the excellency of the Word, that it contains in it many conditions, and
suits many Generations, and some in this place, as well as in Ephesus.

2. The last and special part of the conclusion, is a promise, To him that
overcomes will I give, etc. Wherein, 1. The party is described, to whom the
promise is made, To him that overcomes, in the singular number: to point out
that our Lord Jesus takes notice not only of a Church that fights, but of
every particular Believer in it. This description of the party, implies, 1. A
case or exercise that these to whom the promise is made are supposed to be in,
and it is that they are wrestling or fighting: these are the object of the
promise. It implies, that Believers have difficulties to fight with, and a
fighting life of it here away. 2. Their duty to fight and wrestle with these
difficulties, outward and inward. 3. That there is an actual fighting according
to their duty. 4. A victory, overcoming, a getting of their foot some way on
these difficulties: a victory follows the wrestling to every Believer: what
ever he be, that in the way of duty meets with difficulties, and sets to, to
overcome them, he shall get the victory: yea, fighting seriously, is some
advancement in victory; therefore is it in the present tence, to the overcomer,
or who is a overcoming: because fighting and victory are never separated,
finally, in this case. 2. The promise made to the overcomers for their
encouragement, is, I shall give them to eat of the tree of life, etc. It Is an
allusion to that tree planted in Eden, Genesis 2.3. That tree was called the tree
of life, etc. not for any physical efficacy that was in it, as Papists gloss
here, (though God might have made it isntrumental as a mean of it) therefore,
when sin entered, there was no use of that tree; neither could it do any thing,
but it was so called, to hold forth to Adam Sacramentally the eternity of life,
which he might expect by keeping the Covenant of Works; that tree was given him
to signify, and seal up that life to him, upon condition of his obedience: and
in allusion to it, Christ says here, to the man that sighteth and overcomes,
I will make him partaker of eternal life, not in any earthly Paradise, but in
Heaven; for so Paradise is taken in the New Testament, Luke 23.43. This night
shall thou be with me in paradise. By eating then of the tree of life, we mean
Heaven, with all the great advantages of it, especially Jesus Christ who makes
up that life to fallen sinners, which that tree could not do.

From this promise, Obs. That our Lord Jesus would have His followers cheerful
in their services: therefore He sets a recompense in their view: not to make
them mercenary and servile; but hearty and cheerful in their obedience,
because they serve such a good Master. It Is a great mistake in some, to say
that looking to the reward makes a soul servile; upon the contrary, it makes
a soul free and willing: and this is the ground of Gods giving promises of
rewards; and the use which the Saints make of them, Heb. 11. Moses had respect
to the recompense of reward, and it sweetened his cross, and made him cheerful
in obedience.

2. From the particular promise He maket, Obs. That there cannot be a greater
promise nor encouragement for duty, than the happiness that God has provided
for His People in Heaven, when i'ts rightly eyed: and the frequent laying down
of this promise, is for this end, to make Believers bear difficulties
patiently, and wade through them willingly: a broader sight of Heaven, and
Faith and Hope strengthened, in expectation of it would make folks fight
stoutly.

3. The thing He promises for their present sustaining, is, Heaven, as that
which they might hope for after this life. Obs. 1. That Christ's followers would
suspend their full life, till after this life; they would not expect an other
life or heaven here. 2. The hope of heaven, should comfort wrestlers before it
come. Believers, take your wrestling life here, and expect and look for a quiet
life hereafter; and look not for it till then. Christ speaks of the
wrestling, as here, To him that overcomes; and of the victory, as in heaven, I
will give him to eat of the tree of life. The not thinking rightly on this,
makes us so often grumble when we want satisfaction in the things of a world.
We propose to our selves a quiet life, whereas the Word of God never promises
quietness, and a complete victory and triumph here; yet the time comes, when
wrestlers shall be conquerours over crosses and corruptions: and carnal men,
who live now as Kings, without any fight, shall lie under wrath: there is no
such promise made to them.

Before we proceed to any other of the Epistles, there are some things
insinuated in this, the clearing whereof may be useful in many of the rest: we
shall therefore take occasion to speak somewhat now, once for all, to these
three. 1. To Church Government and Discipline in general. 2. To that relation
which is betwixt a particular Minister and his Flock. And, 3. To the nature of
the difference that is betwixt saving and common grace. All which will be
useful for the understanding of many things in these Epistles.

1. Concerning Church Government and Discipline, in general.
THe matter of Discipline, is much insisted upon in these Epistles; and often
the great weight of the commendations or reproofs that are given in them, is
laid on this, as they were faithful or defective in the administration
thereof: which does certainly show, not only the lawfulness of a Church
government and Discipline; but also the usefulness and necessity thereof to
the Church of Christ when faithfully exercised, as being a special mean and
ordinance appointed by Jesus Christ for the edification thereof, and a thing
that is not indifferent to her O^ficers to exerce or forbear at their pleasure,
but lies on them, to be discharged, as they would have Christ's commendation on
the one side, and as they would eschew His sharp reproof on the other, and as
they would prevent the offense and destruction, and promove the edification of
the People over whom they watch, as they that must give account. It is
therefore no wonder that the devil has in all ages either sought to oppose, or
corrupt so excellent a mean of the Churches edification: he began even under
heathen Emperors to traduce this Government, as inconsistent with civil
Authority; and did provoke persecutors by nothing more than this, that Christ
was accounted a King by Christians, and that accordingly they did keep distinct
Courts under Him, which the Politicians of the world did account inconsistent
with Governments, as may appear from the History of Primitive times, and the
Apologies of Christians, particularly of Origin against Celsus, wherein he does
particularly and fully insist upon this. When the Lord had vindicated His
Ordinance of Government (with all His other Ordinances,) the devil set himself
to corrupt the same, and to pervert it in its nature, and divert it in its
exercise from the appointed end of edifying the Church, to be an occasion of
offense to her, and tyranny over her, by the many debates concerning
precedence, which he stirred up after the Churches freedom from heathenish
persecution, till at last he brought Antichrist to tyrannize over the face of
the visible Church, that thereby he might either make the Government hurtful
or odious unto the members thereof and others. Even as in reference to the
Doctrine of Christ, he did endeavor the corrupting thereof by error, when he
could not altogether suppress the same. Again, when the Lord brought the light
of the Gospel to public, at the time of Reformation, and Antichrists tyranny
is by many casten off, he seeks by all means to effectuate one of these two,
to wit, that either the Church should have no distinct Government at all, or
that, at least, it should be of another form, and of another nature than is
appointed in the Word. Hence it is, that there have ever been such debates in
the Church concerning the Government and Discipline thereof, and even whether
there be such a thing or not: And although the opposers thereof, do not
professedly oppose the truth of the Gospel, nor intend confusion in the Church;
yet has it with it no little advantage to the Kingdom of Satan and prejudice
to Christ's.

For, 1. By this means Satan obscures the beauty and excellency of the Church
of Christ, and draws men to undervalue the same; as being at best but a
refined piece of civil policy, as but subservient to politic ends, and the
upholding of temporal greatness of men in place. Hence it is, that we will
find the most worldly-wise and politic men (that are least zealous ordinarily
in things of God) to be the greatest favorers and abettors of this: and it is
no wonder, seeing Christ's way of Government, even as His Doctrine, is
foolishness to the wisdom of men: It Is observeable also, that where this
opinion has place, there is little account of any other ordinance; the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is prostituted promiscuously to all; the
Ministry, is either accounted a thing indifferent, or Ministers made the
servants of men, and arbitrarily to be put out or in, as they are pleasing or
displeasing to them; and it is specially intended to curb free faithful
speaking, and to be a snare to make them flatter Magistrates and Powers. All
which show the undervaluing principle that this opinion does proceed from.

2. This opinion has ordinarily with it more licentiousness, and that both in
Doctrine and Practice: for, necessarily, one of these two do follow: either
many errors and scandals in practice are accounted light and not censurable at
all; or, if that in way of reason be granted, yet in practice it is never
performed. And can it ever be made out in any practice past, or possibly to
come, that offenses in People or Ministers have been so exactly taken notice
of, and restrained, or removed, where Church Government has been denied, as
where it has been in exercise?

3. Although such Magistrates might be found, as would take notice of every
thing exactly; yet their meddling with it furthers not spiritual edification,
so as the way of Church Government does: for at best, it would make men but
civil, and make Religion look like the way of ancient Philosophers, who
pressed the rectifying of nature; whereas a Church reproof, or censure, has
both more edification to others, and more convincing shame to the parties
themselves, in respect of the sin thereof, as flowing more immediately from
Jesus Christ, and more directly representing to them His Authority, and their
reckoning to Him, who more singularily binds in heaven, what by His Officers is
bound on earth. And we conceive, that even the prophanest, in experience will
find this true, that a verbal Church-censure (which considered of it self, is
but light) will yet have more impression (as to the ends aforesaid) than
sentences of a civil Magistrate, that in themselves may be heavier; and this
will be, even when the parties in their outward carriage will seem to reverence
the Magistrate, and to contemn the Church.

4. Although it should be yet said, that Magistrates could make things more
effectual, as in censuring of corrupt Ministers, and such like, which indeed
is a benefit in it self to the Church; yet, considering this manner of
performing it, especially being compared with the performing thereof by the
Churches own Authority, it proves more disparaging unto the Church of Christ:
because if Ministers and Church Members, should be apt to fall in scandalous
offenses, and yet the Church have no Authority, but what is extrinsick for the
remeding thereof, then is she apt to be looked upon as a sufferer of profanity,
and as a nest to unclean persons of her self, if by the Magistrate, course were
not taken with her: and although by his means such should be purged out; yet in
the opinions of natural men this imputation sticks to the Church, as if such
things and persons were well consistent with her profession, and liked of by
her special Officers and Members. Now censuring of these by her own Authority,
does fully and only vindicate her and them from these aspersions, which are
frequent upon the out-breakings of such scandals in the mouths of many profane
men. And this revenging of disobedience, and vindicating of the Church of
Christ, is none of the least ends of this Church Authority, which by no other
power can be attained. And no question, the devil loves to have scandals
breaking out in the Church, especially in her Officers, which do once put a
blot upon her. And if it be to be taken notice of at all, he had rather that
some other did it than the Church her self: because so the commendation
becomes theirs, and the blot sticks to her: and thus (as it were) he proclames
to all, what sort of persons would these Church Officers, and Church Members
be, for all their profession, if they were not even as other men by some other
hand restrained? And thus the wisdom and holiness of our Lord Jesus, is
reflected on, as if He had approven corrupt men's designs, who love to have a
blot on the Church; but not to have her vindicated from it: because by this,
the Church is capable to give offenses; but, in a incapacity, to remove them,
or to vindicate her self from them: which stands not with that zeal, which
our Lord has to His own glory in the Church. And certainly, it is not the
punishing of faults simply, that vindicateth the Churches holiness; but it is
the censuring of them in such a way as evidenceth the Churches abhorrencie
thereof, that does it: otherwise, Christians and heathens living under one
Commonwealth, might be supposed to have the same indignation at scandalous
ills. And so the denying of the Churches Authority, if it does not permit
faults to be unpunished (at least all) yet it secludeth such a way of censuring
them, as may vindicate the Church and Christ Jesus the King thereof in an
singular manner: and (if we may so say) puts her; yea, the Lord Himself in
their reverence, whether she shall be free of corrupt Teachers and Members or
not? or whether she shall lie under that blot or not?

5. By the denying of this Ordinance, the other Ordinances which are
acknowledged, are made weak and obstructed in their exercise. Concerning the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it is clear: for, by this the rail whereby it is
in a singular manner separated, is broken down; many offices of the Church, as
these of Elders and Deacons, are made void; and that of Preaching, made
contemptible or maimed. For, public authoritative rebuking of all, and
sometimes of some in particular, is a special part thereof. Now, where
Church Government is denied, either the Minister must do it abitrarily by
himself, and so he is more liable to a snare, and the party reproved to be
stumbled, as having only to do with the Minister, who may partially proceed
therein; or, it must be forborne, and so his Ministry be made obnoxious to
despising, which by his rebuking, with all Authority, is to be prevented, and
every way plainness and freedom, even in Preaching, especially toward these
in place, is so far as can be, restrained.

6. By this, the devil aims still either to make Religion to suffer as a
thing that men may carve on according to their interests, as in other matters
of policy (therefore he mixeth all together) or, he does continually lay
grounds of jealousy and difference between Magistrates and Ministers; thereby
to make, that Ministers and these who will be faithful, should either sinfully
connive at what may prejudge the Kingdom of Christ, or by their testifying
against the same, make themselves more odious to the Rulers: for, lay this once
for a ground, that there is no Church Government but what the Magistrate has,
then either the Minister must say, that none ought to be admitted to
Civil-government, but such as both for skill and conscience are fit to manage
the matters of Religion (which Civil States will not always be content with,
neither often is it possible) or, they must account any man, who may be fit to
manage Civil things, fit also to manage the Affairs of Christ's House, which
in conscience cannot always be done, whereby necessarily, they must be brought
in tops with Magistrates, except we say that either unskilful Magistrates use
not to be in place, or that such may yet be tender and dexterous in the
mannaging of every Church matter that comes before them. And on the by, we may
say, that seeing qualifications, fitting one for any place and Government, are
simply called for in these who should supply the same (though sometime de
facto they be not so qualified) and seeing special qualifications, are required
for governing of the Church of Christ, which are not required in these that
govern a Civil State, and will not be accounted simply necessary to them: It
must therefore follow, that by the Lords Ordinance, these two Governments are
not conjoined in one person, seeing he has not always conjoined the
qualifications that are requisite for both. We shall insist no more in this:
the reading of these Epistles will sufficiently show how concerning this truth
is: and although this controversy be abundantly cleared by the writings of
many worthy men, that there needs no more be said therein; yet, having such
occasion from these Epistles, we shall, once for all, touch some things
concerning Church Government, as it is holden forth therein: whereby we will
find it clear. 1. That there is such a thing as Church Government, distinct and
independent from the Civil. 2. Wherein it consists. And, 3. Who are the
Subjects thereof. And, 4. We shall lay down some conclusions or observations
concerning the same, as they may be gathered from the Text.

1. The Church of Christ is furnished with a Government and Authority within
her self, for the ordering of her own affairs, trying and censuring of her own
Members, and that immediately from Jesus Christ, distinct and independent from
any Civil Government on earth. That there is such a thing as Government and
Authority in her, is clear by these, 1. The practice of the Angel of Ephesus in
the trying and censuring of false Apostles, which cannot be done without
Authority and Government. 2. This practice of theirs, is commended by our Lord
Jesus: it can therefore be no usurpation in them. 3. In the Church of Pergamos,
we will find the Angel reproved, that they had them that held the Doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, etc. which does suppose Authority in them, even to have
censured and cut off these from their society: for, if they had not had
Authority to do it, it was not their duty to have done it; and if i^ had not
been their duty to do it, our Lord Jesus had not reproved them for committing
it, 4. The Church of Thyatira, is reproved also for suffering the woman Iezebel
to teach and seduce His Servants: which does imply an Authority and Government,
fitting them to whom he writes, to have marred and hindered her Preaching, and
somewhat to have been in their power to have done, which was not done by them:
otherwise our Lord Jesus would not have to reproved them. The making out of
these three will confirm this. 1. That the thing commended in Ephesus, and
desiderated in the other two Churches, does imply Authority and Power. 2. That
this is in the Church as distinct and independent from any Civil Government. 3.
That this is a thing perpetually belonging unto the visible Church, and was not
temporary, as peculiar to that time.

That there is an Authority employed here, the considering of these three will
make out. 1. If we consider what is commended in Ephesus and desiderated in the
other two: the very expressions and acts do bear forth an Authority. As, 1.
That is commended in Ephesus, That they cannot bear them which are evil, but
have tried false Apostles, and have found them liars. All which hold forth a
judicial way of proceeding and trying, which implies a citing of such a party
and witnesses, for the discovering of such and such things, according to the
rule given to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.19. Against an Elder receive not an
accusation, but before two or three witnesses: for, there can be no trial
without witnesses, there can be no witnesses without Power to call them, and
exact an oath of them, that being the end of all strife, which cannot be done
without Authority. The word added, and have found them liars, does confirm,
that it is a judicial finding after trial, whereby they decide.

1. In the general, that such and such things are evidences of false Apostles:
and then in particular, that such and such things are found to be in them: and
therefore that they are false Apostles, which presupponeth this trial before
they judicially pronounce; than which, nothing does look more Judicature-like.
Which will be the more clear, if we consider, 1. That this trial and finding,
proceeds from their zeal, and not bearing with evil men; and therefore cannot
be a trial for private information. 2. It Is a trial, tending to the edification
of the Church, and the preventing of that snare amongst the people, which no
personal or private thing could effectuate. 3. It Is a trial and finding,
opposite to what is reproved in Pergamos and Thyatira, and so such a process
and sentence as rid that Church of them, which no private or personal act could
do. 4. It Is a poceeding and trial, which relates to these directions, which
Paul gives to Timothy and Titus, as the coincidency of the matter, scope and
other circumstances do demonstrate such, as, 1. Receive not an accusation, but
before two or three witnesses: which is the ground of that which follows,
verse. 20. Them that sin, rebuke before all. Now if that rebuke be an
authoritative act (as cannot be denied, which yet is but the execution of the
sentence that follows the former trial) then the trial it self must be
judicial and authoritative also; and therefore so must this trial be here
understood. To say that this is a Ministerial act, and that that trial
preceding, is only the Ministers private act, for his own clearing, cannot be
admitted: for, that trial belongs to many, as after will appear. 2. To
whomsoever it be supposed to belong, it infers an authority to try, and so
to conveen and examine: otherwise that trial might be made ineffectuall; and
so the party wanting authority, not to be chargeable with short-coming therein.
Or 3. This trial must be commended to Church Officers without Authority to
effectuate it, and so it will not be a mean suitable to the end. 4. Ministerial
trial and reproof, will not be enough to gain the end, and to make a corrupt
Member to be no Member of such a Church, which is the thing desiderated in
Pergamos and Thyatira. And considering the commendation of these Angels and
Churches, it is not like that they were defective in their personal averseness
from and rebuking of these Errors, and yet they are reproved as being
defective: which must infer that they came short in respect of that judicial
trial and censure, which is here commended in Ephesus, as the considering of
them will clear.

2. Pergamos reproof ( verse. 14. and 15.) is, Thou have there them that hold
the Doctrine of Balaam, and them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans: the
fault is, not that they approved that Doctrine or connived at it; for, they
denied not the Faith; and A^tipas is commended as a faithful Martyr amongst
them: nor is it their fault, that such lived in the Town; or, as other Heathens
might, did sometimes enter the Congregations: nor is His quarrel only against
these Nicolaitans themselves, but against the Angel of the Church, because they
had them in their society as Members with them, and had not cut them off: and
seeing this cutting off, is such a thing as made them cease to be Members of
that body, and relates to that which Paul wishes to the troublers of the
Church, Gal. 5. and commends to Titus, Chap. 3. Him that is an Heretic,
reject, etc. it must imply an Authority and Power, without which this cannot be
done, this un-Membering or un-Churching of a Person being a censure of highest
concernment, and that same which we call excommunication; It follows then,
that this Church had that Power, and ought to have executed it against these
corrupt Members, seeing her failing therein does make her reprovable.

If it be said here that this does imply no Authority and Power, but what is
common to all Societies by the Law of Nations and Nature, such as companies of
Chirurgians, Wrights, and such like, have in excluding men from their own
Society: which yet is no distinct Authority, but subordinate to, and derived
from the Magistrate?

We answer, 1. That even these Societies in these things act by Authority,
however it be derived: and so the Argument holds, that the exclusion of Members
from Church Communion, does imply an Authority: and what is said of the
necessity of such a thing by the Law of Nature and Nations, does confirm the
same: for, if every Society be furnished for the maintaining of it self by the
Law of Nature, so must also the Church be; except we say that it is more
defective than other Societies. Beside, even such Societies could not do such a
thing, were not privileges granted them by Authority for that end. 2. We
answer, That although the argument hold in the general, that there is an
Authority necessary; yet will it not prove it to be dependent in the Church, as
in these Societies it is. For, 1. The derivation of Authority from the
Magistrate to these Societies, is clear: for, such and such Societies have that
Power, because it is granted to them by the superior Magistrate; and others
want it, because it is not granted them: but I suppose none will plead for a
derived Power to the Church from the Magistrate in this place: yea, the
greatest opposers of Church Government, do acknowledge that it is not derived
from him as L^d. Mol. page 654. There is no reason therefore that
Church Government should be subordinate to Magistracy as other Societies are,
which she exerces (as they speak) by a proper right and divine without
delegation, Iure proprio and divino, non delegato. 2. The Magistrate may enter
by his Authority such and such persons to the rights and privileges of such
Societies and exclude others from them (though possibly it may be done
unjustly) yet, was it ever heard of, that a Magistrate might privilege any
with the privileges of Church Membership, or by his Authority un-Church any?
The parallel therefore cannot be universal in these. 3. All other Societies as
such, are parts of a Commonwealth, and together make up the body: and therefore
in reason ought to be subordinate to the common Government; but the Church, as
a Church, is no essential or integrall part of a Commonwealth: there is
therefore not the like reason for their subordination.

If any should yet except and say, that an Authority may be immediately from
God, and not derived; and yet be by Him appointed to be subordinate to the
civil Magistrate, as is instanced in that Power, that a Husband has over the
Wife; or a Parent over his Children.

We Answer, 1. That it may be questioned, if a Parent, as a Parent, be
subordinated to the Magistrate, although, as a man and member of the
Commonwealth, he be: for, he may command his Children without any Authority
from him: yea contrary to the commands of Magistrates (and in some cases
warrantably, suppose in their Marrying, adhering to the truth of God, etc.)
neither can the Magistrate increase or diminish their power, although they may
strengthen them, or mar them actually in the exercise thereof; yea, suppose a
Parent to incline to match Son or Daughter in a way that is not sinful or
inconvenient; and for this end, to command them to give obedience: and again,
suppose the Magistrate to command them otherwise to match: The Magistrat's
command here, will not loose the Child from the Parents Authority: because,
although both Parent and Child be the Magistrat's subjects; yet their obedience
is called for in reference to these things that belong to a Magistrate only.
Hence that case of a Magistrat's requiring one thing, and a Parents commanding
of another to the same Child, is by Divines solved by this distinction, That in
things belonging to the Magistrat's command, the Child ought to be obedient to
him in what concerns the duty of a subject; but in things that concern the duty
of a Son properly, he is to be obedient to the Father, whatever the Magistrate
command: which shows, that simply the commands of a Father, as a Father, are
not subordinate to the Magistrate: and so that in reference to some persons,
there may be two supreme Powers, upon diverse considerations, who may command
without subordination one to another; and yet their Authority be no way
inconsistent together.

2. We Answer, That although the Authority of Fathers and Husbands were subject
to the civil Magistrate as such; yet can it not weaken this consequence, [If
the Authority of the Church be not derived from the Magistrate, Then can it not
be subordinate to him:] for, the Authority of Parent, Husband, etc. is
personal and natural, that is, founded in nature: and therefore is derived by
nature to Parents, Husbands, etc. And such, do not make a body of themselves,
but are members of another greater body; whereas a Church, is a Society and
Incorporation, complete in it self: and as such, is not founded on nature; but
by Gods positive grant and foundation is such: and therefore Authority must be
immediately derived to the Church by the same mean, (to wit, of a positive
grant) by which its being as a Church is derived. And can it be instanced that
there is any such, to wit, a complete Incorporation, having immediate power
from Christ for the governing of it self and shutting out of corrupt members
without any derived power from the civil magistrate, who yet, are subordinated
to his power in the exercise of theirs. We grant indeed, that the Church,
considered as subjects and members of the commonwealth, are subject to him; but
it will no way follow, that the Authority or Government wherewith she is
furnished, as a Church, is to be subjected to him. Neither can this be thought
strange; that a Church ^udicatory, considered as such, should be accounted
independent, as to the civil Magistrate, seeing we must either say, that a
Minister, in his Ministerial and Pastoral duty, acts by an Authority
immediately from Christ, without any dependency on the civil Magistrate (which
yet readily cannot be admitted in any other case, to wit, that a person should
command without dependence on the Magistrate) Or, we must say, that the
Minister preaches and acts in his Ministry, in the Magistrate's name
mediately, and by his Authority, or by none at all: which I suppose, none will
affirm. And what greater inconsistency is it with civil Power, to have distinct
Authoritative Courts, than to have Rulers distinctly and Authoritatively
commanding persons, especially themselves?

3. If we consider the Epistle to Thyatira, where much is commended; yet there
is a notwithstanding, and reproof cast in upon this account, because thou
suffer that woman Iezebel, that calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and
seduce my servants. This suffering, can be no defect in respect of civil
Authority: for, that was not in their power, or is it any defect of any
personal or private duty: because none such can imped other persons teaching,
if wilfully they will set themselves to it; nor can they be thought defective
in that, that are so commended for Faith, Charity, Works, etc. and that even in
respect of their thriving and growing in their private conditions: it must
therefore be a suffering of her in so far as by Church Authority she was not
censured and restrained, that thereby the seducing of Christ's servants, might
be prevented, whose edification is the end of this as of all other Ordinances:
and so consequently, the Church of Christ is furnished with power and authority
in reference to her own affairs and members.

2. This will also be clear by considering these who are primarily in this
respect commended and reproved in these Epistles: it is not the body of private
Christians; but the Churchofficers, as peculiarly distinguished from them: so
that these threatenings and reproofs, do otherwise belong to them, than to the
Church, as we will find in the progress. And there can be no other reason
given of this, but because these faults were the faults of these that had
Authority to right them, and did it not: which will be more clear afterward,
when we consider the subject of this power.

3. These acts, are either acts of private Christians, or personal acts of
Ministers and Church Officers (both which, are already overturned by the
forementioned reasons) Or, it must be by some extraordinary act, as Peter's
smiting of Ananias and Sapphira; or, it must be the exercise of some ordinary
Power and Authority: there is no other thing conceivable; But none of the first
three can be said. Not one of the first two, for the reasons given; not the
third, Because, 1. There is no warrant to look upon these Officers as furnished
with that gift; nor was it ordinary to the Church, and her ordinary Officers,
such as these were. 2. That would not attain the scope proposed here, which is,
in part, the recovering of the offending party: therefore says the Lord of
Iezebel, verse. 21.22. I gave her space to repens; and does threaten her but
conditionally: which shows, that He meaned no such extraordinary off-cutting
of them. It remains then, that it must be the exercising of an ordinary
Authority and Government: and therefore such must be in the Church.

The second thing to make out the Argument, is, that this Authority and Power
in the Church, is distinct and independent from any civil Government; which
from the Text, may thus appear, 1. The subject is distinct, to wit,
Church Officers. 2. The object is distinct, to wit, the Church and the members
thereof alone, and as such: it is not the inhabitants of Pergamos and Thyatira;
but the Church Members that are under the same. 3. The matter falling under
that cognition, is distinct, to wit, that which is hurtful to souls, as the
seducing of Christ's servants, and scandals, considered as such. 4. The censures
inflicted, are different, to wit, no civil mulct upon estates, nor punishment
upon bodies, nor cancelling of the freedom of their Burgeships in Towns or such
like; but seclusion from Church Priviledges and membership. 5. The end is
distinct, to wit, the reclaiming of the party offending, and the bringing of
them to Repentance, and the preventing of soul-hurt to others, and the
vindication of Christ's name. 6. The manner is different, there is no external
Pomp nor Power or force in the mannaging thereof, such as is in civil
Governments: for, that is not here conceiveable, considering the afflicted and
persecuted condition of these Churches, but the sword of the mouth, and trial,
and censures. And 7. They differ in their rise, civil Power being derived from
Superiors to Inferiors; but this has no rise or derivation from any civil
Power, although for the time these Cities and Nations wanted it not; but did
arise from that intrinsic oeconomie and power, which accompanies the very
being of a Church, and which by Christ's appointment does reside in such a
number of persons, considered as a Church, which did not reside in other
inhabitants of the same Towns, nor did in these before this their Church State.
8. The account, upon which, this Government does consider persons and actions,
is distinct from the civil: men are not considered as men, nor as in-dwellers
in such and such Places one^y; but as Christ's servants: and actions, are not
considered, either as profitable or hurtful to men simply; but as profitable
or hurtful to their spiritual estate. And therefore, it is seducing of
Christ's Servants, and as such, the deeds of the Nicolaitans and Iezebel, are to
be taken notice of by it.

2. We say, as it is a distinct Government from the civil; so it is independent
as to it: and if the former be true, that there is an Authority and Government
included here and in the former respects exercised as distinct from the civil
power then in being, it will also necessarily follow, that this Authority was
independently exercised in reference to that civil power?

For, 1. There is no derivation of this Church Power, from that civil power, as
is said. Therefore it cannot be dependent on it, seeing it neither did, nor
could derive it. And although some except (as was hinted) that there may be a
power in Fathers, Husbands, and other such natu^rall relations, over Children,
Wives, etc. which yet is dependent on the Magistrate; yet suppose that by the
law of nature, Parents did combine in one Society and Government among
themselves, as a Church does, and in that case had a distinct Government, could
that Authority and Government be accounted dependent, Seeing no Superior
Authority could mar them in the exercise of their power without injustice,
more than a Magistrate can mar a Father in the exercise of His Authority
toward his Children when he does it justly? So this Church Power, not being a
personal privilege, but belonging to her as a body and Society of many
members combining together, having that by the law of nature, as is granted
(and we add, if Jesus Christ allowed them) she cannot therefore be marred
(...) any Authority in the exercising of that Government, what ever injust
violence may do.

2. It appears to be independent in this, that there is a Church Government
among Christians, even when Magistrates were setting themselves to undo the
same: If then Government be necessary to the Church, and yet it be so ordered
in the Lords providence that civil Government may be for hundreds of years
enemies to the Church, as was in these Primitive times. Then it will follow,
that the Church Government and Authority is not placed in the Magistrate, or
civil Governors: because, in that case either she should have no Government at
all (which by these Epistles will be found false) or she must have a Government
and Authority destructive to her, which is contrary to the end thereof; or, in
the last place, her Authority must be independent, save of Jesus Christ alone:
and if it were not so, considering now that these to whom Christ writes, were
not civil Magistrates, there had been no such access to expostulate with them
for their ommission, if they might not have acted independently on them.

3. It may appear thus, that if the civil Magistrate cannot repeal by his
Authority any of their sentences, then is their Authority independent as to
him. Now, suppose a Church justly to degrade, or depose a false Teacher, or to
cut off a rotten member, could any Magistrate by his Authority continue that
man to be a Minister, or that member to be a Churchmember, (what ever violence
might do) Suppose some Emperor (as in some cases Julian did) had taken the
recognition of Ephesus sentence against these false Apostles, and had declared
it null? would not still their sentence have stood in force notwithstanding? Or
suppose Pergamos, or Thyatira, had cut off Iezebel or the Nicolaitans from
their Society, could any civil Mag^strate, Heathen or Christian, have enacted
them to be continued Church Members? And this does not only flow from the
injustice of the matter: for, suppose a Proconsul had justly degraded some
Judges of Ephesus; and the Town of Ephesus, had justly casten out some members
from their Society; yet, by the Emperors interposing his Authority, as the
supreme Magistrate, both might have been fully restored (though injustly) so as
they might have been really again Magistrates and Burgesses of such a City:
which cannot be said in this case. No Emperors Authority could have constitute
such (though injustly) to have been Officers, or members, at all of these
Churches. The difference then, (I say) cannot consist in the injustice of the
matter alone; (for both are injust) but it must consist in this, that civil
sentences are subordinate to the supreme Magistrate, but Church-sentences are
not: although by violence they might have countenanced such and such persons,
and have made the effects of the sentence in many things void; yet could their
Authority have never reached to the formal removing of them, as in civil cases
was h^nted.

Thirdly, To make out the Argument, we say, that this distinct independent
Power here mentioned, is a thing that agrees to the Church in all Ages and
conditions, and is not peculiar to any one time: as suppose, because the Church
wanted Christian Magistrates at this time, it had been lawful to exercise
Authority independent from them: which in other cases, where the Magistrate is
Christian, is not to be granted. Therefore we say, 1. That which is attributed
to these Churches here, agrees to them as Churches: and therefore to all
Churches at all times: for, the duties are common, and the hazards are common,
to Churches at all times. Therefore this remedy of Church Discipline, must be
perpetual also, it being the cure that is appointed for such a disease. And,
that often repeated word, He that has ears to hear, let him hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches, does speak in all ages to the end of the World,
alswell as then. 2. If all other directions, exhortations, etc. in these
Epistles, be perpetual and binding to the Church, to the end of the World,
then this must be so also: and there can be no reason given why this is to be
accounted temporary, more than the other: especially, considering that Christ's
sending of this Revelation, is for the good of His Servants unto the end of the
World: and that especially, is aimed at in these Epistles, as the forcited
close does confirm. It must then be injurious to Christ's mind, to sc^ape out so
much as concerns Government, as not belonging to His Church for so many ages.
3. If the grounds, requiring the exercise of this power in the Churches, during
this time, be perpetual, agreeing to all ages, Then it is not to be astricted
to the time of the Churches being under heathen Magistrates alone; But the
ground are perpetual: for, that is not because the Magistrate is a heathen;
but that the person offending may be brought to repentance; and the seducing of
others may be prevented: Now these ends are perpetual, which the Church is to
study in all times: and seeing Church Authority and Government, is here holden
forth, as a mean appointed by Jesus Christ for attaining of these ends, It must
therefore be of perpetual use to the Church also.

Although these Truths be clear from the Word; yet there are some things, which
are partly exceptions, partly objections, insisted on by Adversaries, which we
shall speak a little to, as the nature of our intended purpose will permit.

A forcited Author? page 545. does confidently undervalue all Arguments to this
purpose; and denies all distinctnesse of Government in the Church by any Power
distinct from that of the Magistrates; and to maintain it, does, 1. assert,
That all sort of Power whatsoever, is supreamly in the Magistrate, whether
Heathen or Christian, by that place, Romans 13.2. he heaps up with many bigg
words several absurdities that accompany (as he alleges) that opinion of a
distinct Church Government, which he calls invidiously the building of an
Empire within an Empire. Yet, 3. He grants, that where the Civil Magistrate
takes not on him the care of the Church, and maintains it not: in that case,
by the Law of Nature and Nations, the Church comes to have an Authority, or
somewhat equivalent in the place of that, whereby she is qualified for the
ordering of what concerns her Members, during that case of such a Magistracy
allanerly; and denies any other Authority to have been in the Church, during
the time that these Epistles were written, but what was by voluntary
confederacy, and association of Members amongst themselves: and therefore
says, That they had and exercised no less Authority, during that time, in
Civil things: for which end, he makes use of that place, 1 Corinthians. 6.1, 2.
etc.

In reference to all which, we say, 1. That Authority cannot be denied here
(however it be derived) seeing it is a Power to Excommunicate and Exauthorate
Officers and Members which they assume, as he speaks, page 654. Yea, a Power
equivalent to that of the Magistrates, because it is a Power adequate for the
time to this end of governing the Church, page 545. And therefore, we say, if
this confederating, or up-making of this Government, be a thing jure called
for, and necessary to be done, for this end; it is the thing which we assert
also; and, in respect of the particular circumstances, that is, what places or
persons are to associate together, is to be regulated by Christian prudence;
but if it meaned of a voluntary association and confederacy, such as trades
and crafts use in their Societies, as that alone which is the ground of this
Power, This we altogether deny: Because, 1. If that confederating be called
for, by the Law of Nature, Then it is not voluntary and free. And this
Authority, is not grounded merely upon voluntary confederating: because as it
is not arbitrary to a converted Christian to be Baptized or not; so, being
Baptized, it is not arbitrary to him whether to join with the Church or not.
And being joined, submitting to its Government, is a necessary duty to him. And
it becomes not Authority to him: because he submits to it; but he is to submit
to it, because it is Authority: and therefore supposing that these false
Apostles, or Iezebel, or the Nicolaitans, had never consented to subject
themselves to the Discipline of these Churches (as, by their taking such names
of Apostles and Prophets to themselves, it is like they did never) yet
notwithstanding had these Churches Authority over them, and it was their duty
to submit unto them. 2. It Is granted that the Authority that the Church has in
such a case, is equivalent to what the Magistrate has and might exercise: and
if it be not equivalent to this, then the Church of Christ under such
Magistrates would not be so perfect as to their Church State and wel-being, as
otherwise: which cannot be said without wronging the wisdom of God, as if he
had left His Church destitute of inward Power when she had least outward
Protection; but if it be such a Power, it cannot be arbitrary and merely
grounded upon the confederacy; but must be authoritative upon an other account,
and may authoritatively enjoin one to confederate: And so confederating, is not
the ground that constituteth the power; but a mean, making way for the exercise
thereof. 3. If it were asked, What evidence or proof could be given of such
voluntary confederating in the Churches for that time? It would be hard to
show, that universally in all the Churches, there was such formal compacting
actually agreed upon; and yet, that there was Government and Authority in them
all, is evident. 4. Suppose confederacies to have been; yet could they never
have constituted an Authority and Government distinct, and independent from the
civil supreme Power, especially while the supreme Power opposed the same; as
supposing (to keep the similitudes proponed) that many Chirurgians and
Tradsemen of any kind, did live under a Magistrate and Laws, which would admit
no such, by their Authority to live and confederate under them, will any say
that in that case, by voluntary confederating, they could assume an Authority
to themselves; and censure any Person (especially against their will) without
wronging and encroaching upon that Authority, under which they live? Yet it
cannot be denied to a Church, and that without any prejudice to the Magistrate:
because it in nothing lessens his Authority or withdraws any thing from his
cognition, which formerly used to belong unto him: but as the arising of a new
Church within a Nation, has with it new cases, actions, and considerations of
persons, and deeds; so it is reason that it should have with it a new Authority
to govern the same. 5. If the Church had another kind of interest, in reference
to spiritual offenses, than in reference to civil debates, then this
confederacy cannot be the ground of such an Authority: this will not be denied
according to the former principles, which do parallel both these in the
primitive Church, and make this the proof of the former; But it is clear, that
the Church Authority did far otherwise reach Church Members in spiritual
offenses, than in civil things: which may thus be made out, 1. They might
Excommunicate and un-Church for spiritual offenses and for disobedience in
these, if a brother did not hear the Church, and ofttimes they did so; But it
cannot be said, that if a brother had been disobedient to an arbitrary decree
in civil things, that upon that account, they would have proceeded against him
to Excommunication, and constrained him to have submitted: sure we are, it was
never put in practice, at least till Antichrist arose. 2. In that Chapter, 1
Cor. 6.7, and 8. the Apostle reasons for submission to this; and exhorts
Christians, so wronged, to suffer the wrong rather than to pursue it before
Infidels: which does suppose, that the Church was not furnished with Authority
to redress civil wrongs, as she was to redress scandals. And therefore,
Matthew. 18. our Lord gives order to proceed, in case of nonsatisfaction, to the
highest degree. And on the by, we may say, it is an odd thing to expound that
place of Matthew, by this place of Paul. As if the Lord did only there warrant
a man to pursue injuries before heathen Judges, when he would not submit to the
advice of Church^members, seeing expressly Paul enjoyneth them rather to suffer
wrong, than to make the Gospel contemptible before Infidels by the contentions
of Christians; which yet that exposition of Matthew. 18. will approve of: which
shows, that it must be understood to speak of Church-offences: in respect of
which, suffering and bearing with them, is condemnable, as we see in these
Epistles. 3. If what the Church did in civil things be common to any person or
persons in any rank or condition whatsoever, and to Christians in any time and
case, that is, that they may and should submit their differences to some; and
these to whom they are submitted, may decide: And upon the other side, if what
the Church exerced in reference to Ecclesiastic offenses and censures, be not
common, but so that no submission to others but such as are in power could
warrant one to draw forth such censures as are here mentioned, (yea according
to the principles which we oppose, it were not lawful for Christians to do so
now in civil things; for, they say it is not lawful to do now in Church-things,
as these did at that time) Then the Churches Authority was not equal in civil
things, as in spiritual things: And so consequently, no confederacy can
warrantably ground this Church Authority; But the former, we conceive, is
clear: Therefore, etc. 4. It may be clear by this, that the Church did never
exact civil mulcts or inflict bodily punishments: which shows abundantly,
that she did not exerce Authority in civil things equally as in spiritual: and
yet had her Authority been only grounded on the voluntary confederacy, she
might have inflicted the one, as well as the other. 5. Suppose a Churchmember
had wronged an Heathen by his miscarriage; No question, Church Discipline would
have reached him: which is not the intent of that, 1 Cor. 6. Therefore that
cannot be the ground of their Power alone. 6. That direction, Matthew. 18. Tell
the Church, was given, before this was written: seeing then, this is the
foundation of civil association, as is pretended, That of Matthew. 18. must be of
another kind. 7. This opinion will infer the setting up of a civil Power in
civil things, where the Magistrate is not Christian; yet, that was never
asserted by any. 8. The Adversaries themselves grant, that in such cases, the
Church may do much more in Church Matters, than in civil: because that the
Magistrate does allow his power to rectify civil things; and yet, this does
make both equally lawful. 9 Suppose the Magistrate had repealed a sentence,
past in civil things; no question, it had bound them, though it had been
unjust; Yet supposing he had repealed one of their Church censures, and
declared excommunication void, It had not done so, nor had been acknowledged:
yea, had he inhibited them to decide a particular in civil things, they would
not have proceeded; but when he did inhibit censures, notwithstanding, they did
proceed, and actually did suffer Martyrdom upon that account: which, in a civil
action, I suppose they would not have done. 10. That, 1 Cor. 6. admitted any to
be Judge that men submitted unto, or had wisdom; But Church-things were
governed only by these who by office were Rulers. All which do show the vanity
of that assertion, that they equally meddled with both kinds; and yet, this one
thing, is the ground of all that is said to evert this Authority. Add that, 1
Cor. 6. the parties offending are reproved for going to him; here, the
Church Officers, for not censuring these that offended: which supposes a power
to be in them. And it cannot be thought, that the Angels had been so
censurable, had they not decided civil businesses, as for this.

Beside (page 548.) He denies that there was a necessity of obedience in civil
things: which yet clearly, is here asserted in these Church censures. Whereas
it is said, as a further evidence, that the Churches Authority during this time
was only built upon this voluntary confederacy, that after supreme Magistrates
became Christian, they did intermeddle with all Church power without any
contradiction (page 544.) It is either a mere mistake or an untruth: a mistake
in this, that it accounts their meddling in a civil way with many things,
which the Church still meddled-with as formerly, and adding of their civil
sanction thereto, for strengthening, not for diminishing the Churches power; to
be an assuming of Church Power and Authority, which are things most distinct;
even as a Christian Magistrate, does command the Son of a Christian Parent to
do the same things, which his Parent does command him in reference to the
Christian Religion, which a heathen Magistrate did not; yet is the Parent's
power and authority over his Son no less than when the Magistrate was heathen,
because the Magistrates command is not privative; but cumulative to the Parents
Authority: even so is it here. And there can be no greater reason to say that
Church Power and Authority over Christians, did cease in spiritual things
after Constantine became a Christian, than to say that the Power and Authority
of a Christian Parent and a Christian Master did expire at that time. And seeing
it is granted, that Church power, and Parentall power, are both immediately
from God, without any mediate derivation by the Magistrate, It is reason that
they should be of equal duration and continuance also. And in matter of fact it
is clear, that the Church continued to exercise the same power, which formerly
she did; and also that the Magistrate concurred in his station for the
strengthening thereof: and there is not the least shadow for any delegation
after that, more than formerly; But, that now by the approbation of civil
Authority, the Church had access to do that, for which before that time she
was persecuted, even as there was full liberty given to Preach the Gospel,
which formerly was inhibited: yet, none will say, that that power of the key of
Doctrine, was derived from the Magistrate. For, what is alleged of the
Emperors calling of Councels, That will prove him to have put them to the
exercise of their power; but not that it was derived from him, more than when
before that time Provincial Councels were called by some eminent Bishops, it
will prove that their Call did authorize them, But rather both these Calls do
suppose Authority to be before in these that are called. And therefore there is
no question, that if Constantine had called others than Church Officers, to
judge and censure in reference to these differences Ecclesiastically, he could
not have derived Authority to them, so as to have made them equally Rulers, and
with the same Authority as if they had been Church Members and Officers: which
yet might have been done, if their Authority had resided in him alone. Beside,
he commanded the preaching of the Gospel also, as is said.

Whence we may see that Christian Magistrates, did not meddle with that Power
and Authority, which formerly resided in the Church: neither ever was it heard
of, that a Magistrate did excommunicate, authorize or ordain a Minister, and
such like, wherein Churchpower is exercised. And though it be said that he does
these things mediately, by putting the Church to it, and by calling
Church Officers to consult in Ecclesiastic things, which he does confirm by
his Authority, even as he does govern other Societies, as Physicians, Lawyers,
etc. by Authorizing some of their own number to manage what concerns such
Callings and Functions (in which respect, say some, the Function is different
from the Magistrate,) Yet he is not the Lawyer, nor the Physician, more than he
is the Minister; but the Authority is on him alone. To this we say, 1. That the
parallel, is most unequal: because although a Magistrate be not by his station a
Physician, or Lawyer; yet supposing him to have skill, he might lawfully do any
act incumbent to these Stations: which does indeed show, that the same
Authority, whereby they act, does reside in him: but suppose he had the Theorie
of Ecclesiastic things, and skill in them; yet he might not step^ to himself,
to act the acts of a Ministerial Function; nor as a Magistrate, to sentence
with Church sentences, Administer Sacraments, as he might do in the sentences
of inferior Magistrates and Courts: which does show, that that Authority does
not reside in him. 2. We grant that he may be said to govern mediately, as he
may be said to Teach and Preach mediately (for, he ought to provide for that)
But that will not infer that the Authority of Preaching is derived from him:
yet, no way does the weight of this controversy so much ly on matters of fact,
what Churches or Magistrates did since the Apostles days, as by what right and
warrant they did what they did.

This last assertion therefore although made out, could prove nothing without
the former; nor will the instancing of exorbitancies in Church Governors,
infer any nullity of that Power, more than the enumerating of miscarriages of
men in civil place, will enervate that ordinance of God: yea, we are sure much
ill has come by Magistrates intrusion in this Church Power, and many have
miscarried in it; much less will heaps of slanders against most faithful men
do it, whom God eminently countenanced, and who singularly by suffering were
honored to testify for Him, such as Mr. Welsh, Mr. Melvil, Mr. Davidson and
others, who, we are persuaded, in the great Day, will be as bold in reference
to their being approven in their stations, as any of their opposers or
traducers on this account. This way of writing, will not be found to proceed
from zeal for the Lord, which has so little respect to such who eminently
adhered to him; and let these traducers of His Ordinances and Servants, prepare
for giving account for both to Him, to which we leave them.

For the absurdities wherewith he does load this truth, they being for
substance the same which often have been fully wiped away, we shall only say
these two, 1. That either they are no absurdities; Or, 2. Not such as the
grounds acknowledged by him will infer. For, 1. It is no absurdity simply, that
a man in diverse considerations should be subject to diverse coordinate
powers, as a son is to the Magistrate as a Member of the Commonwealth, to his
parent as a child and member of the family: and in some things (as formerly
hinted at) he is so obliged to be subject to the parent, that no command of a
Superior can loose him from it; and in other things, so subordinated to the
Magistrate, that therein the parents authority has no place. And the same may
be seen in wives, who, in some things, are subject to their husbands commands,
and no Authority can warrant them to do otherwise. 2. We say, that this same
absurdity might have been instanced in these Churches, that the Lord writes to,
su^pose (as he does in the other case) that the Magistrate had appointed some,
whom the Church had called to her Synods (as for example, to that mentioned,
Acts 15.) to some other civil employment, as they were subjects; would not the
same absurdity of the interfereing of the two Authorities have followed? he
must either then say that such a case was not conceivable in these times, or he
must say the absurdity must be evited, or it will be fastened upon the way
approven by the holy Ghost, as the Churches governing of her self distinctly is
granted to be, at least during such a case: and when he loses and vindicates
his own concession, it will be easy to answer his objection. 3. It cannot be
denied but that a Minister may independently command a Magistrate in the Name
of Christ according to the Word, and that not only by reason of the matter, as
an other private subject may do; but by virtue of his Office and Authority: in
which respect he is not only a reporter, to tell what is Truth, but a Messenger
and Herald authorized to charge all hearers to the obedience thereof, as John
the Baptist did Herod, who in some respect might be subject to Herod, as in
other respects Herod was to him: and if this be no absurdity in reference to
particular Governors, why should it be thought absurd in reference to the
Powers by which these govern? Supreme Church Power then, and Supreme
Civil-power in distinct persons, cannot be absurd. And we suppose there can be
no Authoritative Officer, that upon any civil account can so independently
command the Civil Magistrate: Church Power therefore is not to be regulated in
every thing; as the Civil is. It Is strange to say that it is lawful to a
Magistrate to receive Ministerial injunctions, or not as he pleases, or at
least no more than a sick person is subject to the Physician. can it be said
that a sent Minister can have no more Authority in prescribing duty in the name
of Christ, than a Physician in giving directions for health? Or, will it be
thought equally sinful or lawful, to disobey the directions of the one as of
the other, even laying aside the matter? or, shall every one, skillful in
Divinity, be counted of equal Authority with a Minister, as the counsel of one
that is skillful in Medicine, is to be counted of the same weight, as if he
were a graduat Physician, if his reasons be as weighty? or, is there any
exception of some, more than others from Ministerial power, because of any
outward place or grandou^? These things can hardly be conceived without
wronging the Ordinances of Christ. 4. It Is thought absurd to say that a
Magistrate is not blindly to act according to Church conclusions and
determinations but deliberately to try his own act, and yet not to be the
proper Judge thereof. It cannot be denied, that a Minister is to try and judge
of what commands the Magistrate shall lay on him in reference to his duty: if
therefore the Magistrate's subsequent judgment, did demonstrate him to be
supreme in Ecclesiastic things, the same will prove the Magistrate's judgment
in the case foresaid to be subordinate to the Ministers: that therefore is no
absurdity. 5. An Ambassador from one King to another, or to some inferior
Magistrate, is in his personal carriage subject to the Authority within whose
bounds he is; but as an Ambassador in the following of his Commission and
instructions, and as such, he is only countable to these that sent him: and
never was it heard that one subjected his Ambassador to the Authority of those
to whom he was sent, even amongst men, But that was reserved at least, for some
others appointed for that end by him: neither does a Magistrate account an
Ambassadors independency on him to be inconsistent with his Authority. Now
Ministers being Ambassadors sent by Christ to Magistrates as to others, we
must either say these to whom they are sent, must judge when they faithfully
exerce their Commission or not, in their Masters name: which is absurd amongst
men, and could not but look partial like; or we must say, they are not
countable or censurable on earth; or, that Christ has entrusted His
Ambassadors and Church officers with this power of censuring men, who shall
walk unworthy of their Trust.

If it be said that an Ambassador is no Magistrate, and has but an instructed
power?

Answ. Yet is it a power, and in that respect such as Church Officers have: and
suppose there were a plurality of Ambassadors for a King or State within the
Dominions of another, instructed to act jointly for his affairs, and to censure
any of their own number, or retinue, that should walk unworthy of their place;
would any Magistrate think that these wronged his power; if they shat some from
their fellowship without his warrant? or could he claim to recognosce their
deed; although in a criminal case, he only might have access to punish even
their members in that place?

For that qualification of his concession, which is to allow this confederate
Authority only to the Church that lived under such a Magistrate, as does not
undertake the care thereof; we suppose it will not be easy to free it of
absurdities, if this distinct Government be not acknowledged to be perpetual.

For, 1. Do not the same Scriptures (that place all Authority in the Christian
Magistrate; and require absolute obedience from his Subjects to him) in the
same manner belong to any Magistrate, as a Magistrate, and his Subjects under
him, and particularly that place, Romans 13. And suppose the Magistrate should
not assume that power, and put it in exercise; yet if Ecclesiastic power be in
that same gift committed to the Magistrate with the civil power, no private
persons could upon any pretext meddle therewith.. For suppose the Magistrate
should abstain to punish some kind of Murders, Witchcrafts, etc. no private
persons could confederate themselves to assume a power of punishing these:
because civil power to punish these things, is not committed to them; but to
the Magistrate. If then the Church might censure scandals, without incroaching
upon these Scriptures at that time, Why may it not do so even when the
Magistrate is Christian? This Church power then cannot be understood to be
comprehended under the Magistrates Commission, seeing Paul is exercising it,
even while he is extending to the utmost the Magistrates Commission in all
things, and quarelling Christians for encroaching upon any thing due to him;
and no question he knew best the extent of these directions.

2. There is no Magistrate, who will professedly disclaim the charge and
Government of any people; although in practice many of them prove negligent of
the Church of Christ. Now it may be asked, if this necessity of confederating
for exercising of Church Authority doth^ly upon the Church only when the
Magistrate is professedly Heathen, or if also when Erroneous or Atheistical
and Profane, or in practice negligent and careless (like Gallio) in what
concerns the Church? It cannot be astricted to the first: because the Church
is no more obliged to an Erroneous Magistrate, then to a profane and careless
Magistrate (though he be not professedly an Heretic or Erroneous) if that
Authority be not improven for them: and so according to these principles, the
Church is to confederate and exercise Authority within her self, even then:
which will come to this, that the Church is called to assume this Authority,
except in such cases as the Magistrate does take it on him and exercise it for
her good, (for if he exercise it to her hurt, it is better to want it) and so
it will turn near to this, that the Church is to assume this power, save where
the Magistrate is Godly, and according to conscience does exercise his power
for her good. And then it may be asked, (supposing that the Magistrate profess
willingness to govern the Church,) how shall it be judged whether such and
such a Magistrate be to be admitted to Govern? or, whether they be to assume
Government to themselve? It will come to this, that it must rest in the
judgment of discretion of these private Christians, whether they will admit
the Magistrate to Govern, or not? And according to the principles of that
Author, if they judge him according to their light, to be one that takes no
care of the Church, they should assume that power to themselves: for elsewhere
he affirms the judgment of discretion to be the great decider; and that a
man had better do according to the light of an erring Conscience, than against
it.

Yea, 3. According to his grounds, they may not only assume power in
Ecclesiastic things; but equally in civil things also. And will he say, that
the Church of France may take power in civil things, as they do in
Ecclesiastic, and not wrong the Magistrate? Or, can it be said that this is a
privilege to the Magistrate, which makes him so to depend both in things
Ecclesiastic and Civil upon a Peoples estimation of him?

4. By these grounds, either a Church should never assume power under any
Magistrate however careless and profane, and so as is granted, wrong her self,
contrary to the law of nature; or by assuming power, they declare that they
account the Magistrate a Heathen, Erroneous or Atheistical, etc. and is not
that a greater irritation, and probable occasion of division betwixt the
Magistrate and Church, than to continue this power distinct under all
Magistrates equally? And truly it looks not like Gods Ordinance, that puts
His Church oftentimes in this strait, that it must either suffer prejudice, or
disclame and provoke the Magistrate so as to account him an Atheist unworthy of
Government; but to have forfeited so much of his Power, etc. And suppose a
profane ^on succeed in the Magistracy to a gracious father, or profane men be
chosen to succeed others who bare rule before them even in Church Affairs,
(which case is often incident) what strait would it be to the Church either to
continue to be governed by the Magistrate as formerly? or, with so much
disadvantage upon personal considerations, to assume a power which formerly
they did not?

5. Either the Church assumeth that power contrary to the Magistrate's command;
and so there is clear ground of a Persecution and War; or, it is with his good
will, or, at least, permission; and that must presuppose this, that he does
account himself Heathen, Erroneous or profane, which cannot easily be expected,
especially from a man not so denied and mortified, as such a Magistrate is
supposed to be: for, delegated it cannot be, seeing in that case this assuming
of Authority is not called for.

6. It may be asked, what degree of erroneousnesse, profanity, or carelessness
in a Magistrate, may warrant a Church to assume this power: seeing even amongst
heathens there are degrees? and if so, then how shall that be judged? Suppose a
Christian Magistrate should neglect Church affairs, otherwise than as they fall
within the compass of civil Government: in which respect Heathens did own
them? or suppose he should own some sentences, punish some scandals, which, it
seems Aurelian did in expelling Samosaten^s, and Severus, in commanding to
give again to the Church a place where they used to meet, that some Rogues had
violently put them from, saying, that it was fitter that God should be
worshipped there, than that it should be employed for such an use. Now, what is
called for in such a case, might be a debate; whether might not such Heathens
be accounted to take care of the Church, and so it became not these Primitive
Christians to have retained power during their reigns? or, what may be thought
of Christian Magistrates that do no more, and, it may be, less than these?
whether are these to be retained or not?

7. It may be asked in such cases, whether is explicit confederating for that
end necessary or not? and suppose some would not submit willingly, How could
they be compelled? Or, if so, were they liable to no censure, because of their
obstinacy? It were good that these things were cleared, if it be supposed that
this be a practicable thing* and often to be practiced.

It is further said, That the Churches greatest hazard, is from the great power
of Churchmen, and not of the civil Magistrate, as experience shows:
therefore it is dangerous to give them power. Answ. So the greatest danger of
Error, is from Church Teachers: shall they therefore have no Teachers? So the
greatest hazard of tyranny to a State in civil things, is from a civil
Government: is it not therefore to be allowed? Yea, this is the reason of it,
that corrupt Church Officers wrong the Church most, and that both in Government
and Doctrine: because in both they come nearest Her heart: and therefore when
they miscarry, it cannot be but worse than when an Authority more extrinsick
does miscarry; and by their Power, they had ever greatest access to do her
good or evil: and this rather confirms what was said, That properly the
Power does belong to her, and had need to be well managed, because corruption
optimi est pessima. But was it ever heard of, that Church Authority, well
managed, did hurt to the Church or State either, under what ever Magistrate?
It follows only that the abuse of Church Power is ill, But no more.

2. We come now in the second place to consider wherein this Authority is
exercised: which we shall speak to only in so far as these Epistles give
ground, and we will find it to be in these four.

1. There is a Trial, thou have tried them that call themselves Apostles, etc.
which trial infers Authority to cite and warn parties, to call and examine
witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. to take Oaths; which is requisite to trial and
witnessing, as that alone which puts an end to strife amongst men, Heb. 6.
Therefore, Mat. 18. the Lord gives the same rule concerning procedor by
witnessing in the Church, which Moses gave in reference to all Courts, That out
of the mouth of two or three witnesses, etc. shall every matter be established.
This shows also, that they may receive the complaints of offended Brethren,
(as is in Mat. 18.) keep meetings for that end, lead inquiry upon the crying
fame of offenc^^ (as is like they did in this case of Ephesus) and, in a word,
do every thing that is needful for completing trial: for where the end is
approven, the means that are necessary to the attaining thereof, must be
approven also.

2. There is a Power here to judge and determine, thou have found them liars:
which does respect these two, 1. The nature of offenses: they must judge what
is truth and what error; otherwise they can not tell who is a false Apostle
and who a liar: and they must judge what is scandalous in practice, and so what
is lawful or not; otherwise they can make no progress in trial or censure:
for, they must find such a thing to be an error or scandal, and so not to be
suffered in the Church. 2. It has reference to persons: there is a Power in
judging such and such persons to be guilty, whereby they pronounce not only
such Doctrine to be erroneous, but such a Minister or person to be guilty
thereof, as is clear from the Text, and so must judge what is proven or not,
and every thing tending to that, as citing witnesses and parties, hearing
exceptions and answers, etc.

3. There is a Power of censuring a person found guilty. These words, thou
can not bear them, etc. thou have them, and suffer them, do import that,
as is cleared: this having of them, implying a fault, which was, that by their
Authority such were not cut off from the Church: which is the highest degree of
ordinary censures; for if it be a privilege and benefit to be admitted to the
visible Church, and the Ordinances of Jesus Christ therein, it cannot but be a
high degree of censure to be cut off from both: and yet this is implied here to
be in the Power of these Churches, and they cannot be conceived to have cutted
off such from their society so as not to have had them or suffered them to
remain therein, but by this which we call Excommunication. From which
necessarily this follows, that not only the Church has a Power of censuring;
but particularly of censuring thus, by cutting off one from Church Membership,
and from the privileges of the external Ordinances thereof: this is called by
our Lord Jesus, Matthew. 18, an accounting of one a heathen and a publicane, 1 Corinthians. 5.13. a putting away of the wicked person from among them; a cutting
off of troublers, Gal. 5.12. and (Titus 3.10.) a rejecting of them. There is
nothing almost more frequently and clearly held forth in Scripture than this,
both in Doctrine and practice. The Lord has furnished His Church with this
Power to censure, that He may preserve a Majesty in His Ordinances, which
appear to the most part but foolishness and weakness; and that He may have
weapons of His own kind, to batter down the proud imaginations of
Church Members, and revenge all disobedience, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Corinthians. 10.6. for which cause, he calls it a rod, 1 Corinthians. 4.21. and a
punishment, 2 Corinthians. 2.6.

4. There is here a Power of ordering and making Laws of what concerns the
affairs of the Church, as may be gathered, 1. From this, that they try
Officers: whereby it is apparent, that the Church had her Laws in reference to
the admission of Ministers, before they could be accounted such; and that these
who were found by their trial, to be liars, should not be accounted Apostles,
or Church Officers: otherwise Authority, in the former respects, would be
maimed and defective. 2. It may be gathered from this, that they might conclude
what was offensive, and what not, who was to be tried, and upon what grounds,
when the trial was to proceed; who and what was to be suffered in the Church,
and what not; who might Preach, and what might be Preached; and in every thing
that concerns Doctrine, Worship, and Order, according to the rule of the
Word, and the great end of the Ordinances, to wit, the edification of the
People: beside which, there is no Church Authority any where, it being a Power
indeed, but a Power given for edification, and not to destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8.
and 13.10. This Power being exercised, makes decrees: therefore such acts are
called, ( Act. 16.4.) The decrees that were ordained of the Apostles and
Elders; and by Paul, a setting of things in order, 1 Cor. 11.34. And (1 Cor.
16.) such were contributions for the poor, orderlinesse for preventing of
confusions in Preaching and Hearing; calling of the people to Fasts, as Act.
12.5. and 13.3. and Chap. 14.23, etc. trying, proving, admitting, or censuring
of Officers, and such like, as in the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus,
are clear.

The third thing we are to enquire for in these words, is, who are the proper
and first subject of this Authority and Power? And we Answer, 1. negatively.

1. The civil Magistrate, is not the subject of this Power: for they to whom
Christ writteth these Epistles, are the subject of this Power; But the civil
Magistrate is not the party to whom Christ writes these Epistles, as is clear,
and it can be alleged by none: Therefore it is clear, that the civil
Magistrate is not the subject of this Church Power. Yet, no question, our Lord
Jesus knew best to whom it belonged: neither is it like, when he accounts them
to have Authority, that he does account them to have it from voluntary
confederating for the time: for, he accounts their neglect of the practice of
it, to be a sin, against the breach of their duty; even as He quarrelleth with
the Angel of Sardis for being defective in the Doctrinall part of his
Ministry; and He commends the Angel of Ephesus for his labor in Doctrine,
zeal, and Discipline, as duties equally belonging to the Ministry upon one and
the same account. And it must either be said that a Magistrate, in his Election
to be a Magistrate over a Church, is necessarily to be qualified in reference
to these affairs; or, that the Government thereof, does not belong unto him;
Or, that one may be called of God warrantably to a Government over a Society,
and that in respect of things and persons of no les^e concernment than the
civil State; and yet it not be necessary that he should be qualified in
reference thereunto: which is absurd.

2. We say, that it is not the body and community of the Church and People to
whom this Power is committed: which appears thus, 1. By the same Argument,
these are the subject of this Power to whom Christ principally directs His
Epistles, whom He commends for the exercising of this Power, and reproves
for the ommitting thereof; But these are Church Officers, contradistinguished
from the rest of the Church, as appears not only by the common Inscription,
unto the Angel of the Church, etc. whereby they are distinctly considered; but
also Chap. 2. Verse. 5. where the Church is distinguished from the Angel in the
threatening, I will remove thy Candlestick, etc. which says, that what He had
spoken in the former commendation of that trial, did peculiarly belong to the
Angel, whom He considers as distinct from the Church, spoken of under the
term of Candlestick. Also in the Epistle to Thyatira, the Officers are
especially reproved, as appears from verse. 24. But unto you I say, etc. that
is, the Church Officers to whom He had been formerly speaking; and to the rest
in Thyatira, that is, the members, as distinct from them. It is hinted also, in
the Epistle to Pergamos, as the exposition thereof clears; and no where in
any of these Epistles is that distinction so clear, as in these, where He
speaks of the exercise of this Power: thereby the more clearly to show where
it resideth. And though it be said in the close, Let him that has ears, hear
what the spirit says unto the Churches: yet, that is not to extend every thing
equally to all the members: for, then the M^nistery of the Doctrine, would be
common to all also. It is therefore to be understood with respect to their
places and stations, as was said in our entry to speak upon the second Chapter.
2. The Church here, is divid^d in Angels and Candlesticks, that is, O^^icers
and Members Now, we must either give the Power to the whole, that are
comprehended under the titles of Angels, that is, Officers; and Candlesticks,
that is, Churches and Members; or, we must give it to the Officers alone, as
distinct from the Churches: for there is no warrant to give it to the Angels,
and to some of the Churchmembers, and not to all: for, that were again to
sub-divide the Church, as if all its members were not (as to government) of one
rank, contrary to the way kept here. And indeed we know no other reason more
palpable, why the Officers and Members of the Church, are so distinctly set
forth; but that their distinctnesse in this respect might be held forth: But
the first cannot be said, that all come in equally in Government, who are
members: because that would take in Women and Children: Therefore it must
belong to the Officers, as distinct from the other three; seeing much of this
Church Power, is conversant about things of that nature, as trying of false
Apostles, corrupt Doctrine, etc. which do require both fitness of
qualificaton, and continuance in respect of time, and painfulnesse, beyond that
which always Church Members use, or, are called to have in respect of the one,
or can bestow in respect of the other. And seeing these are certain Truths, that
these who are ordinarily called of God to the exercise of any Authority, are to
be fitted for it, and patiently to follow the trial (for here these who are to
censure, are also to try,) It will follow therefore that this power in such
things cannot be thought to be committed unto the body of the People:
especially, if we consider these two. 1. That in the choice, even of a Deacon,
there is such exactness required in the trial of his qualifications, and
authority to his admission to that Office: yet the power of Governing, does not
belong to this Officer, as such; but he is inferior to that. Now if it be
supposed that the people generally have interest in Government and Ruling: Then
it will follow, 1. That there are more qualifications required in a Deacon,
which as such, is but a service, than there is required in these that Govern in
the highest things. And, 2. That to be a member of the visible Church, has
more Authority in it, than to be a Deacon, at least than a Deacon can have as
such: because the one Governs by Authority in the highest things, and the
other as such but serves: And by the Institution and rules for the Election of
Deacons, it would seem that there is by that Office an accession of somewhat to
them, like Authority, more than they had before, or other members have: and
seeing this accession has no Authority with it, It will seem strange to say,
that a Churchmember, that is overseen by an ordinary Deacon, has Authority in
him, which the Deacon, as such, has not.

In the second place we may add this consideration, That it is simply
impossible for all Church Members (even the generality of them) to understand
many questions that may be agitated; yea, we may say further, they are not
called to understand them; and again, others cannot possibly give their
attendance for the trial of intricat things, which may draw a great length.
For it is asserted by learned Thomas Hooker of New England, part. 3. chap. 3.
page 36. and 37. That the preparation, is to be made by the Elders, because the
body of the People, if numerous, they will be unable with any comely
convenience to consider and weigh all the circumstances with all the emergent
difficulties, which will certainly and necessarily occur in such agitations,
nor can in reason bestow their time and pains upon them, as the intricatie and
perplexity of the work will sometime require. Thus far he, which does
certainly render it at least exceeding suspicious, that they should be instated
with Authority to judge and determine, who cannot possibly wait on the trial;
especially, considering that in all Judges and Governments, mentioned in the
Scripture; and particularly in these Epistles, these two are joined together,
to wit, trial and censure.

3. We say, that it is not one person or Church Officer above other
Church Officers, to whom this Power and Authority is committed. Because, 1. It
is to the Officers who are contradistinguished from the People, and are not
comprehended under the title Candlestick or Church; But that must be understood
of all Ministers, and not of one only. 2. By this one Angel collectively taken,
many Rulers governing one Body in an associated manner, are to be understood as
was cleared, chap. 1. verse. 20.

And therefore, 4. The associated number of ruling Church Officers, is the
proper subject of this Church Power: because it is to them that Christ
directs these Epistles under this name Angel, as was shown, Chap. 1. verse.
20. It Is these He commends and reproves; it is those to whom the oversight of
the People belongs in reference to these snares, Acts 20.28. etc. It Is these
to whom the power of trial and admission of Churchofficers pertains, 1 Timothy,
4.14. which is the work here commended in Ephesus. And if this be true, that by
Angel here is to be understood a plurality of united Church-rulers, as was
said, Then this assertion laid down will also follow: for, no other rests to
lay claim to this Authority.

To close then, in the fourth place, we may shortly lay down these conclusions
further from these Epistles,

1. That this Discipline and Authority is to be exercised on all sorts of
persons, members of the Church, whether they be pretended Teachers, as Apostles
and Prophetesses, whether M^n or Women; in a word, all who are capable to give
offense and to be edified by Church censures, which young Children, mad men,
and such like, are not in the reach of.

2. It concerns all sorts of cases, whether of Error or practice; and is to
be exercised in reference to the first, as well as to the last, as is clear
from these Epistles.

3. These highest censures, are to proceed against Errors and Scandals of a
high nature, as these mentioned in the Text are; or such as are agreged with
hightening circumstances, as disobedience and contempt in not hearing the
Church, etc. Mat. 18. and which after trial, are clearly made out: that
thereby the sentence in its equity, may be convincing for the gaining of its
end, both on the offending party and others.

4. It follows here, that when offenses are so circumstantiated in
Church Members, censures are to proceed against them, and they are not to be
suffered to enjoy Church Priviledges, as if they were not under these offenses,
except they repent of them; yea, that un-Churching and Excommunication in such
cases, is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

5. Church Officers may be often defective in reference to Discipline as well
as to Doctrine, which is also a guiltiness before the Lord, as appears here.

6. Although a Church be defective in the purging out of corrupt members; yet
that does not pollute the ordinances to others, or necessitate them to separate
from them. These Churches continue to be Churches, and the Ordinances to be
Ordinances of Christ, although such were continued in communion with them; and
notwithstanding thereof, these who were free of those corruptions, are approven
and commended by Jesus Christ. And if it were not so, that a persons
endeavoring in his station to amend such a fault, and to have such scandals
censured, did not exempt him from guiltiness, so as to continue in
Churchcommunion, although the plurality of Officers should be short of their
duty: in that respect then there might be still separation after separation in
infinitum: which absurdity the learned H^oker, and Norton of New England, do
press for the obtaining of submission to their Church censures and keeping of
communion with their Churches; even upon supposition, that the plurality of a
Congregation, should refuse to shut out some deserving the same. Otherwise (say
they) when these did separate, upon such a new emergent occasion, there behoved
to be a new separation, and so forth; because no Church or men can be expected
to be so straight, as either not to keep in some injustly, or not to suspect
that some such are kept in: which also would be a snare to their consciences
who judged so, and be a cause of separation, although it were not so indeed.
And were this applied to the defects of Presbyteriall Churches, there would be
no pressing necessity of separating from them, or from communion, in any
ordinance, with them.

7. We may see from these Epistles, that although exact holiness be, de jure,
required of all Church Members; yet, de facto, often, They are not all exactly
such, and that therefore the holiness which is spoken of, as essential to
visible-Churches, or to Membership in them, is not rigidly to be extended to a
reality therein. If this Church of Laodicea (wherein nothing is commended, but
much found-fault with) be considered, it will be found that this holiness will
not abide a rigid trial; yet it cannot be denied, but they have what is
essential to a visible Church, and Membership therein; even as her Ministers,
were Ministers, although not answerable to their stations, as was said: and if
what these worthy men, Mr. Cotton, Norton, and Hooker, do assent unto in their
writings, were accordingly adhered to in all practices, we conceive there
needed not be any great controversy concerning this point. The second of these
forcited Authors, part. 1. page 20. lays down the pinch of the difference in
these words (as he calls it.) Whether such as walk in a way of profannesse, or
remain pertinaciously obstinate in some wickedness, though otherways
professing and practicing the things of the Gospel, have any allowance from
Christ, or may be accounted fit matter according to the terms of the Gospel,
to constitute a Church? Which Authors, also do acknowledge, that casting out of
a Church, is but to proceed upon clear scandals of a gross nature,
convincingly made out, and no otherwise, part. 3. page 39. And if there be
defect in the executing thereof, separation upon that account, is disclaimed,
as is formerly hinted, if the Church in Doctrine and administration of
Ordinances be pure, that is, without error. The judicious Cobbet of new
England, has an excellent saying (as he has many to the Anabaptists) against
whom he writes ( p. 2. cap. 1. sect. 11.) Better (says he) they who have not
so peculiar a title thereto, be folded up in the Church, than that one of such
lambs be left out in the wild wilderness. And again, cap. 3. sect. 3. is full,
to show that there was no strictness observed in the admission of Professors
to Baptism; but rather an enquiry of their purpose for the time to come, in
bidding them bring forth fruits, and believe in Him that was to come, as from
John's example, Mat. 3. and Paul's, Act. 16. where there is no mention of trying
the faith of the households of Lydia and the Iaylor; who yet were instantly
baptized; as also were these Pharisees so checked by John, Matthew. 3. and much
more has he well to this purpose. I have but hinted at these things, to show
that although there be many questions of Church Discipline; yet they are not
all of one nature and hazard, with all adversaries. And the last does rather
concern the constituting of Churches, and admission of Members, supposed yet to
be without, than the governing of Churches, and inchurched-members: in
reference to which there is great difference.

8. We may see, that the sustaining of, and submitting unto this Church Power,
is a necessary and concerning duty: and if, what is said of Church Power and
Government be truth, then this submission must follow: otherwise there could be
no Government nor exercise of Power, if those who are called by their stations
to be governed, were not submissive thereto: and if it were the Church Officers
duty to try and censure, even by cutting off such and such scandalous persons,
Then it behoved to be their duty to submit, and the Churches to acknowledge
these sentences, as Christ's Word is, Matthew. 18. Let him be to thee as a
heathen, etc. And Heb. 13.17. it is thus expressed, obey them that rule over
you, and submit to them: which certainly, looks as well to the Authority of
Discipline, that requires submission, as to the obedience that ought to be
given to the Word in Doctrine: for this cause, Officers are designed by the
title Rulers: which is often given to civil Governors, and the fainting of
such soul-overseers, is marked as a thing most unprofitable to the people
themselves: and therefore is the more to be shunned.

Amongst other batteries against this Ordinance of Discipline, this is not the
least that is raised against it, that it has no compulsive force, if men
willingly do not yield, which indeed tends to place all Authority in strength
and force: for, by that same Argument, a strong son rebelling against his
father, or a people or army against their Magistrate or General, should be
exempted from their subjection to them; and the Parent, Magistrate or General,
be denuded of their Authority over them: because they have not force to compel
obedience. Authority lies in Gods appointing of such to rule, and such others
to obey; although some sinfully should invert that order, as such disputes
teach men to do. And the Question here comes, if in reason a Churchmember may
disclame Church Authority and censures simply, or de jure, though by Power or
violence they may do so de facto: yea, this does indeed prove Church Government
to be distinct from the civil: because it is not armed with worldly Power and
strength, as other Governments of the world are; and in that respect, is not of
this world, as the Lord Christ said of His Kingdom, Joh. 18. yet was He still a
King, and it cannot be but a high guilt to mar this, either by overturning of
it altogether, or by encroaching on it, and thereby to mar its freedom or
enervat its Power, or by refusing to submit unto, acknowledge, or authorize the
sentences thereof, as men's places call them to do.

We may therefore propose a word or two to all, but especially to Magistrates
in ref^ference to this. 1. Let Magistrates in the fear of God consider what
they do, lest they involve themselves in this guilt; it has ever been hard to
kick against the pricks: and although some would make encroachment on this
Government to be a sweet thing; (which men easily admit in their own persons
without any restraint,) yet the end thereof is bitterness. And it would be
considered, if such counsels tend to commend Religion and further it, or not?
which at the best are but to mould and restrain it, so as it may be subservient
to their own greatness and ends, as in Henry the 8. of England did appear. 2.
They would consider if conscience put them to it, or if the most zealous press
it, or if some other thing drive it on, and to what sort of persons that design
is most savourie? If it be not ordinarily the most profane, or otherways
erroneous? and shall Magistrates be subservient to such? 3. They would consider
the absurdities and consequents alleged, if they be hindrances or ills to
Religion and Godliness, or but to their own power and greatness, and that in
pretext only? is it because they will more zealously or profitably do it
themselves, or because they had rather it were not done at all, nor done by
them, and such like? If it be the strengthening of their own Power, more than
of Christ's that moves them: for it has often been a miserable mistake of the
Powers of the earth, to seek the strengthening of their Government by their
enervating of Christ's, which has proven to be the overturning of their own. If
Magistrates cannot in conscience clear themselves in these things, it cannot
but be found to be an encroachment on Christ's Ordinances, which are useful and
necessary in His Kingdom. 4. Consider the consequents, when things are marred
and lie undone, or when misguided by undiscreet hands, who love nothing more
than to make Ordinances despicable: for, if indeed a distinct Government be
inconsistent with the civil, then a distinct incorporation as a Church is, must
be inconsistent, even in its being, with a civil State and Commonwealth. And if
Church Government be needless, because all things may be done by civil Rulers
that are incumbent to it, a Ministry also will be needless, because civil men
that have knowledge may supply that: and seldom is any found that rejects the
one, but he is (at least) exceedingly lax in the other.

5. Suppose it be obtained, that this Government be born down, what does the
Magistrates gain thereby? It is but, either that such things, that
Church Discipline takes notice of, should altogether be slighted, that so there
may be confusion in the Church: which is but a poor advantage: or, it is that
the burden may be doubled on him who had it heavy enough before, and so he be
made more immediately liable for all the defects that shall be in those things.
And at the most, supposing that they should be diligent in the outward duties
for the restraining of the outward man; yet does never that come up to the use
of edifying, as it does by Christ's Ordinance of Discipline: for men, are but
punished as men, and not as Christians; and faults are but censured, as in
other States, and not as in Christ's Church.

6. Let them consider, that the establishing of this Power, as distinct from
theirs, does not exclude them upon the matter from having access to any thing
which may edify the Church: for they are admitted to oversee the spreading of
pure Doctrine and the restraining of false Doctrine, error and vice, and to
every other thing conducing to the end of edification in the way suitable to
their places: only it bounds them here, that pure Doctrine be Preached by
Christ's orderly called Ministers, and not by themselves or others, upon their
mere command, and so that order be preserved, and Discipline and censures be
exerced and made effectual in the Church in the same method. And this is not to
restrain them in Government and incapacitate them for edifying the Church in
their places, more than by refusing them power to Preach authoritatively, and
to administer the Sacraments as Christ's Ambassadors; or, more than a Father is
incapacitated to exerce his fatherly power on an unruly child, because a
Magistrate or Church-Judicatory does concur with him.

7. They are no way weakened in civil things: for, what ever the Magistrate
formerly possessed before the constituting of the Church, or what ever
Magistrates in other States, where no Churches are, do possess, that is still
allowed to him, where this distinct Government is erected: therefore it cannot
be said, that it does encroach on him: for, what cases do flow from a State, as
a State, are still left untouched by this Authority: only what cases flow from
it as a Church, or from the Members thereof, considered as Christians, these
only are meddled with by it, to wit, trial of Gifts, admission of Ministers,
censuring of Church Officers and Members, and that with Church censures, others
than have been, or are used in any mere State or Commonwealth, and such like,
etc. And seeing none of these belonged to the Magistrate formerly, and do but
flow from this consideration of their being a Church: It follows that the
keeping of Power distinct in these, can no way be said to encroach on the
Magistrates Power, seeing he possesses still, what ever any Magistrate
possessed: yea, seeing by the Church there is a new relation arising from what
formerly was, it seems convenient and necessary, that there should be a new
distinct way of ordering and governing the same: else supposing that a
Magistrate had under him both Christians and Heathens in the same
incorporation, he were either not to censure Christians otherwise for their
faults than heathens: which is absurd, seeing the fault of a Christian has a
distinct notion from the same fault in a Heathen, to wit, it is an offense and
scandal which arises from this, that the person committing it, is a
Churchmember; and so by their miscarriages, they reflect more on their head,
and the profession of the Gospel, than the faults of others: or, he must punish
the same faults that are done by persons under the same civil Law with several
and distinct punishments, which is no less inconsistent with the nature of a
civil State considered in its self, which admits not of distinct censures of
the same faults and persons, more than of a distinct Power. And so if the
consideration of a new Church-relation will admit of distinct Laws and
censures, without wronging of the nature of a State, and that equity which
ought to be kept in reference to Subjects, neither ought this of a distinct
Power to make these Laws, and execute these censures, be thought inconsistent
with Magistracy, seeing it flows from the same new relation; and this equity
among Subjects, is no less essential to a well ordered Commonwealth, than
universal Supremacy and Power to the Magistrate. And the conveening of
Church Officers for the exercising of Discipline, and that without dependence
on the Magistrate, can be no more inconsistent with subjection to him in civil
things, than the conveening of Church Members for hearing of the Word and
receiving of the Sacraments, even though it should be expressly contrary to His
command.

8. It would be considered, that the right exercise of Church Power, does not
only not weaken; but on the contrary, does exceedingly strengthen civil
Authority and obedience thereunto in the Church. For, where this is, a
Magistrate has all Authority that civil Laws give him, and all the power that
the Word upon consciences does imprint; and he has beside these, Church Power
and censures concurring for his strengthening: because disobedience to him, is
accounted a scandale by the Church; and therefore is amongst other scandals to
be taken notice of, and censured by this Power; even as they take notice of
disobedient Children, Servants, and Wives; which does exceedingly strengthen
the Authority of these relations in the Church, beyond that which can be
elsewhere. And thus the Churches Power does confirm the Power of the State,
when they censure disobedience to them, and when they censure the same faults
in the same persons, which the State does, though under a different notion: and
by so doing, they pronounce the Power and proceeding of the civil State to be
just, when the things punished by it, are thus represented to them, and not
only as faults against humane Laws and inconsistent with Civil-states, but also
as sins against Christ and unbecoming His Church: which certainly cannot but
add a great impression of reverence unto the civil Power. Thus these two
distinct Governments, do no way interfere, but support each other. And so as
it is no obstruction, but a great furtherance unto Church Power in the exercise
thereof (although it be still distinct and independent as such) to have
Civil-power after its own manner concurring with it; so is it a strengthening
to Civil-power, to have the accession of Church Power in its kind, to concur
with it. And if indeed we suppose Magistrates to punish all things that are
scandalous in the Church, there can be no prejudice to the Power by this, which
does censure the same things on another account. And if we suppose them not to
do so, Then there is necessity for this Church Power, that such things may be
taken notice of, as has been said.

9. The exercise of this distinct Church Power, is a great advantage to the
Church; and so cannot but be well consistent with Magistracy: for these two
ordinances, cannot but be consistent. 1. It makes sin hateful. 2. It
strengthens the Authority of all other Ordinances. 3. There can be no such
way for trying qualified men fit to manage Church Censures and Church Affairs,
as such who are purposely chosen. 4. It has what the Magistrate can give, and
this beside. 5. It proves more convincing and edifying to the person censured:
for, (what ever is said to the contrary) experience does prove, that no censure
has such convincing weight on consciences, as when it is distinctly administered
by Church Officers. 6. It does more show the Holiness of the Head Christ, and
the compleatnesse of His Ordinances, and other advantages that may be gathered
from what we said at the entry to this d^gression. In a word, if civil powers
mind edification in their place, and to be a terror to evil doers, this proves
strengthening to them: because it furthers that end. If they mind not that, it
is no marvel such a power be suspicious like, which tends only to the
carrying on thereof.

It is ordinary to men to suspect more the encroaching of Churchmen in Power
and their exorbitancy than of any other, that being ever thought by natural
men to be a bondage, and these ever esteemed to be more proud, rigid, etc. and
I know not what in the exercise of their Power. But men would soberly consider,
1. If that be the fault of the Ordinance, or of the persons, and if Discipline
well discharged and Ecclesiastically followed with love, meekness, conviction,
etc. if so it were not useful? And if the fault be in the persons, why should
it be imputed to the Power it self in this case, more than in other cases? 2.
Is there any thing in a Church-office to occasion this exorbitancy and
miscarriage, more than in another civil Station? This looks not like in it
self. 3. If more nearly we consider Church Officers, there is no such reason to
suspect them: for, is there any rank of persons so regulated, and to be tried
in their qualifications for the exercise of their Trust, as by the Scripture
they are? Or, are any places more deliberately filled, that men conscientious
and fit for such a Trust may be called thereto? And are there any sort of
persons so bounded with profitable rules in the exercise of their Authority? If
there be defect in the observing of these, it ought tenderly to be remedied;
yet, it cannot be thought but Church Officers must be most fit to manage
Church Matters. 4. Let them that are employed in Church Power be considered,
without respect to that, are they not of themselves men of tenderness,
conscience, and gifts proportionably, as men in any other Station are, so that
it may be supposed for their qualifications and carriage, they might have been
men of other Stations; and if called thereto, Judges, Rulers, etc. without any
just ground of suspicion more than others? And if so, shall the very Office,
which ought to capacitat them more, only render them obnoxious to suspicion?
This had need to be adverted unto, least their office be reproached. And may
not that Power put in civil hands, be as ready to miscarry as in theirs? 5.
What Churchmen are usually most mistaken? is it not they who still have been
most faithful and zealous in their duty? Have not such ever also been thought
most intolerable even in respect of their freedom in the Word, as we may see in
the case of Elia, John the Baptist, etc. and the two Prophets, chap. 11. Shall
therefore Doctrine and Power in the Word, be thought insufferable? Or, shall
the false Prophets of Baal, or of Antichrist, be thought more fit to have place
than the Lords faithful servants? This can be no good ground that does reflect
only upon these that are faithful, others being ready to apply themselves to
the pleasing of men both in Word and Discipline. 6. It would be considered,
what may move men of judgment and parts (especially if they be conscientious)
to top with Magistrates? It Is not like that self interests does that; seeing
flatterers that seek that most, take the contrary way and come speed, when as
the most faithful are often under a cloud. Or, is it like that the most
zealous, humble and tender, should be most subject to miscarry? And if there be
ground to reprove or censure either by Word or Discipline, is it not most
profitable, even though most displeasing, that it be done? 7. Consider, who
most readily fret at this Power? it will be found they are such, who from
inclination to lousnesse or error cannot abide any bands, or from a principle
of politic indifferency in the matters of Religion, would mould all in a
State-frame; and such are imbittered at freedom in Preaching, as well as Power
in Governing; or, they are such as are led with a prejudice at the power of
Ordinances, which certainly men naturally are not free of: and it would be
adverted in this. 8. Consider, that this mistake of Church-mens Power, does
often arise in such cases, wherein they are serving Christ: and men entertain
it most in such times, when their frame is least spiritual and sober, as the
observation thereof in experience will evidence. What man at the approach of
death has been comforted in such an opposition, or challenged for submission?
Although contempt thereof has lien heavy on many, and that to scare others
from following their ways. All therefore of all ranks, would be obtested to
advert to this, lest they be found even fighters against God: especially at
such times, when this design by some is driven; least by putting to their hand
to pull down this Authority, they themselves perish in the fall thereof. And
what does the advantage at most amount unto? It is this, there shall be greater
freedom to sin, and fewer means to reclaim from it; or what censure shall be
inflicted, may be done in such a way as may stand with men's laughing at their
sin, without being affected in the conscience by any convincing mean? Has this
ever profited any hitherto? Or, has the right exercise of Discipline ever been
prejudicial to any? And do not ordinarily Religion and Discipline flourish
together? And are not Congregations in best case, where this Ordinance is most
vigorous? And do not the sad effects of the want of this in other places
evidently demonstrate the necessity thereof? People would consider these
things, especially these who are engaged singularly for the supporting of this
Ordinance: for, a time of reckoning will come, when this exercise of Discipline
and submission thereto according to men's places and engagements, will not be
found so indifferent as now it is esteemed by many. And disputes of this kind,
we suppose, will not be admitted, when the Lord will declare that he has
ratified in Heaven, what according to His will has been pronounced in this
ordinance of Discipline upon earth: which by Divines, is well accounted to be
the ratification and confirmation of the threatenings contained in His Word, and
added to make them the more weighty, as the Sacraments are unto the promises
of His Grace.

2. Concerning a Ministers relation to a particular Congregation.
THis relation between the Angels and the Churches, is mentioned in all these
Epistles. The Minister, or Angel, is called the Minister of such a Church
peculiarly: here the Church, or Candlestick, is called His, I will remove thy
Candlestick. It will not therefore be impertinent to enquire a little
concerning this mutual tie and relation in these three, 1. In the general. 2.
In the grounds of this peculiar tie. 3. In the nature of it; particularly, in
these two, 1. If a Minister, as such, be only a Minister to a particular
Congregation, in which he serves: And, 2. If that tie be such, as upon no
consideration it may be broken or loosed, and he removed by transportation to
some other charge. We are the rather to take notice of this: not only because
it serves to clear the Text in hand; but also because it supplieth somewhat yet
defective in reference to a Ministers Call, (of which we have formerly spoken)
to wit, what may be thought of a Call, that is, by transporting of a man that
is already fixed in a particular Congregation; or, if a Minister settled in
some particular charge, may upon occasion act Ministerially in things peculiar
to a Minister without the same.

For clearing of the first, we would distinguish a threefold relation that a
Minister of the Gospel stands into. The first is, a relation that is between
Christ the Master and Lord, and him as his Servant and Ambassador. This is the
first relation, and fountain of all the rest: in this respect, they are the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Corinthians. 4.1. and
Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Corinthians. 5.20. etc. because they have their Authority
and Commission from Him, and He peculiarly is their Master and owner. In this
respect also we may consider the Church; and so she is Christ's Church,
purchased with His own blood, Acts 20.28. This is the principal relation, by
which both Angels and Churches are Christ's, as He is the Sovereign Master and
owner of both: And so neither are the Churches the Ministers, nor the Ministers
the Churches; but both are Christ's.

2. There is a less principal relation, which is delegatory, and flows from
the former, He, to whom both Ministers and Churches do belong, thinking good to
bestow Ministers as a Gift unto His Church: in this respect, Ministers relation
is primarily unto the Catholic Church, and so, 1 Corinthians. 12.28. it is said,
God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, etc. And again, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. He gave some Apostles, some Pastors,
some Teachers, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Here we may see that
Ministers belong to the Church universal, and have relation to it, they being
Ministers of that same Church, that the Apostles were Apostles of, and for that
same end, to wit, the building of Christ's body, which takes in both Jew and
Gentile, as from that, 1 Corinthians. 12. verse. 13. etc. does appear. In this
respect the Ministers principal relation and charge, is Christ's Church
universal, and His body: and they are given thereto, to wit, to the House of
God, which is the Church of the living God, into the which they are to behave
themselves as Stewards, etc. as Paul has it, 1 Timothy 3.15.

3. We may consider this relation, as more particular, and less principal and
as subservient to the former end: and so Ministers, are Ministers to particular
Churches, and not to others; and Churches, are the Churches of such Ministers,
and not of others, as we may see in these Epistles. These relations are neither
inconsistent, nor yet to be confounded: and may, from the comparisons used in
Scripture, be thus illustrated. The Church is compared to a City, or Vineyard,
or Flock; the Ministers are Watchmen, Dressers, or Pastors: The Lord Christ is
the Sovereign, and owner of all. Now, if the question be moved concerning these
Watchmen, Dressers, or Pastors, to whom they belong? First of all, they are
Christ's, as appointed by Him for such a Work, and countable to Him in it, as
Watchmen are the Watchmen of such a State, or King, whom they serve. Secondly,
They are also Watchmen of the City, in common, as that is the object of their
watching, committed to them; or, they are Dressers of the Vineyard, etc. and so
it may be said, they are Watchmen to the whole City. Yet, Thirdly, Because
there are several Towers of that one City, and it requires several Watchmen,
and these require an orderly appointment of them to their several posts; and so
in this respect, a Watchman that is a Watchman of the whole City, may be called
peculiarly the Watchman of such and such a particular Tower, and Fort, for
distinguishing him from other Watchmen of the same City; who, in that respect,
cannot be called Watchmen of any particular Tower, but such as is allotted to
them, although they be Watchmen of the whole City principally; and so may be
said of the other similitudes. Even so it is with Ministers, who are primarily
Christ's, and by Him are delegates principally to the oversight of His whole
Catholic Church; yet so, as for the better attaining of that end, each has
his particular Post assigned him; from which, for distinctions sake, he is
denominated, as specially belonging to it. The former relation is essential to
a Minister of Christ, to wit, that he belongs to Christ's Church, and is
commissionated for the edifying thereof. The last, to wit, a Ministers relation
to this, or that particular Church, is not essential to a Minister of Christ;
but is to be subservient to the former: for, we see Apostles and Evangelists
had no such particular relation: and it is not impossible but a Minister may be
separated from such a relation; yet is he still to continue a Minister of
Christ: much less is the difference between one particular Church and another,
to be counted essential to a Ministerial relation. Thus, in a great house,
there may be many Stewards for distributing to the Children or Servants; and
for order, each may have his number assigned to him for whom he is to provide,
and on whom he is to wait. They are all, 1. Stewards of that one Master. And,
2. in reference to his own house, they are all also Stewards of it. Yet, 3. By
peculiar delegation, they are only Stewards according to their peculiar
assignments. It Is essential by their commission to be Stewards of that house;
but not that they should be Stewards of such and such a number: for, this
adds no new power to them; but orders them in the exercise of the former.

In the second place, this particular relation between the Minister and a
particular Flock, does arise from these grounds, 1. From the Lords special
assigning of one particular Church, to one man, rather than to another: in
which he is to labor for the good of the whole. In which respect, as he is a
Minister of Christ, to the Catholic Church, and has that common with all
other Ministers; so has he this peculiar to him, that he is specially designed
in reference to that portion, as it were his particular Post, as has been
said. 2. Upon this delegation by the Master, such a people become peculiarly
his; and by the Masters appointment, are to submit to the Ordinances
administrated by Him: because, that same Lord and Master of the Minister, who
warrands him peculiarly to treat with such a people, being also Master of that
Flock, calls them peculiarly to submit to Him: from which, according to his
appointment, there does arise a mutual obligation between such a Minister and
such a People: he is, obliged to minister unto them in the Gospel; and they,
are obliged to submit to him, strengthen him, acknowledge him, communicate to
him in all good things, and to provide for him, etc. And this mutual relation,
is not founded merely on voluntary consent, nor is of a personal nature (to
speak so) that is, as if he, or they were disposing of themselves as principal
parties; but it is an obligation flowing from the former delegation, and cannot
but follow from the nature thereof, and by virtue of the general commands
given, Heb. 13.17. 1 These. 5.12. Gal. 6.6. etc. although there were no
explicit covenanting in reference to these ends amongst these parties: and
where any is, it is but a formal expressing of that which otherwise is implied:
and is necessary, not for binding up that relation simply; but for the better
furthering the ends thereof. Therefore in that tie, Ministers and People both,
are to look upon that obligation as a mean subservient to an end, and so to be
regulated by it: and (as was hinted at) both would remember that they do
principally belong to Christ; and that therefore it is not free to them to
article or not, or as they will in that obligation, or otherwise than may
stand with the Masters end, and delegation foresaid. 3. From this mutual
obligation, there does arise a more near mutual sympathy between that Minister
and Church, than between him and any other Church, or them, and any other
Minister: they have common interests, common hazards, common joy and grief,
etc. in which respect a cross to one of them, is a cross to both, as this
threatening here does clear: and in this respect, there is a greater sibnesse
between them than others not in this peculiar relation. 4. As there are
peculiar duties called for on both sides from each to other, which are not so
required between them and others; so there is a particular charge or reckoning
and account, which will follow thereupon: in this respect, a Minister is to
count more peculiarly for that particular Church than others; and the people
again for the reverencing and encouraging of him in a special manner, as may be
gathered from, Heb. 13. verse. 17. And upon this account, Paul did particularly
aggrege the Ge^^^les slighting and grieving of him, in his Epistle to the
Corinthians and Galatians, because of his particular delegation in reference to
them. In which respect, although he was an Apostle of the universal Church; yet
peculiarly was he the Apostle of the Gentiles: and upon that ground, did plead
a peculiar claim to them; But still as subordinate and subservient to the
former.

The third thing proposed, is, that which mainly is to be enquired into, to
wit, The nature of this eye and relation betwixt the Minister and a particular
Church; if it be such as does bound him in his Authority, so as he may not
perform any Ministerial act without the same? and so upon the other side, if he
be so tied to that Church, that, for the greater good of the universal Church,
he may not be loosed from it, and be made use of, as a Minister, elsewhere?

For the first, We may take these general Conclusions for helping us in the
understanding thereof. The first is, That there is an Union and Communion in
the Catholic visible Church: which is one Body, 1 Cor. 12. and that both of
Jews and Gentiles, one City and House, one Commonwealth, Ephesians. 2.19. etc. one
Mother of us all, Gal. ^. one Bride and Spouse, etc. Which expressions, do hold
forth this Uunion in reference to all visible Churches, and all the members
thereof. There are not two Bodies, Cities, or Commonwealths in this respect;
yet must these places be understood of the visible Church, it being that Body,
into which we are entered by Baptism, 1 Cor. 12.13. and that City, in which
Watchmen are set, and external Ordinances; and that Commonwealth, which
succeeds to that which once was peculiar to Israel, and from which the
Gentiles were once separated by a Partition^wall, which is now taken down by
the Gospel.

Conclusion 2. Although this Church be one in it self; yet it is sub-divided in
particular Churches, which are as parts of that whole. This arises from
accidental considerations of the number of Professors, distance of place, and
such like: in which respect, it is needful for her edification, and the going
about of the Ordinances, that this should be; yet is this subdivision without
prejudice of the Union foresaid, yea it is subservient thereto; even as
supposing a numerous City or Incorporation should be sub-divided in so many
Quarters, or lesser Societies, for the good of the whole. Thus the Church at
first, being one, upon the former considerations, upon this occasion did extend
her self in this manner; and these who just now were of one Church, and meeting
together for the Ordinances, were induced to divide in several Societies and
meeting-places, (as may be gathered from the History of the Acts) yet
continuing still of the same Body together, in the first respect. In which
respect, sometimes the visible Church is spoken of in the plural number;
sometimes again only in the singular, as pointing out an Unity: such are these
phrases, to edify the Church, to add to the Church, to cast out of the Church,
etc. which respect the whole Church, considered as an integrall whole, existing
in particular Churches, as we say, the whole world, which does yet but exist in
so many particular Notions, and has no existence distinct from them; and to
say it were considered as a genus in this sense; would not be intelligible.

Conclus. 3. Our Lord Jesus, the owner both of Ministers and Church, has given
Ministers, principally for the edification of His Catholic Church, without
respect to this or that particular Congregation, but as that is subservient to
the former end, as it is, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28. it being one Church to
which both Apostles, Pastors, Prophets, and Teachers are given; and they having
all one scope, to wit, the perfecting of the Saints; and one Commission, to
wit, the preaching of the Gospel, which principally is to engage Souls to the
Bridegroom. Hence in their Preaching, we are to conceive this order, 1.
Apostles and Ministers, etc. treat with sinners, to have them engaged by faith
to Christ, as the Master for whom they treat. 2. To enter them in the Catholic
visible Church by Baptism as the entering of them within Christ's House in
general, without respect to this or that particular Congregation: as when
Philip, Acts 8. did first Preach Christ to the Eunuch, and afterward did
Baptize him, and then left him. And, 3. Being thus entered and brought in to the
Catholic Church, thereupon follows their entering into particular
Congregations, that so they may be the more conveniently and commodiously
edified and provided for, as all that are in Christ's House should be: who
therefore are committed to some special Overseers and Stewards for that end:
as suppose the Eunuch had been admitted to some particular Church for partaking
of the Ordinances therein after his Baptism; that he should be a member of
Christ's Church in general, which is sealed by Baptism, 1 Cor. 12.13. was not
indifferent to him, but of what particular Church he might be a member, that by
after convenience was to be regulated. Whence it does appear, 1. That there is
a consideration of the Church as universal, beside the considering of her in
particular Churches. 2. That the Church so considered, as an integrall whole,
is before the particular Churches; and they are derived from her. 3. That the
work of the Ministry does relate principally to the whole, their Commission
being, in common, to build the Body, to watch the City, feed the Flock, preach
the Gospel, etc. and their delegation to particular Churches, is in a
subserviency to this, that is, so as this may be the more orderly and
conveniently followed: even as suppose so many Eldermen or Watchmen were by
some Superior designed for the governing and watching of one City, and should
for the better accomplishing thereof, have their several Quarters and
Divisions assigned to them; yet still were they to be accounted as Governors
and Watchmen of the City principally, and not of these particular portions only.

Conclus. 4. Although they be designed principally for the Catholic Church,
and their Commission will bear them to treat any where; yet are they not
Catholic Officers of that Church, nor at their arbitriment to treat where they
will; but (according to the order which he has settled) in particular Churches
as parts of that whole; that being the way which He has laid down for
edification. I say, 1. They are not Catholic Officers, there being great odds
here betwixt Officers of the Catholic Church, and Catholic Officers of the
Catholic Church, such the Apostles and Evangelists were; such the Pope claims
to be, that is, to have an immediate access for exercising the Trust equally
to all places. Officers of the Catholic Church, are such as are placed in it
for the building up thereof, and have Commission in reference to that end; yet
is it to be executed according to the rules laid down, that is, as Christ's Call
in an ordinary way shall give them access. For although (as was said,) they
have a Power and Commission, actu primo, to be Ministers of the whole Church,
and Watchmen of the City indefinitly; yet, actu secundo, they are specially
delegated for such and such Congregations or Posts, as was hinted in the former
similitudes. In this respect, Peter and Paul were Apostles of the Catholic
Church equally; yet, for the good thereof, by special appointment Peter
becomes the Apostle of the Circumcision, and Paul of the Gentiles: and so Paul
could not be called the Apostle of the Circumcision, nor Peter of the Gentiles,
in an equal manner. Hence that Argument may be answered, if a Minister be a
Minister to more Congregations beside his own, Then he must either be a
Minister to them as to his own equally, and so have common charge of all: which
were indeed absurd, and would constitute him a Catholic Officer; or, he
behoved to be to them a Minister or Officer of some other kind than to his own,
which were also absurd, and would introduce a new kind of office and Officer:
It Is answered, actu primo, he is a Minister of the same kind to all the
Churches, to wit, a Minister or Ambassador of Christ; but, actu secundo, and
in respect of special delegation, he is peculiarly Minister of that
Congregation, whereto particularly he is appointed: in which respect, Paul and
Peter are equally, and yet not equally Apostles of the same Catholic Church.

Conclus. 5. Notwithstanding of this particular delegation; yet is it
profitable that a Minister should exerce Ministerial acts, upon occasions
warrantably calling for the same in other Churches; and when called to it, he
may do it, not only by virtue of his gift; but also Authoritatively and by
virtue of his Office and Commission, as a Minister of Jesus Christ: even by
that same Authority and Warrant, whereby ordinarily he ministers within his own
Congregation; and they are acts of Ministerial Authority in the one as well as
in the other: for Ministers in the Church, are not to be looked upon as Majors
of several Towns, or Sheriffs of several Counties, who cannot exerce
Authority out of their own Bounds; but they are to be looked upon as Heralds
of one King, having Authority to charge in His Name, where ever it be, within
His Dominions, although for the better supply of the Subjects, some of them be
designed for one corner, some of them for another of the Kingdom: or, they are
like Ambassadors, Authorized to treat with rebellious Subjects, who have each
of them Authority to treat and conclude with whosoever shall come in their way:
although for the better carrying one of that treaty, some of them be designed
for such a corner, and to tryst at such a place, and others elsewhere; yet all
of them being jointly Ambassadors, and any of them warranted, if it were
possible, to treat and conclude with all, by virtue of their Power: so that the
ending of the Capitulation with one of them, is equally strong and binding as
if it had been closed with another, although for eschewing of confusion they
met in their treaty severally. It is so here, every Ambassador of Christ, upon
Gods occasional Call, has warrant to propose the same terms, and conclude
the treaty with a sinner; yea, to seal it in any Congregation, as well as in
his own: which may be cleared and confirmed further in these following
considerations.

1. The Power and Commission, which a Minister has to perform Ministerial
duties, he has it from Christ the Master and Lord of the whole Church: and in
this respect, is the Minister of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. and His Ambassador, 2
Cor. 5.20. and therefore may his power extend it self to His visible Kingdom,
he being a Herald Authorized to proclaim in the Name of that King: as far
therefore, as His Authority as Master does reach; so far may his Ministerial
delegation under Him, upon just occasion, be extended. Indeed were his
Authority derived from a particular Church, it could be extended no further
than it self; (which is the ground of this mistake) But his Authority being
derived from Christ, the Master, though in a mediate way; and the Minister
being His Ambassador, treating and performing all his acts in His Name, There
is no ground to deny this Ministerial Authority of the servant, where the
Master is acknowledged.

2. Consider, that the Masters intent in sending Ministers, is, by them not
only to edify particular Congregations, but the whole Body, as is said. A
Minister therefore in his acting as a Minister upon such occasions, must be as
a Minister in them; otherwise he were only given as a Minister to that
particular Church.

3. If his relation to the Catholic Church be principal, and his relation to
a particular Congregation subordinate to that, Then must his Ministerial
Authority, in the case foresaid, extend it self to others of the visible
Church, beside that particular Congregation: because, according to the rule,
propter quod unumquedgue est tal^, id ipsum est magis tale, that is to say, if
because he is a Minister of the Catholic Church, he is therefore capable to be
a Minister of a particular Church; or, if his Authority reaches to that
particular Church, because it is a part of the whole, Then much more must he
have a relation to the whole: But the former is true, as has been cleared.
Ministers are in capacity of taking the Oversight of such and such
Congregations, because such Congregations, are parts of the whole Church; and
Ministers are appointed to edify the same; and do undertake that particular
charge, as it is subservient to the general end of edifying the whole: even as
Watchmen take the oversight of such a Post, because they are Watchmen of the
City; and their overseeing such a place in particular, does contribute to the
good of the whole.

4. Their Commission which they have from Christ, will suit as well in one
Congregation as in another, it being indefinit to Preach the Gospel without
respect to this or that particular People; and it agrees also with their
office, and His end: seeing therefore their Commission, in the matter of it, is
not bounded, What warrant is there to bound their Authority, as if as
Ambassadors they did treat with one People, and as private persons with
another; whereas their Commission, in it self, is indefinite, and by
accidental considerations but appropriated some way to one people more than
another? For further clearing whereof, consider,

1. That the Apostles had their bounds in Christian policy asigned to them; yet
notwithstanding might they Authoritatively, as Apostles, act anywhere in the
Church: therefore will not the particular allotting of Congregations for
Ministers in a special manner, confine their Authority within the same. It Is
true, they were Apostles of the Catholic Church, and so might use Apostolic
power in any part thereof, which a Minister cannot do; yet proportionally, he
is a Minister of that same Church, as is said: and therefore as that peculiar
delegation did not mar the Apostles in the use of their Apostolic power when
it was called for any other where; (for, although they did it in an
extraordinary way, yet Peter had still Apostolic power in reference to the
Gentiles, and Paul to the Jews, when they exercised it;) So may a Minister have
Ministerial power, in Ministerial acts, and may act by virtue thereof, when
in an ordinary way he is called to it without the bounds of his own
Congregation.

2. If Apostles might use Apostolic Power, and, as Apostles, act without the
bounds of the Catholic Church, Then may Ministers act, as Ministers, without
the bounds of their particular Churches: because there is a proportionablnesse
in respect of the extent of power betwixt Ministers in their particular
Congregations, and Apostles in the Catholic Church; But it is certain that the
Apostles, as Apostles, did Preach to Heathens, and engage them to Christ, and
enter them in the Church, and that by virtue of their Apostolic Commission and
Authority: It will follow therefore, that a Minister is not so bounded by his
relation to a particular Church, but that he may exercise Ministerial power^
without the bounds thereof.

3. If a Minister, by that same Authority, may Preach and administrate the
Sacraments to others without the Congregation, as to these within, Then is not
his Ministerial Authority confined to one particular Congregation; But the
former is true. For the matter of Preaching, it is not denied: only it is said
that they Preach not by Ministerial Authority, but as gifted private men. Unto
which we oppose, 1. If a Ministers warning, reproof, invitation, etc. have
equal weight with it in every part of the Church, as it has in his own
Congregation, Then must he Preach every where as a Minister; because, it cannot
be denied, but he has in his own Church a Ministerial Authority, beside that
which a gifted Brother would have; But the former is true, the Word by him has
the same weight as preached by Commission from, and in the Name of, Christ, so
that he may say, We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled, which another
cannot do: and the guilt of refusing the Word from him, will be found upon the
account of his Authority, no less inexcusable than if the refuser were a
member of his own Congregation. And I suppose a conscience will not get a
defense tabled for excuse upon this exception. Beside, the Minister has
Ministerial Authority, as an Ambassador, to conclude with them that receive
his word; and by the power of the keys, to pronounce pardon upon the terms of
the Gospel in one Church, as well as in an other; and one may receive that
word, and rest on it as spoken by an Ambassador, and expect the ratifying
thereof. And if it were not so, their consolation were exceedingly lessened,
and the Minister disabled from concluding the treaty as an Ambassador, which
does not agree with Christ's end of sending Ministers, which is the perfecting
of the Saints, and edifying the Body indefinitely, Ephesians. 4.12. And therefore
may he, as an Ambassador, act in these Ministerial duties.

The considering of the second Branch, will clear it more, to wit, thus, If a
Minister may administrate the Sacraments without his own Congregation, Then
must his Ministerial power go beyond that relation: because there is a
Ministerial power requisite for these, which no gifted person whatsoever can
assume; But the former is true. Ergo, etc.

This minor is denied by some, as being an unwarrantable practice; yet being
generally used by all, it is thus answered, That a Minister may give the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper to one not of his Congregation, because the body
of the Church thinks good to admit them: and therefore he may warrantably
administrate it to them, it being still lawful to him in it self to consecrate
the elements in his own Congregation. But we reply, 1. That a Minister may
warrantably Baptize one, who is no member of his Congregation: and therefore
neither of the former answers will weaken this Argument; As suppose a Minister
did encounter some heathen, it cannot be denied, but he might Preach the Gospel
to him; and upon his professed Faith and Conversion, baptize him: otherwise it
were now impossible to baptize and bring in a heathen: which were absurd. Yet
could not that be done, without Authority, as is granted; nor could it be done
to him as to a Member of a particular Church: because, even after his Baptism,
it were lawful for him to choose what particular Church he would join unto;
neither before that, were he in capacity thereof, nor could the Minister act
therein by the Churches warrant: because, 1. The Church could not judge a
person that is without: that were not within their reach. 2. Because a Minister
might do this upon occasion, where there could not be access to have any
Church determination concerning the thing, as suppose it were abroad on a
journey, as Philip's encounter was with the Eunuch, Acts 8. yet can it not be
said that upon the heathens proposing this question, What does hinder me to be
baptized? that it might be answered warrantably by the Minister, it hinders,
because thou art no Church member; or, my Church is not here to authorize me,
etc. such answers would be uncomfortable to the man, and disproportionable to
Christ's end. It follows therefore, that the Minister, as a Minister, might
baptize him, and seal the treaty, and so Authoritatively treat and Preach as a
Minister, seeing Authoritatively he may seal it. The former answer is therefore
weak: And, 1. does speak nothing at all to the case of Baptism; Nor, 2. to the
administration of the Lords Supper out of his own Congregation, seeing it
allows him power only to consecrate the elements there: yet there can be no
question, but Authority to administrate the Lords Supper, must be as broad in
this respect, as to administrate Baptism, seeing they are both seals of the same
Covenant. 3. If a Ministers power were peremptorily commensurable with his
flock, even in that case of the plurality of the Church their admitting of such
a member, the Minister could not be warranted to administrate to him; because
still notwithstanding that person continues to be no member of that particular
Church, nor subject to other Ordinances of Discipline: and therefore, according
to the former grounds, no such determination of a people could communicate
Authority to a Minister by such an act, as to make him use Ministerial power in
reference to a person, not under his charge; if otherwise he were not
furnished therewith.

4. These principles seem to be repugnant, both to the commission, and practice
generally of all the Ministers of the Gospel: For, 1. They have one commission
for all places and persons where they shall be called: this makes them to act
as Ministers in one place, and not in another. 2. Their commission is to treat
for Christ indefinitly, and for the carrying on of His design, without respect
to this or that particular charge, except in a subordinate manner, so that by
their commission, they are constitute Christ's Ambassadors, Ministers and
Stewards simply for the Preaching of the Gospel and edifying of His Body. This
says, they are but Ambassadors in reference to such and such a people: and so
consequently, could not by His warrant, close a treaty in His Name with any
other. 3. A Minister by his commission, is absolutely set a part for the Work
of the Ministry, so long as Christ has Work for him, if he continue faithful;
yea, by virtue of this his commission, he is to follow the same. Now by this,
suppose a particular Congregation to be dissolved or destroyed; or, suppose
them to reject him that he has no access to exercise his Ministry amongst
them, In such a case he cease to be a Minister, and his commission expireth,
according to these principles, so that he stands afterward in no other relation
to Christ than any private person so qualified.

It does also thwart with their practices, it being acknowledged and practiced
almost by all ever since the days of the Apostles, that Ministers might and
did administrate Word and Sacraments Authoritatively beyond the bounds of any
particular Congregation. And although in the primitive times, there was strict
interdiction, that no Bishop should exercise jurisdiction at his own hand,
within the bounds of another; (which was necessary for preventing of confusion
and keeping of order) yet was it never heard that a Minister might not
Authoritatively Preach, and administrate the Sacrament by the key of order in
any part, as he might be called: yea, it is not to be thought that the
Ministers of particular Churches in their voyages to the Apostles, or
scatterings and otherwise, whereby they were necessarily withdrawn from their
own particular charges, that they did, during that time, abstain all
Ministerial exercises, because so it should prejudge the Church of their
labors as Ministers, during that time: which is not likely, considering, that
their help in the Ministry of the Gospel, is sometimes insinuated, and
acknowledged by Paul; and they counted his fellow laborers, such as
Aristarchus, Epaphras and others, companions and fellows, both in Paul's
sufferings and labors. It is like therefore, that their Ministerial acting,
cannot be confined to any particular place or Congregation.

Lastly, This opinion would infer many absurdities; As, 1. A Minister could
administer no Ordinance as a Minister, and some, not at all, but in his own
Congregation. 2. Nor in it, but to such as were of his own Flock. And, 3. If
any other were present, he should be the Ambassador of Christ to one, and not
to an other; and that in the same message. 4. Suppose a Congregation to want a
Minister; or, that he be, by sickness or otherwise, incapacitated from
exercising of his Office, By this ground they could have no Ministerial act
administered amongst them, and so no Baptism, or Sacrament; nor yet have any
benefit of a Ministry more than if there were no such Ordinance. 5. By this,
no particular Church might have Ministerial communion (to say so) in
Church-ordinances together, but such as private persons; yea, as heathens might
have in the hearing of the Word. 6. There could be no Ministerial communion and
help amongst Ministers: for so, no Minister could supply another, more than a
private person, though Ministers, as joint workers in one Work, be called in a
special manner to have communion together. 7. No Member, how ever gracious,
being withdrawn from his own Congregation, could be under any Ministerial
charge, or have access to the Preaching of the Word, as it is a treaty by an
Ambassador; or, to any Sacrament for himself or his: which is hard, considering
that it is the same Master, and the same house; and seeing often occasions may
draw men abroad where the Ordinances are, this would make them in a great part
to be strangers even within the Church whereof they are children. 8. No
Minister might Authoritatively reprove any offending brother not of his own
Congregation, nor censure such as did not willingly join, howsoever scandalous:
which is contrary to the practice of Ephesus, as already has been said.
Neither would this bring in confusion, or the making of the particular
privileges of a Congregation common, more than is allowable: because this
pleads not for an arbitrarinesse in the exercise of this power; but that
there may be a power to be exercised for edification, when it shall be called
for.

Neither will it hence follow, that a Minister, Elder, or Deacon, may thrust
himself in, to the exercise of Jurisdiction in every place, because they are
Officers of the Catholic Church: because, 1. This only says, that he, being
called orderly by an opened door may exerce his power in one place and
Congregation, as well as in another. 2. Because ruling belongs to the power
of Jurisdiction; which, beside instalment in an Office, does require other
things to concur with it, before it can be exercised: Preaching and
administration of the Sacraments, are done by the power of order, and by virtue
of the Office as such. Hence a Minister might Preach to Heathens without the
Church, and Baptize in due order; because he does that as a Minister: yet could
he not censure one such, till he were a Church member, and until there were
some orderly way of trying, judging, censuring, etc. by a Church Judicatory
settled: because the exercise of this power does require more than the being of
an office. And therefore even the Apostles who did thus preach and administer
the Sacraments; yet neither judged these that were without at all; nor these
that were within (when they acted by ordinary rules) except in the way of
orderly proceeding. Therefore, Acts 15. Paul found it meet to go to Jerusalem
to a Synod for deciding of some things by this power of Jurisdiction, although
still by his Doctrine he was Authoritatively condemning the Error: which
shows, that there is more required in the one than in the other. And in that
practice, the Apostles gave a precedent to Ministers whereby to be directed in
ordinary cases, because in it they did follow ordinary rules common with them
to all Ministers, and did not act as extraordinary Apostles, for so one was
equally sufficient for deciding of the matter as all were, but in this a copy
is given how the Church is to walk in such cases ordinarily.

The last thing which we are to enquire into, is, If this relation betwixt a
Minister and a particular Congregation be such, as the Church for a greater
good to the whole body may not loose it, and call one, serving at one
particular Church, to fix and serve elsewhere, upon supposition that it may
more further the good of the Whole Church?

Answ. What is already said, does make way for the answering of this, which we
shall comprehend in these three Assertions,

Asser. 1. No Minister ought to dispose of himself at his own private
arbitrament, to the prejudice or dissolution of a tie betwixt him and a
particular Congregation that is orderly and legally settled. For, first, no
Minister being free of such a relation, ought to dispose of himself
arbitrarily, (as was said in the close of the first Chapter) much more being
under a tie and particular relation. 2. It Is a general to all, 1 Cor. 7. Let
every man abide in that calling wherein he is called; but especially, Ministers
are to walk by a singular call, even in reference to a particular Charge: so as
it may be the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has set them: which must, at
least, include his being set there in the mediate way of Church order; which is
that that the Holy Ghost ownes, as by comparing, Acts 13.3. and 4. and Acts
14.23. with Act. 20, 28. is clear. This therefore cannot be left to any private
way of transacting betwixt a Minister and a People. 3. If it were so, then this
particular relation were of no value, neither could properly a Minister be
called the Minister of such a Church; or such a Church be his in a more
peculiar manner than other Churches, if he might at his pleasure and of himself
dissolve that Union. 4. Ministers being servants of Christ's House and Watchmen
put to their Posts by Him, as being specially to count for that People
committed to them, they ought not and cannot without His warrant remove: this
would be found to be treachery and unfaithfulness in any other Servant or
Watchman, much more must it be here. 5. Whereas Christ has appointed these
particular relations for the entertaining of order, the preventing of confusion
and promoving of edification, This would destroy these ends and bring confusion
into the Church: which is contrary to the order that He has established in it.
Lastly, It would beget despising of the Ministry in the hearts of the People,
and lay them open to snares, if a Ministers settling in a place stood so upon
his own Election (especially after a former tie) as is usually in men who are
of other professions. And there are many strict acts of Councels in all times
against this: as a most wretched abuse, if it should be admitted in the Church.

Assert. 2. Although this tie cannot be loosed by any private consent, so that
no Minister can transport himself upon that account; yet may the Church for her
own greater good transport a man from one particular place to another, and that
warrantably, notwithstanding of the former particular tie and relation: yea,
sometime it will be expedient for the good of the Church so to do. The
application of the former grounds and the laying down of some others, will make
way for the clearing and confirming of this. The first is, If there be an Union
and Communion in the Catholic visible Church, and if Ministers be especially
given to the edifying of it, and in a subordination thereto, to the edification
of particular Churches, Then supposing that a Ministers transportation from one
place to another may further more the good of the whole than where he is, in
that case, it ought to be done. Because the whole is to be prefered to the
part, the good of the Body to any particular member: and in that case, it is
not the prejudice of that particular Church, that their Minister be set where
he may more profit the Body, but (as the Learned Bowls in his Treatise of a
Gospel Ministry, lib. 3. cap. 7. says) It Is rather their preservation and
safty, even as it is the good of any particular Fort of a City, when a Watchman
is removed from it to some other Post, where he may be more useful to the
whole City: because the benefit of the City, is the advantage of every person
therein. But both the former are true, as has been said, to wit, that there is
an Union and Communion in the Catholic visible Church; and that a Ministers
relation, stands principally to serve Christ in reference to the edification
of the whole: Therefore, etc. 2. The examples used already, hold this forth,
the Church being one City, and Ministers appointed to be Watchmen thereof,
there can be no reason why one may not be removed from one corner to another,
if so it may conduce for the good of the whole. This is allowed in all
Commonwealths, Cities, and Incorporations, etc. and is engraven by nature on
the hearts of all men to preserve themselves into Societies by such means: and
can that be denied to the Church of Christ, which nature makes common to all
Incorporations? 3. If a Ministers relation to a particular Charge be less
principal and subordinate to his relation to the whole Body, Then ought it
not to stand in the way of his being useful to the whole, But rather it is in
such a case to cede and give place to the other: otherwise that particular
relation would be principal, and would not be subservient to the other, as a
higher end: because so, the Church in general would be more frustrated and
prejudged of the benefit of such a man's Ministry, than if there had been no
such relation at all. But the former is true, This particular relation is
subordinate to the other, as ^^ said. Therefore, etc. These consequents do
follow upon the grounds formerly laid down. Moreover we may add these
uncontrovertible conclusions.

Conclus. 1. There is a diversity in the cases of particular Congregations; and
there is diversity also in the gifts of Ministers. Some Congregations are more
weighty, and much more of the good or hurt of the Church depends upon their
plantation than others. Again, some are more intelligent, some are more uneasy
and dangerous to deal withal, etc. as experience clears. Whereby it is
apparent that the planting of some places, is of great consequence for the
Gospels advancement, above the planting of others; and also that comparatively,
one place will require Ministers otherwise qualified than another. Again, there
are diversities of gifts among Ministers, some are fit for one People, and not
for another, as is clear from, 1 Cor. 12. 14. 15. etc. There are diversity of
gifts, but the same spirit, differences of administrations, etc.

Conclus. 2. Ministers ought so to be distributed and placed in particular
Charges, as that there may be some proportionablenesse and suitableness
betwixt the Minister and his Charge, that is, the ablest Minister should have
the weightiest Charge; the weakest, the easiest burden: and as their gift is
more eminent in learning, teaching, prudence in Government, etc. there likewise
ought a proportion to be kept in laying on their Charge, so as there may be a
fit object for such qualifications, and as the good of the Body may be most
advanced. This also we take for granted: for, that is the end of all gifts
which are given to every man that he way profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. whether
it be the word of knowledge, or, the word of wisdom, etc. they are all members
of one body, verse. 12. and therefore are to concur for the good of the Body,
according to their several qualifications, as different members of that one
Body: and in this respect, a disproportionating of a Ministers Charge to his
gift, it is as if we would put the foot to do the hands work, or the ear to
supply the room of the eye: which were absurd; and would argue either such and
such distinction and difference not to be necessary, and so all the members
might be eye or head, or any one member; or, it will say, that we are not to
walk according to that which the Lord has distributed to every one: both which
are absurd, and expressly contrary to that which is said, 1 Cor. 12. Where
expressly these three are held forth, 1. That the Church is one Body. 2. That
there are different gifts, which are as different members of one Body, some
more eminently for one use, and some more eminently for another. 3. That the
Lords intent by that difference, is, to have all these members concurring in
their several places for the good of the whole Body: that so, as it is, verse.
25. by each members concurring in its own place, there may be no ^chism in the
Body: which cannot be eschewed, if this proportionating of public Charges and
Gifts be not observed.

Conclus. 3. There cannot be ordinarily such a discerning of the
proportionablnesse of men's gifts to a particular station at the first entry, as
to fit every one sufficiently, and to place them in their right room. This we
suppose, is also clear from experience, wherein it is seen that many, at first,
are fixed in Congregations wherein afterward there proves to be a
disproportionablnesse. And it cannot be otherwise, upon these considerations,
1. Because it cannot then be known fully what will prove to be the peculiar
gift of every man, till trial and experience evidence the same. 2. Because
this proportionablnesse is not only to be tried by comparing a man and a
particular Congregation simply; but it is to be taken by trying him
comparatively, and that both in reference to other gifts and other
Congregations: for, a man absolutely considered, may be fit for such a
Congregation; yet when other Congregations and gifts are considered, it may
possibly be seen that he is more fit for an other Congregation than many other
Ministers; and yet possibly some of these may be as fit for his Congregation.
In that case, it cannot be denied, but it looks liker the right
proportionating of every member, that men be put to serve in these
Congregations, for which according to their gifts they are best fitted. 3.
Because at a Ministers first entry there is not occasion to try a man's
proportionablnesse to any other Charge but one, or at most in reference to so
many as shall at that present be vacant and give him a Call. Now, suppose some
other Charge should thereafter vake, it is hard to say that they should be
simply excluded from having any access to that person, if his gifts were more
proportionable to them: Because, as we said, this proportionablnesse is to be
looked to in reference to what is most fit for the whole Body: for although
(if we may so compare it) it is not unfit that the foot should be guided by
sight; yet with respect to the whole Body, it is more fit for the whole Body,
that the eye should be placed in the head, than in the foot: because it is not
to give light to one member only, but to the whole Body, So is it here, a
Minister may suit a particular Congregation, giving light as it were to the
foot, whereas if we consider his office, which is to be an eye to the whole
Body, he is disproportionably placed: for so the Body is darker, when the
foot has more light: which is absurd.

Conclus. 4. Christ has furnished His Church with Power in her Judicatories
and Officers, to proportion Ministers Gifts suitably to the good of the Body.
Hence is the trial of Spirits and Gifts appointed: and in that respect, the
spirits of the Prophets, are to be subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.
otherwise the Church in her Government were defective in that order which is
in other Societies: and it would not be adequate and proportionate to its end,
if that were not: for so there might be an inconveniencie and
disproportionablnesse in the Church, and no remedy to cure the same. From which
grounds put together, we may thus argue, 1. If God has given diversity of
Gifts to Ministers, and they be to be improven for the good of the whole Body,
Then supposing that a Minister settled in some more private or lesser
Congregation be more proportionably qualified to fill such a place as is more
large and eminent, than any other who can be had without a charge. Then in this
case he is to be transported: because otherwise, that being denied and the
Charge put upon a man of no competent ability, there would be a
disproportionablnesse between the Gift and the Charge. For, that would join the
able man and the light burden, and the weak man and the heavy burden: which
were absurd; But the first is clear from the former conclusions. Therefore,
etc. 2. If by a Ministers first plantation in a particular Charge there be a
disproportionablnesse in the Body, which transporting of him to another Charge
would remeed, Then is he to be transported: and transportation in that case
must be allowable and expedient: because by it that due proportionablnesse is
preserved among Ministers, and Members of the Body, which otherwise would be
defective, and so a Schism is prevented: For if the end, to wit, that
proportionablnesse be necessary, Then transportation, which is a necessary mean
whereby it is attained, cannot but be necessary also; But the first is true
from the former grounds. Ergo, etc. 3. If transportation were unlawful, Then
we behoved to say, that either no Minister could be at first misplaced to the
prejudice of the Body: or, that there were no remeed for such a case, for the
recovering thereof; But both these are absurd, as the former grounds do clear.
4. If Ministers were peremptorly fixed by their first tie to particular
Congregations, Then could not their Gift come under cognition in reference to
any other charge; which would infer these absurdities, 1. That the Church
were bounded and limited in the use-making of her own Members for her own good:
which is contrary to the nature of a body; for so she might have Members, fit
for such and such stations; and yet could not make use of them. 2. In
proportionating Gifts for places, there would be little place for Christian
prudence and deliberation: because so the case would be determined necessarily
by providence, that such vacant places behoved to call such men as were not
under any former tie, and they behoved to accept these particular charges; or,
must both necessarily forbear; and so such Churches be without Ministers, it
may be for a long time, before any did occur whom with confidence they might
Call: and it will be hard to fasten any of these necessities upon the way of
Christ. 3. By this, the Church should have little or no access at all to
cognosce of men's Gifts, so as to proportion them for her good, if she had no
place for it after their first entry to the Ministry: because, then often
there does lie much of it upon the man's determining himself; or, at most a
Presbyteries determining of him, and a particular Congregations pressing, who
often are more swayed with respect to themselves, than to the Church in common.
Beside, that there is no access to cognosce thereof upon other grounds given:
if then the Church be any ways allowed to cognosce or dispose of Members
according to their Gifts, and that be not left to particular inclinations,
transportation must be allowed. And if it be singly done, we suppose, there is
no such access to cognosce of a man's Gift, and to proportionate it for the
good of the body, as may be done in transportation. 5. We may argue thus, If
Ministers be lights planted in the Church for the good of the whole, Then ought
they so to be placed, as they may most extensively give light to the whole.
Now, these are certain, 1. That there are some Congregations where a Minister
may more conspicuously hold forth the light of the Gospel than in others, some
places being as Tables or Candlesticks from which light does shine; other
places again, being as corners. 2. Sometimes a light may be set in a corner, or
under a bushel comparatively, and not be set on the place where the greatest
light is called for. 3. When it is misplaced, it ought to be removed from the
corner to be set on the Candlestick: and although it may be, that that corner
become more dark; yet the house in general becomes more lightsome. And if
these former grounds be true, Then transportation, when it proves the removing
of a light from under a bed, to the Candlestick, for the greater good of the
whole house, must be allowed and admitted: But these two considerations will
make this appear, 1. Christ's express words, Matthew. 5.14, 15. ye are the light
of the world, etc. Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel,
but on a candlestick, that all in the house may see light, (compared with Luke
8.16.) which demonstrates there, that Ministers are so to be placed as they may
most lighten the whole house: and if any place conduce more for that than
another, they are accordingly to be placed. 2. The Apostles practice clears
this: we will find them in their Preaching especially, to frequent most
populous places, because there was most occasion of spreading the Gospel in
those: Paul is marked, Acts 19.10. to have stayed two full years in Ephesus,
and that all Asia, upon that occasion, heard the Word: which does hold forth,
1. That there are some places (particularly populous and public places) of
more concernment for the spreading of the Gospel, when they are well planted,
than other places. And, 2. That the Apostles were in their abode and Preaching
exceedingly swayed by that consideration: so that although in some respect they
had equal interest in all persons and Churches, yet did the consideration of
the good of the whole engage them to have particular respect to some places
beyond others; and so, as it were, to transport themselves from private places
to more public, that they might give light to the more. 6. If the good of a
particular Congregation, and necessity of a particular Minister, may warrant a
transportation, much more may the public good of the Church do the same: this
cannot be denied; But both the first are true, 1. The good of a particular
Congregation may warrant it, as suppose they be utterly prejudged against a
present Minister, who yet elsewhere may have access to be profitable; either
transportation must be allowed, or he must be rendered unprofitable, contrary to
the end for which Christ has given Gifts, 1 Cor. 12. and they put in a worse
condition by having, than by wanting: For the second, That a Ministers
particular necessity may constrain this, as suppose there be no possibility to
live and follow the Ministry in such a place, because of outward straits:
thus, Nehemiah, 13.10. the Levites by the withdrawing of their maintenance, are
made to fly every one to his field: and Nehemi^h contends with the Rulers, and
removes that obstruction, and does not challenge the Levites, as Mr. Bowls does
observe. We find also in Church-story ( Socrates, lib. 7. cap. 36.) of one
Sylvanus, who not being able to live in one place^ because of his infirm
health, which did disagree therewith, he was transported to another more
wholesome and agreeable to his constitution. 7. If notwithstanding of that
relation between a Minister and a people, any particular Member, or any other
Officer, upon weighty consideration, may remove themselves, or be removed from
that Congregation, Then may the Minister be removed also, upon supposition of
the public good: because there is that same tie between the people and the
Minister, and other Officers and the people, that is between the Minister and
them: for, the relation is mutual; But that private Members, and Elders or
Deacons may remove, or be removed orderly, has never been questioned. Ergo,
etc. 8. If a Minister, upon particular occasion, for public good, may perform
Ministerial acts without his own Congregation for a time, Then supponing these
grounds to be urgent, and Authority to interveen, why may he not be fully
removed? for, the same ground that calls to act for a time, to wit, the good
of the body whereof he is a Minister, may call for it to be perpetual, and
ought not to be rejected; But the first is true. Ergo, etc. 9. If we will
consider the Word of God more nearly, we will find this to be conform thereto.

And, 1. If we consider the Old Testament, it is certain that the Levites had
their own fixednesse in the several Cities beside Jerusalem, seeing that was
their Office to teach the People: and no question, it was done orderly: hence,
Thou and the Levite within thy gates, is so frequently mentioned: and Act.
15.21. it is said, that of' old time Moses had them in every city that did
preach him. It is certain also, that notwithstanding of that fixednesse,
Levites might be removed to more public service at Jerusalem, as is gathered
from Deuteronomy. 18.6. and 7. If a Levite come from any of thy gates, out of all
Israel, where he sojourned, and shall come with all his desire to the place
which the Lord shall choose, then shall be minister, etc. where a Levit's
removing from Ministering in one place to another, is clearly approven. Neither
is it to be thought, that this removal was left arbitrarie to the Levite
himself: because so, confusion could not have been eschewed; but when it is so
qualified, that he comes with all his desire, it does suppose a trial
thereof, and an orderly way of disposing of him, for the attaining of that end,
to have proceeded, as the learned Iunius does observe on the place.

2. If we come to the New Testament, there we will find our Lord Jesus himself
going from City to City; He sends His Disciples to go through the Cities,
Preaching the Gospel: the Apostles follow the same way in their practice: And
we will find them sending Ministers sometime to one place, sometime to another;
sometimes keeping particular Ministers with themselves, as from the History of
the Acts, and from the beginning and close of several Epistles, may be
gathered. And although these practices may seem, at first, to be extraordinary,
yet considering the end thereof, which is the spreading of the Gospel, and the
ground upon which it is built, to wit, the unity of the Church, the good
whereof is to be sought by all the Ministers who are Christ's Servants, in
reference thereunto; con^idering also that the Church, to the end of the world,
is furnished with power for prosecuting of moral ends in an ordinary way; and
that the Churches propagation, is the end now as then; seeing the removing of
Ministers sometimes from one place to another, may conduce to that end now as
then; and the ground, to wit, the good of the Church universal, is the same
now as it was then, We conceive the practice it self must be moral, as the
ground was, although then the manner and power was extraordinary, which is now
to be performed in an ordinary way.

3. If we will particularly consider, Act. 13.1, 2, 3. we will find this, near
almost in an example. For, 1. There are there several Prophets and Teachers in
the Church of Antioch, as Barnabas, Lucius, Simeon, etc. 2. They are Ministering
there in a collegiat way, and that for a long time. 3. Two of them are pitched
on, to be sent elsewhere, for the spreading of the Gospel; it being in the
wisdom of God thought fit, to call some from Antioch, where were many, that
others might be helped, who had nothing: although no question, there was work
for all of them in Antioch it self: And He might have thrust out more
immediately Himself, if this way had not been pleasing to Him; yet their
sundering was thought fitter for the Churches universal good. 4. This is
execute in a mediate way by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, and
with fasting and prayer. Whence we may argue, If for the greater good of the
Church, some Teachers were taken from Antioch and sent elsewhere, Then may a
Minister, by Church Authority, for the end foresaid, be removed from one place
to another; But the former is true. Ergo, etc. There is nothing can be objected
against this, save to say that this was extraordinary, in that it was
particularly commanded of God: And, 2. That they were extraordinary Officers
that were sent; But this will not enervate the Argument: for, in these
practices of extraordinary Officers in the Primitive times, we must observe
some rules to difference what is ordinary, from what is extraordinary in them,
and so know what is to be imitated, and what not: otherwise we may reject all
the practices of Christ, and the Apostles upon that account, and so prejudge
our selves exceedingly of a great part of the Word that is written for our
direction. Let us therefore observe these rules;

1. Where the ground and reason of a practice, is moral, although the Call
thereto and manner of discharging thereof be extraordinary; yet must the
practice it self be moral, although the manner in so far as is extraordinary be
temporary: Thus, that the Kirk have Teachers (supposing that there must be a
Church) it is moral; as also that her Teachers have a Call, This will follow
from Christ's sending of Apostles, Disciples, and others: Because the same
reason says, that a Minister who is Christ's Ambassador, according to his
station (as an Apostle was in his) should have his commission as an Apostle
had: but that the Church should always have Apostles, or that her Teachers
should be immediately called of God, That will not follow: because the reasons
thereof are not moral. Now, if we may safely reason in the general, that a
Church must have Officers with a lawful Call, because Christ's Apostles had
such, though it was immediate, and also he that was called ought to obey: by
proportion we may gather, that a Church Officer may be called from one place to
another, upon a moral ground, although there be no immediate Call at his
removal, more than at his first entry: because the ground whereupon this
practice is founded, and which is the reason thereof, to wit, the greater good
of the Church, is still binding now as then.

Rule 2. In these primitive practices, there is a proportionablenesse to be
observed between the Officers who act, and their call and manner of proceeding,
to wit, an extraordinary Officer, must have an extraordinary call, as such; and
he may act extraordinarily in the prosecution thereof, by extraordinary Power,
whereas an ordinary Officer must act, by an^ ordinary call and Power, the same
things, suppose in Preaching, Discipline, ordaining of Ministers, etc. and in
so far, that laying on of hands was extraordinary, as being done upon an
immediate Call. But Ministers may follow it in an ordinary way, that is, by a
mediate Call, they may ordain Ministers to a particular Congregation, or
transport from one to another by proportion: because the Apostles by an
immediate Call did send out extraordinary Officers to any particular place.

Rule 3. We would in such practices difference such things as are temporary,
that is, such as have special relation to that time and state of the Church (as
extraordinary Officers and Gifts were) from such things as agree to the Church
as a Church, and serve to the edification thereof at all times. And thus also
transporting of a Minister, must be allowable in such case: because there can
be no reason given why that practice should be peculiar or only agreeing to
that time and case of the Church, or during the Apostles lifetime: but the
grounds that infer the convenience of it, are in a good measure common to us
with them, to wit, the furtherance of the Churches good, which cannot
otherwise be so well done. And if it may be as well done without this, we
acknowledge that this practice will not be binding. And certainly the Lords
putting of the Church to this, to send out some already called, when immediately
he might have thrust out others, does say, that he minded to teach what
ordinarily should be done by the Church in the like case: for, his sending of
them mediately by the Church, and not immediately by himself, as at other
times, does insinuate this.

Rule 4. We are to distinguish things wherein the Apostles acted
extraordinarily, by reason of their infallible Gift, extraordinary Power, etc.
from such things as were common to them with other Ministers, and wherein they
acted in an ordinary way common to them with all Ministers: of the first sort
were their immediate deciding of controversies, appointing of censures, sending
of Ministers, etc. by virtue of their own alone power: this is not to be
imitated: of the other sort are their admitting of Ministers upon a mediate
Call to Congregations, as Acts 14. their debating and deciding of
controversies, and making of Laws in a Synodical way, by reasoning from
Scripture in an ordinary way, as Acts 15. These are imitable; and what they did
in that manner may be followed: And their laying on of Hands (when the Call was
intimate) their Praying and Fasting, which are mentioned in this place, were of
the last kind; and so upon supposition of the intimation of a Call, this their
practice for the substance is to be followed.

Now, to resume a little further the application, that we may know what is
ordinary and what is extraordinary in this case; or, what is moral, and what
perpetual, or what is temporary. 1. That there be a Call of God, that is moral
and perpetual; and it may be concluded from this, that no Minister without Gods
Call, is to be transported; but that that Call is immediately revealed by God
Himself, is temporary, and not to be pleaded for in ordinary cases. 2. This is
moral, that he who is called of God to edify His Church, by leaving one place
to serve Him in another, should obey the same. 3. It Is moral, that this
removal should not be at the man's own determination; but that it be done by
Church Guides, and Church Judicatories. 4. It Is a moral ground upon which this
proceeds, to wit, the greater edification of the Church, whether by engaging
and grafting in of Strangers, or building up of these that are brought in; this
ground can no way be thought more peculiar to these times than to after time:
and therefore it is laid down as the great end of Pastors and Teachers, as well
as of Apostles, as may be gathered from, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. This reason
then must have weight to the end of the world. 5. It Is an ordinary way by which
they proceed, to wit, fasting and prayer, showing the necessity of a
concurrence of Gods orderly and external Call with his inward, for warranting
of this practice; and also showing that when the removing of a Minister from
one place to another may contribute to the good of the Body, they are in that
heartily to concur who have most special interest. Now, these things being
moral and of perpetual weight in the Church, although it will not plead that
the Church may send out Apostles by an immediate Call, or that they may send out
ind^finitely without respect to any place, or not knowing where; yet this will
follow, upon the grounds laid down, that when God calls a man for the
edifying of the body of His Church from one place to another, there it ought to
be obeyed; and that sometimes God may Call, for the greater good of His Church,
to have men removed from one place to another. He is Master of the Harvest: and
therefore may either thrust out Laborers of new to His Field, or may take from
one part of the Field to set upon an other. Only these things would be adverted
here according to the former rules, 1. That by Gods Call, is not to be
understood any extraordinary thing, but His signifying of His mind in an
ordinary way, that such a man's removal from such a place, to another, is upon
consideration of his gifts, upon comparing of the places, and the respecting of
the state of the Church, a hopeful mean through Gods blessing for the further
promoving of edification. 2. As an immediate and extraordinary Call was
necessary for such officers in such a case; so proportionally is an ordinary
Call by ordinary Officers, acting by ordinary Power, only necessary for
ordinary cases, seeing in moral things ordinary Officers, are to do by their
ordinary Power what extraordinary Officers did by their extraordinary Power.
And if we will consider this practice, we will find it this far to be intended
for imitation: For, 1. Although the Lord immediately reveal the Call; yet does
He follow His design in an ordinary way: not by thrusting out new Officers,
which he might have done, if he had walked altogether absolutely and
extraordinarly in this; but he does it in a mediate way of providence, in the
making use of some already called. 2. The circumstances seem so to be recorded,
as if the Lord were giving the reason of calling some from Antioch, rather than
from any other Church, to wit, because there was a considerable number in that
place of fit qualified men; and that so in reason it were more agreeable for
the good of the body, that some should be taken from them to supply the want
of the other, rather than that others should be altogether destitute, or some
removed from such places as might not so well spare: and there can be no reason
of the mentioning of this, but to show the moral equity of this practice, that
Ministers would be proportionated in the Church so as may be extensively for
the good of the whole: and that where some places abound, and others have
scarcity; the abundance of the one, should condescend to supply the other, and
that not of the weakest or least able. 3. The Lord uses a mediate way of
sending them by the Churches interposing of her Authority and Prayers, which He
did not use in the sending of Apostles; nay, Matthias had no imposition of
Hands; and this was because the election of Apostles was no way to fall within
the compass of ordinary Church Power, nor to be followed. It would seem
therefore, that it is made use of in this practice, to signify, that it is a
thing to be continued in the Church, and to be performed by ordinary
Church-judicatories, and imitated by them.

If we consider the times following, it has ever been practiced in the Church.
It Is marked to have been the practice of the first two famous general Councels,
as a mean useful exceedingly for the good of the Church. The Nicaen Council
did transfer Eustachius from Berrhea to Antioch. Sozom. lib. 7. Cap. 2. And
it is observed particularly of Gr^gorius Nazianzenus, that he was thrice
transported: first, he was Bishop in Cappadocia, thereafter brought to
Nazianz^^^; and thereafter to Constantinople by the second famous general
Council, and it is marked to have been of great use to the Church. Cent. 4.15.
300. and to have been their common practice in this time. Socrates, lib. 7.
cap. 35. does for this very end, give many instances of this in several
persons. At the beginning of the Reformation, it was one of the great means
that was made use of by God for propagating the Gospel in several places: the
transporting, or removing of Ministers from one place to another was exceeding
useful: and what cruelty had it been to have refused the desire of people,
seeking Ministers from those that had them? And how else could they have been
supplied? And proportionably the same weight lies here in all times.

Asser. 3. Although in some cases this be for the good of the Church, and is to
be practiced by Church Judicatories; yet it is to be done with great
singleness, tenderness, prudence and caution, least that which of it self,
being rightly managed, is a benefit to the Church, be turned to an abuse, and
prove hurtful to her.

These Cautions and Rules must be regulated according to particular
circumstantiate cases, which cannot be numbered. Yet these things may be said,

1. That no self respect ought to have place here, but the greater good of the
Church and advantage of the Gospel, is the great (...) whereby this is to be
decided.

2. This general is to be found out, by comparing of places and qualifications
with respect to the number of the hearers, their qualifications as they are
strong or infirm, tractable or stubborn, pure or corrupt; In respect of their
stations, as they have influence on public things or not, as they may have
influence in communicating their light to other places; as the word in his
mouth may be more readily and freely received without prejudice, and such other
considerations of this kind: some whereof, are hinted in the close of the
former Chapter concerning a Minister's Call at his first entry.

3 This comparison would not be considered between places, as if there were no
tie standing between him and either of them: certainly there is more
disproportionablenesse required to loose one from a charge, than would have
cast the balance between places at his entry. Also other means of a
proportionable settling and providing of such a place, would be first seriously
essayed and followed if they occur.

4. This would be endeavored to be done by convincing reasons, so as (if
possibly) they who have interest may be satisfied, if not in respect of their
affection, yet in respect of their reason, to wit, that it is the more public
good of the Church.

5. No people ought to oppose the removal of their most faithful and beloved
Ministers, when it is done upon convincing reasons. These people are content to
yield to the removing even of Paul and Barnabas, who, no question, were most
dear unto them. And certainly were there endeavors to convince on the one
side, and an acquiescing to conviction on the other, it would look much more
Christian-like, and prove much more useful. And if this be a called-for duty,
to wit, that a Church^judicatory remove one from a settled Congregation, upon
such grounds, it must be a sin and an opposing of duty, wilfully to obstruct
the same; and if it may be a Call of God, there is more need of conscience and
submission here, to try if it be so or not, than absolutely to resolve a
peremptory and pertinacious opposition to the same without any respect to the
grounds thereof. And we conceive that the keeping of a right mean in this
practice, and eschewing of extremes, might conduce exceedingly to the advantage
of the Church: and it would be exceeding suitable to the unity of the
Cathol^ck Church and that communion that ought to be in her, and well becoming
that Authority and care that is committed to Church-judicatories, that the
several particular Ministers were upon just grounds proportioned with respect
to the edification of the whole. And so we have done with this particular
relation.

3. Concerning the nature and difference of saving and common Grace.
IN this Epistle, there is a large commendation of this Angel's practice: which
is not only given to him in respect of the matter of his actions; but in
respect of the qualifications of them: as, first, that he did not only suffer
for, and have patience in, that which was materially right; but that he
suffered for Christ's Name sake: and that he did not only hate thee deeds of the
Nicolaitans; but did it with a respect to Christ: which is here added, to
difference the sincerity of these actions from others that are materially good
also: for, no question, there may be much suffering, which is not commendable
before Christ. And certainly many others, even among heathens, did hate these
Nicolaitans, who yet cannot be thought to be alike comprehended under this
commendation. This therefore that is added, for my Names sake, must be to show
the sincerity and graciousnesse thereof, as that which did put a difference,
between their sufferings and patience, and the sufferings of others. And it
does imply, that this qualification, was that mainly, which made the Lord take
notice thereof. It is therefore the same on the matter with that, Matthew. 5.11.
of being persecuted for Christ's sake, to which the promise is made, verse. 12.
and the same, with that 1 Pet. 4.13. of being made partakers of Christ's
sufferings, and of being reproached for his Name: which being an evidence, and
part of blessedness in these places, cannot be conceived but to imply
sincerity; without which, suffering it self, even where the cause is good,
would be of no weight as to that end. We do therefore conceive these words
undoubtedly to be added, to point out that wherein their sincerity consisted,
and wherewith the Lord was especially well pleased: from which we may gather
these Doctrines.

First, That there is a great difference between an action morally or
materially good, and that which is gracious, and as such acceptable to God. It
is not simply suffering and hatred, which the Lord commends here; but suffering
and hatred so and so qualified. Hence we will find frequently in the Scripture,
difference made between these, to do that which is good upon the matter, and to
do it with a perfect heart. In actions therefore, there are these three to be
distinctly considered, 1. The act it self, as it is natural, suppose an act of
hatred, love, grief, etc. 2. As the act is moral, and is directed toward an
object that is agreeable to the Law, that is, to love that which is good, and
to hate that which is evil, and so forth: both which, in many respects, may be
in hypocrites, who may do that which is materially good. 3. We are to consider
an act as gracious, that is, when not only the thing for the matter is
agreeable to the will of God, as suppose, one were acting, or suffering for a
truth; but also when that is done in the manner that the Law requires, and
with a suitablnesse thereunto: and so one suffers not only for a truth; but as
a Christian he carries himself in his suffering for the same: it is this last
which makes the difference, and which the Lord does especially take notice of,
and commend by this qualification, that it is done for his Names sake.

Secondly, We gather, that this difference, wherein the graciousnesse of the
act does consist, is not to be inquired for in any incense degree of the act it
self, whether positive or comparative (at least only) but it is to be inquired
for in the nature and kind thereof, to wit, in respect of positive
qualifications concurring therewith, and having influence thereon: For, this
commendation, is not given upon the degree; but from the nature of these acts:
it is not commendable hatred, because it is in such an intense degree
positively: nor comparatively, because it hates these errors more than it does
hate truth; but because in their hatred of these errors, they conform
themselves to Christ's hatred of them. And likewise by that commendation for
Christ's Name sake, is not holden forth any degree either of their labor, or
patience simply, nor yet comparatively, that they labored more, or did suffer
more for that which is materially good, than they did for any other thing; or,
because their patience was for degree more than their impatience; but, that
there was a peculiar respect to the Lords Name both in their labor and
patience.

If it be asked, What this is, which beside the moral rectitude of the act,
must concur for the making of it to be accounted gracious?

It may be answered in these four. First, There is a different spiritual
principle in the person acting, which must actually have influence upon the
act, and from which the act, as gracious, proceeds. This in Scripture is
called the Spirit, Inner-man, New Creature, etc. and is different in its acting
from the Old Man and Flesh; yea, and from the faculties of the soul, considered
merely as natural: for, if we consider an act, suppose of love, submission
under sufferings, or such like; it is the natural act of the soul as formally
elicited by it: but if we consider them as gracious acts, they do proceed from
the Spirit influencing them (to say so) with a suitableness to it self, by the
cooperation of the Grace of God. Secondly, There is a difference in respect of
the end; there is a gracious and spiritual end proposed in performing of such
a lawful thing: this is implied here in this, that they had the glory of the
Name of Jesus before them in their suffering and patience, as seeking to pursue
that, and not to gain credit to themselves. Thirdly, There concurreth to
qualify a gracious action, a spiritual motive inclining the spiritual
principle to follow this end, which can never be separated from the former, and
here is clear in the two instances that are in the Text; where, as respect to
Christ's Name, is the end, so, love to Christ, and zeal to His Glory moves
them, and swayeth them to pursue this end, by such means, as Laboring,
Patience, hating of the Nicolaitans, etc. and thus to have patience for Christ's
Names sake, is out of respect to Christ's Glory, to be swayed thereunto.
Fourthly, There is a difference in respect of the formality of the act, when
not only the thing that is good is yielded unto, upon a good motive; but as
such, it is yielded unto or acted, that is, when the object, as so considered,
is acted upon: and so not only is one swayed to patience in suffering from
respect to Christ's Name; but upon this formal consideration, they yield
themselves to it, and do it as such. So that still there is a reduplication in
the act, suitable to the end and motive proposed: and as the person in the act
has another principle to act by, another end proposed to himself, and another
motive persuading him to it; so has he a different uptaking of the act or
object in the act, not only as considered in it self as good; but as considered
in reference to such an end, and as such he acts on it. As for instance, it is
laudable and commendable to give to one that is in misery, and more laudable to
love one that is gracious, and to supply his wants; yet both these are not
sufficient to make the act to be accounted gracious, even though the love to
them should be most intense, and the beneficence large; but there must be a
concurrence of these four formerly mentioned, to wit, 1. An inward gracious
principle acting: otherwise, one may be renewed, and carry love to another that
is gracious; and yet if it proceed not from this principle, it is not to be
accounted sincere gracious love. 2. There must be a spiritual single end in
their loving of them, and giving to them, to wit, the honoring of Christ in
them, and their good. 3. A spiritual motive, to wit, the considering of them
not only as in strait, or as lovely in themselves; but as gracious and beloved
of Jesus Christ, whose command calls for love to them. And lastly, this is done
to them as such, when the heart in it is affection, closes with them upon this
account, that they are beloved of Christ, and, as being themselves called of
God to that duty. Thus, Mat. 10. To give to a disciple, is one thing; but to
give to him in the name of a Disciple, is another, that is, to give him upon
that account that he is such; or, as it is, Mark 9.41. Because they belong to
Christ: the former may be often in many natural men, and has no such promise;
this cannot be in any but a Believer, who only may expect the promised reward.
This as, is to be understood, as 1 Cor. 8.7. where some men not only did eat
that which was sacrificed; but as such a thing, and under that formal
consideration, that is, with some conscience of the Idol, as the words before
carry it: and this as makes it quite another thing. So is it to be understood
here, when we say the object is to be considered as such. And in this
reduplication, we conceive, that a main piece of singleness and sincerity does
lie, when not only we do what is commanded, or suffer for what is truth; but
when we do it as a thing commanded, and suffer for it as for His names sake:
and in some respect, it may take-in the two former last differences; and so if
any shall make the number fewer, we shall not debate, providing that under any
name these be taken-in.

Hence, thirdly, We gather also, That what ever act is so qualified (as in the
former is expressed) it is a sincere gracious act in whatsoever degree it be,
so that it be an act of Patience, Love, Hatred, etc. proceeding from an inward
renewed principle, tending to a spiritual end, swayed by a supernatural
motive; and upon that account acting, it cannot be but accounted an act of
sincere Patience, Love, Hatred, etc. although as to the degree of it, it be but
like the grain of mustard seed. For although the acts themselves, even toward
such objects, may be distinguished from gracious acts; yet they cannot be
conceived to be so and so qualified in any degree, but hoc ipso they must be
conceived to be gracious; because in so far they are agreeable to the Law, and
that not only in the matter, but in the manner of them. And this agreeablnesse
to the Law, being a proof that one is Sanctified, without which no such act
could be performed, it may be also an evidence of Justification, although it be
not considered as a condition thereof, which is accepted by the Covenant of
Grace. And although these acts be imperfect in respect of degree; yet they
cannot be denied to be sincere, or perfect, in respect of their kind. Every act
of the new nature in whatsoever degree being like it self, and conform to the
principle from which it proceeds; even as on the contrary, the least motion
of the old man is sinful according to the root from which it flows: for,
these two cannot be separated, which the Lord has put together; a good tree
must have good fruit, and cannot bring forth evil fruit, Mat. 7.17.18. etc.
Now, acts in the least degree so qualified, as before is said, are in so far,
at least, fruits of a good tree; yea, of a gracious principle within: and
therefore they cannot but be such also. And if it were not thus, that this
Angel had patience for Christ's Names sake, it could be no ground of
commendation for differencing his patience, from the patience of hypocrites, if
it did not sufficiently prove his carriage to be sincere. And hence,

Fourthly, Arises also this, that no natural man or hypocrite, though coming
the greatest length in the state of hypocrisy, can in the least degree perform
an act so and so qualified, as is before said, more than they can act from a
principle which they have not: for, if they might in any measure have patience
for Christ's Names sake, in respect of the end, motive, and account upon which
the heart yields to suffering, it could be no ground of a peculiar
commendation to this Angel, which is yet contrary to the scope. And if the
former be true, that every act so and so qualified, is a sincere act, this must
necessarily then follow thereupon. And so more particularily we say, that no
hypocrite can thus formally do any thing that is good, as, to give instances,
1. In the duty of love to God; an hypocrite cannot love God as God, and to
suffer for Christ's Names sake, as is formerly expressed. Because, 1. That is
given here as the evidence of this Angel's gracious practice, that it was so
qualified; and the promises that are annexed to this of suffering for his Names
sake (whereat formerly we hinted) do confirm it. 2. This being true of all
natural men, that they are real haters of God; and it being true also, that
natural men and hypocrites may go a great length in loving God, and in
expressing the evidences thereof in some respect; It must either be said then,
that they hate God in respect of the materiality of their actions, or in
respect of the want of the qualifications formerly mentioned, that is, because
they love not him, and what he loves as such, and upon such an account: now, it
cannot be said that they love not God in the former respect; Nay, not only in
respect of their being defective alanerly in the degree or intensnesse of the
act, as may be showed afterward. It must be true therefore in the last respect.
And so it will follow, that no man in nature can be said to love God, or
perform any act in things materially good, according as it is formerly
qualified. 3. This may be added, that if respect to good, could sway the
natural man so as to make him act according to the former qualifications in
any one act, then might he perform all other acts upon that same account also:
for, a qua^enus ad omno, vales cons^quentia. Now, if it be absurd to say, that
one can be a hypocrite, and yet in all his performances and actions be so
swayed (which is the clear evidence of a sincere Professor which needs not to
be ashamed, Psalm. 119.6.) Then it must also be absurd to say, that a hypocrite
may perform any commanded thing upon that account as such, and is formerly
qualified. 4. The doing of acts so qualified, does necessarily presuppose a
gracious principle, or habitual change in the person that acts it: for, it
being a fruit, (In so far as it is so qualified) that is good, and agreeable to
the Law of God in the spiritual meaning thereof, it must be supposed to
proceed from a tree that is good, seeing grapes are not gathered from Brambles,
etc. It cannot therefore be consistent with the state of hypocrisy, for one to
perform acts so qualified, who in practice is still a stranger to the
spiritual meaning of the Law in the kind of the act. 2. It may be instanced in
hatred: for, though one in nature or an hypocrite may hate that which is sin;
yet from this we may gather that he cannot hate it as sin, and as it is
hateful to God: Because, 1. This hating of the Nicolaitans deeds, is given
here as a proof of this Angels sincerity: and if it were a thing common, there
could be no such peculiarnesse in it; and there can be no peculiarnesse here,
but that they hated them upon that account as hateful to God, and out of zeal
to him they did it: otherwise, no question, heathens and natural men might
have hatred at them in greater vehemence for the degree thereof, than these who
are commended. The difference then must be in the qualifications, as is said.
2. The reasons for the former instance will confirm this also: for, if one
might hate sin as sin, and as hateful to God, then might he hate all sin, and
what is hateful to God, according to the axiom formerly laid down, a quatenus
ad omne, etc. and so he might hate his loving of any thing more than God, and
his being defective in the degree and manner of any duty: and consequently, he
could not be said to love any thing more than God, seeing no man can actually
love a thing, and, upon that same account and consideration, hate that act of
their love, at the same very time, in the same very degree: It must then
follow, that what hatred they bear to sin, is for some other ends, and not upon
this account. Again, if one might hate sin as sin, one might love grace as
grace, it being equally approveable by God to hate sin as sin, and to love good
as good. Now, this being disproved in the former instance, must also fall in
this. Lastly, The hating of sin as sin, must suppose a different principle,
whence that act does proceed, beside what is in it self sinful: for, it cannot
be conceived that a sinful principle, as such, can hate it self: and in
Scripture, lusting against the flesh, or fighting against the law in our
members, which must be a warring against sin as sin, and as proceeding from
such a root as the flesh or the old man, is ever attributed to the Spirit, Gal.
5.17. or the inner man, and law of the mind, Romans 7. which does necessarily
infer a change of the root in these who do hate sin as sin: and therefore this
can be within the compass of no hypocrite. Neither will it infringe this, that
by experience we find drunkards, swearers, and other unrenewed persons, hating
not only these acts in themselves; but even in their children; or, that we may
find it to have been in our selves before regeneration: This indeed will prove
that a natural man, may hate that which is sin; but will not prove that he
hates it as sin, but as that which is hurtful or shameful to him, or proves
disquieting to the peace of his natural conscience, as from the same
experience may be gathered; for, these sins in others will never affect them;
and there will still be many delightsome sins continued in, which, it may be,
they will know to be sins, and yet carry no such hatred to them. And though
natural men in their judgment may be convinced that sin as sin is hateful,
and evil in it self; yet it will not follow that they will actually hate it as
such upon that consideration: because there is no particular sin, that from the
Word may be gathered to be sin, but a natural man's judgment may be convinced,
that as such it is evil; and yet oftentimes do they continue drunk with the
love of many of them'r because men do not consider and hate ill simply as ill,
but as evil to them; even as they desire not that which is good simply, but
that which they conceive good to them: and experience daily will make this
appear, that the heart loves not, or hates not things as they appear simply
in themselves, but as it conceives them to be in reference to its present
condition. Now, considering sin as sin simply, without reference to any other
thing, there is nothing upon that account can be conceived in it that can be
hateful to a natural man, who is dead in his sinful condition. It must be
therefore for some other respect that he hates any particularl ill, as these
whom God afterward renews will find in their own experience.

Fifthly, This also will follow, that then there is a difference between the
acts of saving Grace and the acts of common Grace, beside any consideration of
the degree thereof: so that this difference may well be said to be in kind, or
ipso genere. We need not be curious in the terms of Physical, or moral
differences, this must be a Physical and real difference, as Grace is a
Physical and real thing, and does not only differ from common gifts in respect
of the Covenants accepting of such a degree, and not of another; but also in
respect of concurring qualifications formerly mentioned: for, an act performed
with these qualifications, must either be of the same kind that an act is
without them, or it must differ from it because of these qualifications. And if
it differ because of these, then is that difference real, flowing from the kind
of the act, and not from the consideration of the degree alone; and so not
graduall only.

Lastly, It will follow, that one in the search and trial of the sincerity and
savingnesse of his Grace, is not only to consider it in the degree thereof,
either positive or comparative; but may also look to the nature and kind
thereof, and cannot conclude the sincerity of it, except they consider the
qualifications formerly mentioned: for, that must be the only sure way to find
out the sincerity of an act, which our Lord Jesus proposes as the ground of
the commendation thereof: but here we see that the grounds upon which He
commends both their patience for Him, their respect to Him, and their hating of
what was evil, is, not (only at least) because of any degree, that is
considered in these acts; but because of their kind, or qualifications
wherewith they are qualified, as it is not patience (that is, patience as it is
a Grace) because it suffers so much, or suffers more for Truth, than for any
other cause, considered upon the matter; but because their suffering in a good
cause was so qualified, as is said: we will see this same to be clear in all
other instances, as, it is true saving Repentance, not that which has the
deepest sorrow positively, nor that which has more sorrow for sin
comparatively than pleasure in it, but it is according as the principle and
motive are, from which the sorrow proceeds, and by, and according to which it
acts: otherwise, no question, Judas his sorrow might have been said to have
been true Repentance: which was certainly not only an intense grief; but also
comparatively, it affected him more than any worldly loss could affect him, or
any pleasure or advantage, which by his sin accreased to him, as the story of
the Gospel does clear. The like may be said of fear, There is no positive or
comparative degree can prove it to be saving, this being certain, that for
degree some natural men may fear and tremble, and that with anxietie, so as the
Lord may be more feared in this manner by them than any other thing else: trial
then must especially be, by considering the principle whereby the person is
acted in this fear, the motive that swayes him to it, and the account upon
which he acts on God in it, whereby filial fear is differenced from servil:
and this can be by no consideration of the degree, however considered; but must
be in respect of the qualifications of the act.

If it should be said, That it is single respect to God swaying one to sorrow
for sin or fear more than any other motive does; and so in that respect, it may
be said to consist in the degree.

Answ. 1. This supposes the concurring of positive qualifications. 2. It
supposes the concurring of the same qualifications mentioned. 3. This places
not the difference in the intensnesse of the act only, but in the
qualifications that have influence on it; and so it does confirm what we said,
to wit, that more respect is to be had to the nature of the act, and the
qualification thereof in our trial, than to the degree thereof.

Here it is to be adverted,

1. That in all this discourse of the positive qualifications of sincerity,
they are still to be considered with respect to Christ and the Covenant of
Grace, so that singleness in the end, takes in the glorifying and worshipping
of God in Christ, and in the motive, the consideration of Gods worth and love,
as considered in Him, comes in (as the words, out of the apprehension of the
mercy of God in Christ, put in the definition of Repentance, do import) and in
the reduplication, it acts on Him considered as such, that is, it loves God,
fears him, and believes in Him as considered in Christ: and this has an
universal approbation of the way of the dispensation of Grace, and that as
proceeding from a principle of life communicate to them by Christ Jesus:
whereby they become not only obliged to God for it; but obliged to Him in
Christ Jesus. And thus we may see, that this single respect to God and His own
goodness for Himself, does not shut out simply all respect to our own good:
for, the considering of Him in Christ, cannot but include that; but it derives
all our good from that Fountain, and by that Channel Christ; and subordinateth
all the thoughts thereof to the praise of Gods Grace in Him. And this is to be
remembered throughout: because this does fully difference true Gospel-sincerity
from the moral flashes of love, fear, faith, etc. which by some legal work may
proceed from natural men, who yet can never act any thing for kind the same
with these qualifications: because the considering of God, and acting on Him so
by love, fear, faith, etc. is really to call Him and count Him Father in
whatsoever degree they be, which has the promise of acceptance, and is a
fruit of the Spirit of Adoption: for, Gods Covenant runs not to him who
believes at such a degree; but simply, to him that does believe, thus
qualified, whether his faith or unbelief be more or less: and so the marks run
not, these that have Grace or fruits at such a bigness only; but these that
have good fruits in any measure, have them from Christ; and may conclude that
the tree is good: and therefore cannot but be accounted living branches, that
will never be broken off: which of no hypocrite can be said, who do never bring
forth their fruits in Him. And it is hard to say, that fruit brought forth by
virtue and communication of life from Christ, does not differ but in degree
from fruit brought forth from, and to our selves. Especially considering, that
the Scripture does contradistinguish them on that account, without this respect
to their degree, as we may gather from Hos. 14.8. being compared with Ioh. 15.
v. 2.4.5.

2. We would advert, that this reduplication consists not only in the
proposing of such an end, or being acted by such a motive, to wit, a command,
etc. but it takes in a singleness in both, and gives such an end and motive
the chief consideration in the act, whereby in the practice of duty the heart
not only purposes the pleasing of God in the giving of obedience to a command,
but goes about it as a thing pleasing to God and honorable to Him, and as such
does approve of it: for, a servant may desire to please his Master, and do what
he has commanded, and yet possibly not to be single in it, as it is pleasing
to him: which, as we said, is the thing wherein the great pinch of discerning
these differencing qualifications will lie.

Learned Baxter, in his excellent Treatise of the Saints everlasting rest,
part. 3. does otherwise express the Doctrine of the difference and trial of
saving and common Grace, than what has been usually rested in among practical
Divines, which does necessitate us someway to insist a little further in the
clearing thereof. He has these Assertions, 1. That it is not the Law but the
Covenant, that can clear the sincerity of Grace as saving, to wit, as it is
accepted by the Covenant as the fulfilling of the condition thereof, page 205.
and 206. 2. He says that God has not in the Covenant promised Justification
upon any mere act, or acts considered without their degree and suitableness to
their object, etc. page 210. 3. There is no act, considered in its mere nature
and kind, which a true Christian may perform, but one that is unsound may
perform it also, page 211. From which he draws, That wicked men may really
rely on Christ, have recumbencie on him, love God, etc. page 211. and 231. and
that they may hate sin as sin, and as displeasing to God, Ibid. 4. He asserts,
That the sincerity of saving Grace as saving, lies materially, not in the bare
nature thereof but in the degree; not in the degree considered absolutely in it
self, but comparatively as it is prevalent against its contrary, that is, when
love adhereth more to God than any other thing, and such like, page 222. which
he endeavors to show both in the infused habits, and in the acts of saving
Grace: and page 235. does assert, That in loving God and Christ as Mediator,
there is no more than a graduall difference between the regenerate and
unregenerate; and in the end, he does load the common opinion with many
dangerous consequents.

These assertions do seem, at the first, to be expressly contradictory to what
has been said; yet if we will consider the explication thereof, we will not
find so great difference in the matter it self as to be the rise of a new
debate and controversy in the Church, wherein there are, alace I too many
already; nor any just cause to reject the former received opinion for any
prejudice that follows upon it: to which two we shall speak a little.

1. We conceive that the difference will not be found so great as the
expressions at first seem to carry, and were it not that this opinion of his,
is expressly laid down in opposition to what is commonly received, there might
be not so great ground to suspect it: For. 1. the infusing of habits as
necessary and antecedaneous to gracious acts, is acknowledged by both: and
expressly, part. 1. page 158. and 159. he does condemn the contrary in
Grevinchovius, at least as an error. And, part. 3. page 224. he has somewhat to
the same purpose. 2. It is not questioned whether true acts of saving Grace
have a rational and deliberate prevalencie over the opposite lusts, as he
asserts, part. 3. page 212, 213. that will be also granted by all Divines, that
though where true Grace is, it may be captivated and not always actually
prevail against the opposite suggestions of the flesh; yet in a sober and
deliberate frame, the interest of God and spiritual things will have more room
in the heart of one that is renewed (as he is such at least) than sinful lusts
unto which the flesh does entice.

3. It is granted also, that beside the act there is necessary for the
constituting of it to be saving, a sutablenesse and adequatnesse to the object,
which we will find in the explication thereof to be almost the same with the
positive qualifications, which formerly we did lay down, as page 211. and 212.
he does thus express it, The sincerity of the act, as saving, consists in
its being suited to its adequat object (considered in its respects which are
essential to it as such an object) and so to believe in, and love God as God,
and Christ as Christ, is the sincerity of these acts; but this lies in
believing, accepting and loving God, as the only supreme God, etc. where
expressly the act is considered as acting upon its object under the
reduplication formerly mentioned, and seems to be by him accounted the same
with accepting and loving God above all. And again, page 229. to will God and
Christ above all (says he) this is to will savingly, which he explains thus,
to will God and God, the chief good, and Christ as Christ the only Savior: and
page 230. he says, that a man may will God and Christ, who by the
understanding are apprehended as the chief good (as the devils do) and yet by
not willing Him as so considered, that willing is not saving, and wherefore? It
must be because it wants that reduplication: which reduplication in the term
as, must be indeed extended to the will, as well as to the understanding, as he
there asserts; but is not to be restricted to the degree of its act, to speak
so, but is to be extended also to the nature of it. Further, we will find the
same learned Author elsewhere (to wit, in the Appendix to his Aphorisms, m.
lib. page 242. In answer to the 4. objection) giving the difference between
sincere Covenanting with God and that which is not sincere, where he does lay
down six concurring qualifications, and so concludes thus; Ye see that there is
a great difference between covenanting sincerely and covenanting in hypocrisy,
and so between faith and faith, and yet the difference will be found no other
thing but what almost is usually asserted by Divines in the like case.

4. We will find him also come near in expressions, as page 226. a specific
difference is acknowledged: and although he call it a moral specific
difference; yet does he express the same, thus, that is proceeds from the
agreement and conformity of our actions and dispositions to the Law (which
determines of their duenesse) or their disconformitie thereunto: again, page
229. he instances love and delight, etc. as these things wherein sincerity may
be tried, (for certainly delighting in God, is a Grace and a commanded duty, as
loving of Him is) compare it with page 213. and 214. he does assert that
hypocrites may have delight in the same objects (to wit, the knowledge of God
and His Works) which are objects also of the delight of the Regenerate; but
(says he) In the sinner, these delights are nearest of the same nature with
the former sensual delights: for it is not the excellency or goodness of God
Himself that delights them; but the novelty of the thing, etc. as receiving
thereby some addition to its own perfection, and not as from God, etc. and
though they delight in studying and knowing God, and Heaven, and Scripture; yet
not in God as God or the chief good, not out of any saving love to God (this
contradistinguishing of saving love, from knowing of God as God, and from
hypocritical love, does seem to place the difference in some other thing than
the degree alone) but either because (as some Preachers) they make a gainful
trade of it by teaching, others; or, because it is an honor to know these
things, or be able to discourse of them, or at best ( nota, if these be their
best motives, or the highest account upon which they delight, Then they cannot
delight in God as God, which sincere Believers do; nor can they do an act for
kind the same: and since there must be a difference between their delight, and
the delight that is gracious in respect of the kind, because they go on
different accounts, so must it be in other Graces) as I said before, they
delight to know God out of a delight in the novelty, etc. and natural elevation
of the understanding thereby; it is one thing to delight in knowing, another in
the thing known. And afterward near the foot of that page, says, So it is the
same kind of delight that such a man (to wit a hypocrite) has in knowing God
and knowing other things: whereby it is clearly insinuated, that it is another
kind of delight, which the Believer has in delighting in God, than any
unrenewed man can have, seeing it is an other kind of delight than he has in any
other thing. And wherein this kind of difference consists we may gather from
what is said. 1. There is supposed to be a different principle, to wit, an
infused gracious habit, which must precede this act. 2. There is a different
end, the one seeks to please his own curiosity, the other respects God and
his own spiritual good. There is, 3. a different motive; the one delights in
it, because it is profitable, or honorable, or pleasing to himself to know
such things, the other delights in God Himself, as acted therein from the
excellency that is in himself, and the love that he has to himself, and the
spiritual satisfaction that he has in it. 4. There is a reduplication in the
act, they not only delight in God, but in him as God, moved thereto out of true
love to God, which (says he) the natural man does not. Now, these four being
granted by the said Reverend Author, and being the very same thing upon the
matter with that which formerly we asserted, we may see that beside any
consideration of the degree, there must be a concurrance of these
qualifications, wherein ordinarily the difference in kind, betwixt saving grace
and common, is placed; and the thing that they call the physical and real
difference being acknowledged by him, as by others; it is not of great moment
to debate for the terms of physical or moral. Seeing then, upon the one
side, the supremacy of Gods interest in the act is not denied, and that in
respect to its eminent degree, if it be well understood; and upon the other the
concurrance of these qualifications is acknowledged, The difference cannot be
great: for understanding of this difference (which must be less than appeared
at first) we would consider these two, 1. That when the degree of grace is
spoken of, it may be considered either more strictly, as contradistinguished
from the former qualifications, which in this respect are said to be the kind
of the act; or, it may be considered more largely, as it comprehends the
principle, motive, end, etc. and so it takes in the former qualifications. It
seems that this Learned Author, when he speaks of the degree, does take it
in this large sense; whereas usually it is taken in the first and strict sense,
and this makes the difference appear greater than it is: and if this
distinction might reconcile these mistakes, it were desirable. 2. The
supremacy, or precedence and prevalency of the interest of God in us above the
interest of flesh (in which alone that Reverend Author does place the sincerity
of saving Grace, page 211. prop. 10.) may be considered in respect of the
degree of the act it self, being compared with the objects whereupon it acts;
and so comparatively, that act may be said to be prevalent, suppose of love,
fear, sorrow, etc. that loves and fears God more than any other thing, and has
more sorrow for sin than delight in it, etc. or we may consider this supremacy
and prevalency of Gods interest in respect of the qualifications of the act,
that is, of the end, motive, etc. and thus the interest of God may be said to
be prevalent, when it is respect to God Himself, and the souls esteeming of Him
as He is God, that makes it love Him and fear Him, and sorrow for dishonouring
of Him, so that it is His interest, more than any other end or motive that has
influence on these acts: in this latter sense, there is also no difference from
what was formerly said; and if that proposition could be so understood, there
might be an accommodation: but the instances and explications added by the
fornamed Author, seem to limit this prevalency of Gods interest to the act it
self, as being only compared with other objects, or as acting on God, or what
is approven by Him prevalently, beyond what it does on other opposite objects.
In a word, this, when the good that is in God is considered on the one hand,
and the good that is in creatures on the other hand, if the soul choose God and
love Him beyond any created good, That is accounted by him to be saving sincere
love, and the sincerity thereof to consist in this degree alone. From this the
ordinary Doctrine differs especially in these, 1. That usually Divines
consider the prevalency of Gods interest to be especially in the motive swaying
to the act, and other qualifications, and the act to be sincere, suppose of
love, fear, sorrow, etc. not only because it loves or fears God more than any
other object; but because, single respect to God and spiritual good, makes it
love Him, fear Him, sorrow for the offending of Him, in what ever degree the
act it self be. In the former respect, supposing that an act could be
prevalent, to wit, in loving or fearing God more than any other thing, such
acts behoved to be accounted sincere and saving without any respect to the
motive, or other qualifications of them; and it supposes that an act may have
these qualifications and not be gracious: in the last respect, acts so
qualified (supposing that there may be such prevailed over by the violence of
other subjects) yet are to be accounted gracious, because so and so qualified,
without respect to the degree of the present act; and so, that no act of an
hypocrite can be so qualified. 2. The difference is in this, that this Reverend
Author does only constitute the difference in that comparative prevalent degree
alone: and therefore expressly asserteth, page 235. that there is no more but a
graduall difference betwixt the grace that is in an regenerate man and the love
that he has to God, and the common grace and love that may be in one
unregenerate: which would seem to say, that the one may love God on the same
consideration and account, and from the same motives that the other may,
especially considering that he does extend this mere graduall difference, both
to the habits and acts: and so the question here comes to this, if there be
any other difference than a graduall difference to be inquired for? And this is
that which we assert, that there is beside any gradual difference, a difference
in kind (that is, in respect of the former qualifications) betwixt saving and
common grace, and that in our search the one is to be inquired for with the
other; so that no degree simply can quiet the mind, except it be so qualified
as aforesaid. And we conceive that the instances, reasons, similitudes, and
Scriptures that are adduced by that Reverend Author to illustrate and confirm
his opinion, will do no more but this, to wit, show that when a gracious person
is acting rationally, Gods interest will be prevalent with him in degree; and
that ever it should be so, and that it is most useful for a Believers
clearness that it be so in an high degree. All which are without question: but
they will no ways exclude the qualifications mentioned; but rather do
presuppose them, as for example, page 231.32. he says, That sincere sorrow
must be at such a degree that it prevail over our delight in sin and love to
it, also i^ cannot be saving: although this be true; yet, can any say that this
is enough, except the principle, motive, etc. from which in proceeds, and by
which it is qualified be considered, as was formerly hinted? Again, page 234. he
says, True love to the brethren consists in this degree, that it love them
above our honor, wealth, etc. And (says he,) What did the love of some in
Queen Mary's days want but a more intense degree to make it prevail over love
to their houses, to their honor, safety, etc. that it might be sincere? Beside
this intense degree, there might be wanting a right principle, for bringing
forth of love, and a right account upon which to love them, without which the
hazarding of lives and estates both for them, had never been accounted sincere
love before God; and with which, the giving unto them a cup of cold water as in
the name of a Disciple, Mat. 10. would have been acceptable. And no question,
many who through fear, and self love, did keep down the stirrings of sincere
love within them, so that it prevailed not to make them publicly own these
Sufferers as they should have done; yet might still carry sincere love in their
hearts to them, although sinfully they obscured it: which will indeed prove
them to be guilty, and their love to be imperfect; but will not prove it
altogether to be hypocritical and unsound in the kind thereof: and therefore
seeing without these qualifications, no degree can be sufficient to prove the
sincerity of an act: and where these are, the act in whatsoever degree cannot
but be accounted sincere; it must rather be these that constitute the sincerity
of the act, than any degree considered as distinct from them. That assertion
therefore, which is, page 238. That a hypocrite may love a Godly man for his
Godliness, or a Christian for Christ's sake, seems to be unwarrantable, and
utterly to make void that mark of the Grace of God, which consists in true
love to the brethren: for, nothing can be conceived in the comparative degree
without the kind, but may be in hypocrites: and often these that are sincere
will be for a time so captivated with self-love, that they will not evidence
their love to others; but see for themselves, as the Disciples did, when Christ
was betrayed: yet it cannot be denied but that then they loved him sincerely;
and that not in word only, but in deed also. And although it was exceedingly
defective, yet unsound it cannot be called: and so may be said of love to
others. And considering, that where nature has dominion, there is still
enimity at the seed of God as such, how can it be that a natural man can love,
and hate the same person, upon the same account, at one time? It cannot be
denied, but natural men may entirely love these that are gracious; and that
also their supposing them to be beloved of God, may have some weight with them:
yet is not that respect had to them upon this account as they are beloved of
God, or like to Him; but at the most, as thereby they may gain Gods love, or
have some benefit by their loving of them, or the preventing of some evil, or
the confirming of themselves in their security and self-conceated opinion from
this, that they love such an one, etc. And it appears further in this, that
they love not all who are Godly, and hate not, and shun not, all that are
opposite to Godliness; and so do not love God and Godliness it self singly as
such: because then their own inclination and secret delights, would be hateful
to themselves. And yet certainly, all this would be, if Godly men were loved,
upon this account, because they are such. Again, page 226. he illustrateth it
by this comparison of eating much and little, to show that the moral good of an
action consists in the degree thereof. Now, none will say, that simple
shunning of extremes of eating and drinking too much or too little, will
constitute an act to be sincerely gracious, and acceptable to God, except it be
considered as qualified with its motive and end, to wit, Gods Glory, etc. And
elsewhere, gold (says he) is to be tried by weight, at by the touchstone: now
this is true that the quantity of gold is to be tried so, (but not only to be
tread by the weight; and then also Grace is not only to be tried by the degree)
yet certainly the reality and truth of it, is to be tried by the touchstone,
and it is here the sincerity and truth of Grace that we are inquiring for: and,
says he, Ibid. it is not the wrestling, but the overcoming, that the promise
is made to, which is true in respect of the promises of full fruition: for,
these do presuppose a full and total victory; but can it be said that no
wrestler may be said to have true Grace, or may conclude that he has it, till
he have in this sense fully overcome? That would directly thwart the Authors
scope, which is to press the making of our election and calling sure, and by
this debate to help therein: for, upon this ground, none in this life could
attain assurance, because this victory, that is mentioned in these Scriptures,
Rev. 2.3. etc. He that overcomes, etc. is the result of all: that therefore
which he asserts, page 243. cannot be granted, to wit, that fighting is the
same action naturally in both, to wit, in these who overcome, and these who are
overcome, 1 Jo^. 4.5. with 2 Pet. 2.19, 20. For both fight, but the valiant,
strong, and constant do conquer, when the feeble faint, and cowardly and
impatiently do turn their backs and are overcome. It may be observed, that
though fighting be the same (possibly Physically understood) yet it is one thing
to fight valiantly, and stoutly, another to do it cowardly and faintingly, or
to fight for respect to their Captain, or for love of wages, etc. and so there
is a great difference morally between fighting and fighting, and also in
respect of the positive qualifications thereof: and thus the difference is
admitted here. Beside, that word (...) in the present, shows that the Lord
does reckon a difference before this victory be obtained. And (says he) the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence; and violence is no distinct action but a
different degree of action. These things (I say) may serve clearly to
illustrate what we asserted: for here, fighting is contradistinguished from the
victory that follows it. Now can it be said, that there is no true Grace in
the person that fights, or in fighting that he may overcome? And if there be,
then the sincerity and truth of Grace consists not in this actual overcoming
only: nor can it be said, that the renewed fighter wrestleth in the same
manner, or that his fighting is in the same kind, considering that he fights
by his faith, 1 Ioh. 5.4. that he mortifieth the deeds of the flesh by the
Spirit, Romans 8.13. that he puts on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. etc.
And seeing an unrenewed man, neither has such weapons or spritual armor, nor
has a life or dexterity to use them, nor such arguments inducing him to the
fight, or such an end before him, or such a principle as is capable, so to be
wrought upon, etc. can it be said that his fighting is the same with the
former? And that other expression of offering violence to the Kingdom of God,
is but a borrowed expression: and therefore ought not so to be made use of
here, as if there were stronger and weaker assaults made at Heaven indeed; and
as if there needed no more to the weak assault, but a further degree only,
when, at least, there must be new conveyed skill and strength, and a new way
must be followed for attaining it. For, the scope of that place, is, to show
the necessity of taking hold of Christ by Faith, notwithstanding of what ever
impediments and discouragements would scare one in the way: and so it proves,
that the Faith of a Believer, is far different from the Faith of a Hypocrite;
because the one steps over difficulties upon the consideration of Gods
faithfulness, and by taking hold of Jesus Christ does prevail in the
conquering of Heaven, as if by violence and might they did carry it, whereas
others, who never took hold on Him, or by their Faith improved His offices, for
the upmaking of their own needs, have no ground of expectation to be admitted
to Heaven; and nothing they can do, can be of force to do violence to the
Kingdom of God without this. And so in this respect the fighter prevails and
overcomes, and gains Heaven: because, as the Apostle says, he striveth
lawfully, 2 Timothy 2.5. and because he fights in the right manner; and his
fighting is not, not to be accounted sincere, till he overcome; but he
overcomes, because it is sincere; and so it is sincere before that. Beside, the
native exposition of that place, looks to a violence peculiarly called for in
that time: for, since the days of John Baptist, says the Text, which will
concern this nothing, For indeed then, there was a great difficulty to get the
Messiah closed-with as already incarnate, and to lay by all Types, as now
having their accomplishment. By all which, we think it is more agreeable to
Truth, to continue the received Doctrine of inquiring for the Truth and
sincerity of Grace in the kind thereof, and not in the degree only. For further
confirming whereof, (beside what is said) we shall first show that there is a
real difference between the habites of saving Grace in the Regenerate, and the
common dispositions that may be in hypocrites. 2. We shall show that there is
such a difference also in the acts of saving Grace, in respect of these former
qualifications, beside the consideration of the prevalency of the degree, and
the acts that may be in hypocrites. And, 3. That this new opinion, has no more
advantage with it, than the former; but that it has the same inconveniences,
(if they be inconveniences) which are alleged against the former, waiting upon
it and others also besides these.

1. That the infused habits of Grace which are called the new nature, seed of
God, the unction, and spirit, etc. do differ from the habits and dispositions
that are in unrenewed men and hypocrites, and that by a real and Physical
difference even in kind, may thus be made out, 1. If the Flesh and Spirit, etc.
be different in kind, having different originals, and different effects, etc.
Then Grace, thus considered in a renewed person, must be different in kind from
what is, or can be in any hypocrite: because the one is Spirit, the other is
still Flesh: and there is no mids between a natural and a renewed man, and what
proceeds from them as such: for, what is born of the one, is Spirit; and what
is born of the other, at what ever length it be, it is Flesh: But the former is
true; Flesh and Spirit are most opposite in all the former respects: this, to
wit, the Spirit, is an immediate effect of a Physical operation of the Grace of
God working a change upon the heart; and so must have some suitable Physical
thing in the nature of it, different from any thing which is not produced by
the same cause, or by the same manner of causality; such as common dispositions
are: and in the effects, there is contrariety, the one lusts against the
other, for the one is contrary to the other, Gal. 5.17. and therefore there
must be some real, Physical difference between these, whose causes and effects
are so different. 2. If they do not differ in kind, then it is either because
they are both fruits of the Spirit, and that equally, or, because neither of
them is so, or, because that which is of the Spirit savingly, does not differ
from that which is not saving. Now, none of these can be affirmed. Concerning
the last, this only can be said for answer, that although nature and saving
Grace may differ so, yet common Grace cannot be said to make such a difference,
it being also a fruit of the Spirit. And to this we reply, If these common
gifts can be consistent with a dominion of sin, and complete deadness therein,
and saving Grace cannot be consistent with these, Then there must be a real
difference, seeing saving Grace not only imports a relative change of a man,
to wit, that he is justified, but also a real and Physical change, to wit, that
he is a new, or renewed creature, which by no common Gifts or Graces can be:
But the former is true. And therefore again, 3. If saving Grace be somewhat
Physical, (to speak so) and constituteth a Physical difference between a man
that has it and others; yea, between a man and that which formerly he himself
was; and if common Grace cannot do that, but the man that has it and no more,
is the old man still, and in nature, Then there must be a Physical difference
between them: But the former is true. Ergo. For, this is ever certain, a man is
either renewed or unrenewed and in nature, there is no mids: Now if there be
any difference that is Physical between these two (which must be, as there is
between a good tree and an evil, a new creature and an old, and not as between
a little creature, and one that is more big: for, new and old respect the kind)
Then habitual Grace must differ from all other common works Physically:
because it is that which constituteth this difference. Add, 4. These common
dispositions may evanish or never be so through, but the person which has had
them may perish: which cannot be said of saving Grace, called the Seed of God,
immortal, and inccorruptible, that remains in them that once had it, etc.
especially, considering that it is called immortal, in respect of the nature of
it: and that, that continuance is one of the properties thereof. For although
nothing of it self be eternal, and immortal but God; yet it cannot be denied
but what the Lord minds to make immortal, He does otherwise fit and qualify
it for that end than other things, as we see in the difference that is between
Angels and other creatures, and the souls and bodies of men, and of that
glorious conformity that shall be put on the glorified Members of Christ unto
their head. And though (as he says) that all, both Philosophers and Divines do
say more; yet this is enough: which also the forementioned Author acknowledges
in the Appendix to his Aphorisms, page 240. And saving Grace being of the same
nature with Glory, it were hard to say, that a man in nature, did for kind
partake of the Divine nature, and of the first fruits of the Spirit and Glory,
who, yet may be tormented in hell for ever. Lastly, The multiplying of these
common gifts, could never alter the tree and make it good; so as if it were
possible that they might grow to the greatest hight and bigness, they would be
still but common gifts, seeing they grow from that root: therefore the tree must
first be good, ere the fruit be good. Now common gifts never being able to
alter the tree, as is said, there must therefore be a difference between them
and saving Grace in some other thing than in the degree. And indeed if these
dispositions be of the same kind with gracious habits then the root of common
and saving Grace would be one; which the Scripture does still difference: and
in this respect the habit has not its sincerity from the acts, as if it were
gracious, because the acts thereof are thus comparatively prevalent; but the
acts, are gracious and prevalent, and cannot but be so, because they proceed
from such an habit; and the habit is first gracious, before the acts thereof be
sincere: and therefore there must be a real and Physical difference in the
habit it self from common dispositions, as it is considered (at least) in order
of nature, before the acts: and so, the difference does not only lie in the
acts themselves. Neither can it be said here, that habits and dispositions do
not differ in kind: therefore that difference is not to be sought here: for,
beside that this Assertion will find opposition among Philosophers, it can no
ways be acknowledged here, where the habit is not natural, nor acquired. And
certainly the names and titles, whereby the Scripture does set forth this
habitual Grace, (as the New-nature, Spirit, New-man, Newcreature, Gods
Workmanship, His Seed, the Heart of Flesh, etc. whereby it is not only
contradistinguished in its kind from nature and flesh, taken in their most
gross acception; but from all common gifts of the Spirit also) do hold forth a
real difference to be between them.

2. Concerning gracious acts, that are fruits of this Spirit and grow upon this
tree of habitual Grace, mainly the question is here, If that act of love,
whereby a Believer loves God, does differ any other way than gradually, from
that act of love whereby an unrenewed person loves Him, or which he while
unrenewed had unto Him, that is, that the one loves Him above all and the
other does not, though both love Him really and in the same kind for the nature
of the act? And so if this be not the only mark by which the sincerity of all
Graces are to be tried? whereof this is a particular instance.

To say somewhat to this, we conceive, that the truth and reality of sincere
saving Grace in its acts is otherwise to be inquired for, than in such a degree
only: for, true love loves God above all, because that is the nature of true
Grace as such, to have such acts: and so it is rather a consequent following
on, or a concomitant of true Grace where it is sincere, than that which
constitutes the truth and sincerity thereof: although it may well (being
rightly understood) evidence that: even as a Woman that loves her Husband
chastely, cannot but love him beyond any other; yet does not that constitute the
sincerity of her love; because an Adulteress may do so to an Adulterer; But
especially, it is in loving him as her Husband, and according to that relation:
otherwise we suppose it is not impossible for a Wife to love her Husband,
beyond any other man, and yet not to do it with true conjugall love, but
possibly upon some worldly (and it may be sinful) principle: which if
contraried, would soon discover that love not to be sound, as not loving him as
her Husband, but for some other advantage or satisfaction, as often experience
does clear: and must not that differ from the love of another, who cleaves to
the Husband out of conscience and affection, from that conjugall relation that
they stand in, and because he is her Head, even when many crosses and
discontentments occur to her in her adhering to him? So it may be in other
cases, a Servant may fear his Master more than any man, as a Son may do his
Father; yet that there is difference in that fear (although both agree in the
comparative degree, and neither of them dare offend him) none will deny. This
difference then, must be in the formality of it, (to speak so) as the same
person is distinctly or differently considered by the one, and the other; and
as they are differently swayed, and acted in the same thing, as in the instance
of filial and servil fear, is ordinarily illustrated: much more may this be
conceived in the acting of grace on God, there being so many relations under
which we may consider Him, and act on Him. And may it not be supposed that a
Woman may at first love a Man above all others, and yet not love him for
himself conjugally, who afterward being Married to him, may come to love him on
other principles, and from other grounds? and though there be no difference in
the comparative degree, and the first possibly seemed to be most vehement; yet
is there a difference really betwixt what it was, and what it is. And if this
may be in moral and natural acts, may it not be much more in spiritual saving
acts, when compared with those that are not so? It Is upon this ground that the
acute Divine Cameron does expressly assert, that the love whereby a Wife loves
her Husband, does differ specie from that whereby she may warrantably love
another, so that if she loved any other in the least degree with that kind of
love wherewith she loves her Husband, she were really an Adulteress. And this
is when he is speaking of that question, Number Christus Mediator sit adorandus?
intending thereby to show, that that kind of love, adoration, etc. which is due
to God, can be given to none other in any degree, without manifest impiety. And
will it look well* to say that warrantably we may give love and fear, etc. of
the same kind to men and creatures, which we are called to give to God? and
that only the degree to Him, is comparatively to be supreme; yet upon the
former assertion, this will necessarily follow: for, if a Believers love, fear,
etc. differ no otherwise from the love, fear, etc. of hypocrites, Then that act
of love which he has to God, must be of the same kind with what he has to
Wife, Children, etc. except in the degree: yet I suppose he would be mightily
affected within himself, to approve himself to do so in the least degree. We
say then, that the sincerity of Grace is not to be inquired alanerly in this
prevalent and predominant comparative degree thereof; but there must be some
other things concurring, at least, that constitute the difference betwixt
saving acts of spiritual Grace, and these common acts which may be in
hypocrites. For, if these two may be separated, that is, if there may be this
comparative degree, in the common gifts or graces which an hypocrite may have,
Then that which constitutes the difference of the sincerity of Grace, cannot
consist in that only: for, that must be proper to saving Grace quarto modo,
which does difference it from all other things: but we may see in instances,
that if we consider this degree without respect to any other thing, it may be
found where saving Grace or sincerity is not; and contrarily, saving Grace may
be (at least in respect of particular acts) where that degree is not. Therefore
it is not that alone wherein properly, and essentially the difference does
consist.

Before we give any instances, we would premit some advertisements, especially
concerning the first, which may possibly look strange-like to some, to wit,
that there may be such a comparative degree of love, fear, sorrow etc. in
hypocrites, who yet have nothing of sincere Grace; and that therefore sincerity
is not to be tried by that comparative degree alone. Concerning which it is to
be adverted,

First, That when we say, there may be in an hypocrite such a degree of love,
fear, etc. that may be comparatively prevalent, that is not to be understood,
as if there were love, fear, etc. in sincerity in the least degree in any
hypocrite; but only this, that seeing it is certain (and this Learned Author
asserteth it) that hypocrites upon carnal considerations may love and fear God
in some respects, which yet is out of no true respect to God: so it may be
supposed, that upon the same considerations they may come to love Him, or fear
Him above any other object comparatively. Certainly upon this supposition, that
it were at that degree upon these carnal considerations, it would still be but
of the same kind of which it was, to wit, carnal, and hypocritical love, and
servile fear. Neither can this supposition be thought strange, Seeing. 1. No
hypocrite can fear God sincerely more than love Him; yet that such an one may,
upon apprehensions of Gods terror, fear His wrath more than all the world
beside, cannot be denied. 2. Seeing also it is but some carnal motive that
leads natural men to love any thing most, why should it be thought
impossible, that upon such motives and considerations, they may be swayed to
love God most? Especially considering what flashes of joy may be in temporary
Believers (although they continue not) and what may be supposed to have been in
Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4. and Darius, cap. 6. and possibly in many hypocrites
amongst the Jews and others, upon some signal manifestations of Gods goodness
to them; yet, even the supposition of the being of such a thing, although it
actually had never been, Even that were enough for confirming of what we say.
3. It cannot be denied but hypocrites may have a zeal of God, which may bear
great sway with them and more than any mere temporal thing, as in the instance
of the Jews, Romans 10. Yet there cannot be zeal of any kind without love of that
same kind; yea, zeal presupposes love, and that in an high and intense degree.
But we shall offer some instances afterward.

Secondly, It would be adverted, that we do not assert that hypocrites may thus
love or fear God habitually, and (to say so) in their ordinary strain: nay, we
think it extraordinary to them to attain even to this; and that it follows
upon the back of some extraordinary manifestation, either of Gods love, wrath,
terror, etc. If it be said, that this meets not the question. Answ. Indeed
that Reverend Author, stateth it upon habitual and deliberate acting; yet,
considering that the thing enquired in here, is the sincerity of particular
gracious acts: if there can be any particular act which has that comparative
degree, and yet is not sincere, nor will prove the person to be gracious, Then
it will follow that the sincerity of particular gracious acts, is not alone,
nor mainly to be enquired for in that.

Thirdly, It would be remembered, that when we speak of this prevalency in the
comparative degree, that we take not the phrase largely, as including the
motive, end, etc. or Gods interest swaying to such an act, by such a spiritual
motive, etc. but strictly, according as we held it forth in two distinctions,
mentioned before this. Gods interest then in this act, is not to be considered,
as it respects motives, and compares all these, amongst which respect to Him
does sway; but it is to be understood, as it respects the act only, without
respect to the motive, what ever inducement it be that persuades thereto.
Otherwise, as we said, the difference is but in expressions: and it is not our
purpose to contend for words. And therefore in such an explication, we shall
acquiesce, as to this, and we profess not to dispute against that.

If it be said, that the loving of God so comparatively above any thing, is not
to love Him above all: because that for which we love Him, is more beloved by
us, even though thereupon we should be induced to give our lives for His Cause,
etc. Answ. 1. It Is true, this proves it not to be sincere love, or to proceed
from right principles and motives, as is said; and this is not intended: for
even such a person hates God really, as was formerly asserted. Yet, secondly,
it is such love as hypocrites use to have to other things, to wit, that love
wherewith they love the world, their Patrons and Idols of any sort, which is
certainly still from some selfish principle or motive: and therefore indeed
still they love themselves best; yet are they said to have such things to be
their Idols, and comparatively to love them above all other things, even above
the Lord Himself, although it be such a motive as prevails with them for that
end: and may not the same be acknowledged here, supposing that the Lord may for
a time get that from a man upon carnal considerations which some Idol uses to
have? Thirdly, We conceive it will be, in this case, argumentum ad hominem:
for, this Reverend Author instanceth the prevalency of love to God and the
Brethren, not in the motives that swayeth to love them most, but in the acts,
being compared with other objects, that is, if God be loved above His temporal
good things, if the Saints be loved more than our estate, place, etc. so as we
can quite all these for them, as the former instances do clear. Now supposing
it may be made out, that as to the effects, hypocrites may so love God and the
Saints, as to abandon all their temporal satisfactions for them, and possibly
even their life (which is the only thing that that Reverend Author says was
desiderated in the love of some in Queen Mary's days, page 237.238.239.)
though still upon carnal principles and motives: Then it will follow that the
assertion as formerly understood, will be sufficient to oppose that
proposition, that the difference betwixt saving and common grace is only
graduall, and that in respect of such a degree as is explained. Now we come to
instances.

1. We may find it in love: one that is an hypocrite, may in some respect (as
is qualified) love God above all: For, 1. May it not be said from the zeal that
many Jews had, that they loved God above all; and out of their blind zeal would
have preferred Him to their lives, or what else was dear to them? Yea, 2. Was
not that in Paul while yet a Pharisee before his Conversion, who in some
respect had that testimony from his Conscience, that zeal and love to God put
him to all that he did, so that it is like he could have suffered the loss of
all things in that quarrel? yet, it cannot be said, but that his love to God
after his Conversion was exceedingly different from what it was before,
although in this comparative degree it might be some way the same, to wit, he
loved God above all before; and he continued to do so thereafter, but with
love, far otherwise qualified, than formerly he did. If it be said, that
although the Jews and Paul had a zeal of, and did love God above all; yet, was
it not according to knowledge, as is said, Romans 10. and so could not be
accepted by the Covenant as sincere love. Answ. This is truth, and does confirm
our assertion: for, wherefore was it not accounted sincere, and as such
accepted? It cannot be said simply, because they loved some other thing better:
for, the degree of their zeal and love, is not controverted; but it is in
respect of the qualifications thereof, it was not according to knowledge, that
is, in a word, not regulated and qualified in respect of the principle, end,
motive, and account thereof, according to the rule whereby true love should
vent, which in their ignorance they could not do; and therefore still there is
some thing beside this degree necessary to the constituting of the sincerity of
love, that it may be acceptable: and so in other acts, this must ever be
presupposed, that they be according to knowledge, that is, 1. That the matter
of it be right in it self. 2. That the manner be according to the rule
prescribed, that is, not only Gods glory for the end, but the glorifying of Him
according as He requires and prescribes. 3. That both these be known to the
person. And, 4. That as such he perform them; and upon that account, act in
them, as they agree to His will: otherwise it can never be accounted to be an
act according to knowledge, as in the former instance is clear: whereby it
appears, that the sincerity of an act, and this prevalent comparative degree
thereof, may be separated.

Thirdly, That men may love their Idols above all, cannot be denied, seeing men
are naturally mad upon their Idols, so Turks love their Mahomet, Baal's
Prophets their Baal, even beyond their own lives. Now, may not one love God and
Christ, as one may love Mahomet or their Idols? This Argument is also made use
of by the forcited Author, to prove that a natural man may love Christ really
for kind, page 236, 237. And will not this ^ame hold in respect of the degree
also? Considering that there is as good ground, and more, even in a humane
respect, for Historical faith to believe the truth of the being and worth of
God, and Jesus Christ, and as much proof and experience of the advantages and
benefits that come from him, as there are for any to be assured of the being
and worth of Mahomet, Jupiter, Apollo, etc. Now suppose one that formerly loved
Mahomet, or Jupiter, above all, should by the force of Historical faith, or
some extraordinary deliverance be brought to account of, and love the only true
God, as he did formerly love Mahomet or his Idols, could that be accounted to
be sincere love, because the object were changed? Supposing still no change to
be in the man, nor intrinsickly in the act it self in respect of its kind? and
yet upon the supposition foresaid, this act would not be defective in respect
of the comparative degree, supposing him to love God now, as formerly he did
his Idol: It must therefore be in kind. And may not such acts as have proceeded
from Nebuchadnezar and other hypocrites, upon special and singular appearances
of God, be accounted such, wherein there was some kind of reality as to their
actual esteeming of God above all; yet still being without sincerity, as the
zeal of the Jews was, because God was not esteemed of according to knowledge,
that is, as in Christ Jesus: in which respect He has manifested Himself in His
Word, and without which, there can be no degree of love acceptable to Him.

Fourthly, Might not one have loved Christ above all, while He was upon earth,
from the convictions of the worth that was evidently seen in Him, and from
particular favors, received from Him, suppose of health, freedom from the rage
of the devil, etc. as one man may love another, especially His benefactor above
all things, so that He may become his Idol? Now, suppose it had been so (which
was not impossible) that men had known and loved Christ thus after the flesh
(as the Apostle speaks, 2 Corinthians. 5.17.) could that have proven that love to
be sincere? And yet the fault, is not in respect of that degree.

Again, we may instance it in faith: for, that one may trust Christ in some
respect above all, is clear by the many examples of the faith of miracles, and
that both active, and passive; yet is it also clear that saving faith is of
another nature, and has other qualifications concurring in it is acting as
such: the first acts on Him, as powerful to bring forth such an act, and in
respect of some particular manifestation of His Will for the bringing forth
thereof; the other considers Him as a Savior offered to us by Gods
faithfulness in the Word; and for that end, to wit, Salvation; and upon that
account, to wit, as offered, and as such, it receives Him and rests on Him,
being moved thereunto by its giving credit to the faithfulness of God in
respect of His Covenant and offer of special Grace. So, to be willing to have
Christ, is a main act of Faith; and that one in nature may in some respect be
willing to have Christ and Heaven above all, cannot be denied, especially by
this Author. Neither can it be said, that this respect to God and Christ, is
inferior to their love to earthly blessings, which they prefer to Him, as is
insinuated, page 237. for certainly they may esteem Him beyond temporal
blessings: therefore they will suffer the loss of these, and their life it
self upon this presumptuous ground of gaining Him by the abandoning of these;
yet cannot that be accounted sincere willing, because they will Him not as
such, and according to the terms of His Covenant.

Further it may be instanced in fear, repentance, love to the brethren, etc. as
was formerly hinted: wherein we will find that natural men may come to this
comparative degree in respect of the external object, to wit, to fear God more
than to fear men, or any other thing; to sorrow for sin in such a degree, that
it may prevail over delight in it, and love to it: wherein the comparative
degree that constituteth the sincerity thereof, is instanced, page 231, 232.
and they may love the brethren so as to relive, clothe, visit them, etc. and
for this end to part with their own case and estate, which is the degree that
is only marked as wanting to such as loved the Saints; but yet could not part
with temporal things for them, page 239. and upon this ground it is, we
conceive, that page 232. this necessary advertisement is given, That these
graces which are expressed by the passion, as fear, love, joy, etc. are not so
certainly to be tried by the passion that is in them, as by the will that is
contained in them or supposed to them: which must either be to show, that
sometimes the vehemence of the passion may seem more toward one object, suppose
in fear of men, or love to creatures; when yet the will rationally fears and
loves God more: or, it is added to show that something must be respected in the
trial beside the degree simply; so that this degree is not to be accounted the
alone mark of trial: otherwise this advertisement were needless. And what is
spoken of the will its acting rationally in its act, as contradistinguished
from the passion, or act of the sensitive part, must infer some concurring
qualifications to be necessary in the act of the will, which cannot be in the
sensitive part, which does necessarily infer a racite acknowledging of the
necessity of observing something in the nature of the act, beside this degree
alone, for the evidencing of the sincerity thereof.

On the other side, may not habits for a time be without acts, at least,
without acts prevalent in respect of this degree? Now then, what shall be
judged of such acts, suppose of love, fear, faith, etc. which for a time are
prevailed over, and the heart is led captive by the opposits? They cannot be
denied to be sincere acts of Grace; nor can it be said, that there are none
such at all: for, in that one place, Romans 7. we will find the Apostle speaking
of such motions of the Spirit or Inner-man, which yet prevail not as to the
effect, but the heart is led captive over them, so that what he would, that he
does not; and he is led captive to the law of sin, over the law of his mind;
yet, even then does he acknowledge these acts of the Inner-man to be sincere
acts of Grace: and therefore does comfort himself in them; and does oppose them
to the law of sin in his members, which otherwise he could not do. And this
sincerity cannot flow from this degree, which then is not: it must therefore
flow from the kind thereof, and so be contradistinguished in that respect from
any common work of a hypocrite. If it be said here, that it is true love,
faith, etc. that in its sober, composed and deliberate rational actings does
prefer God, although at fits and times it may be overpowered; and that in this
respect Paul did in his deliberate actings, prevail over the Law of his
members, though by its surprizals it did captivate him. Answ. Although this be
granted to be truth; yet it will not infringe the Argument: because we ask not
only what Paul was in respect of his state, or of his deliberate acting, but
what these motions and stirrings of the Spirit in him were, that were
overpowered, whether even these were gracious and sincere, or not? For, if
these stirrings be acts, as is acknowledeged, page 224. they must either be
sincere, or not; it cannot be said, not, upon the grounds formerly given; they
must be then sincere: and if sincere, then they must be sincere, not in respect
of the prevalencie of the degree; but in respect of the nature of the act it
self, as is said. For although we say that such a person did in
his^^^ionallacting of love, etc. prefer God above all; yet that would only
prove that the person were habitually gracious, and a true lover of God; or,
prove that once he has had acts truly sincere; but that could never be the
ground upon which the sincerity of these present acts could be founded. And so
as the close of all, seeing this prevalent degree may be separated from sincere
acts, and may be in acts that are not sincere in the manner qualified and
contra: Therefore the formal reason of sincerity, is not to be inquired in it
alone. If it be said, that even in such acts wherein corruption prevails in
the affection or passions; yet Grace is still prevalent in the will. Answ. Then
whether can it be said that there is no true Grace in the affections, or,
whether the actings thereof in them be not sincere, although not prevalent? If
they be gracious, even as such, Then the Argument does still hold, that Grace
may be sincere where it prevails not as to the effect: if it be denied that
they are sincere as such, Then it will follow that true Grace is not universal
as to the subject thereof; or, that it may be sincere in the will and not in
the affections: which yet are acts of the same Grace and soul, in so far as
renewed, striving with it self in so far as unrenewed. Beside, prevalencie is
but in the will as renewed, so that it is only as such induced to dissent or
consent; whereas that same will, as unrenewed, yields over that dissent of
the renewed will: whereby it comes to pass that acts are elicited thereby,
which the renewed part did oppose; and so indeed, as to the effect, the renewed
will is not prevalent: because that is not acted, which it would be at; yea,
acts are elicited by the will, as is said, which, had the renewed part been
prevalent, had not been at all, which shows that in such a case there is a
prevalencie, even in the will.

If it be said further, That the love wherewith natural men love God, as it is
formerly described, is but still self-love: because they love not God as God;
but upon some other self-account: and therefore do still love themselves more;
and so do not love God above all soveraignly: because they love Him not for the
goodness that is in Himself; whereas if Gods interest were main and chief in
that love, it were to be accounted sincere: and this presupposing the habits to
be infused, this sovereign interest of God in the act will take in the end,
motive, and that which we called the reduplication of the act. Answ. If that
Assertion, that sincerity does lie in the comparative prevalent degree, be thus
explained, as to take in Gods interest as sovereign in the end, motive, and
formal consideration of the act, Then it comes indeed to be one: and if so,
then there were no reason to fall out with the Doctrine that ordinarily is
delivered concerning this: and, for the expressions we will not contend, as we
formely said: but when we consider the explication of the Author, especially as
it is opposed to the common Doctrine, it seems that he means the
soveraignity of Gods interest in respect of objects, compared together, that
is, God more soveraignly loved, feared, and trusted, than any other; and does
not take in the consideration of God in the motive, end, and formal
consideration of the act, which has influence on the person for bringing forth
of such an act; and so on the act it self, that is brought forth: for, the
comparison runs thus, betwixt the objects, flesh and spirit, who does
preva^l most on the heart, but is not in comparing the motive and other
qualifications of that act, which materially is spiritual: and therefore still
in that respect, the former Argument will hold, and the ordinary expressions
will suit better to the thing.

It may be further argued against the placing of the nature of sincerity in the
prevalent degree alone, Thus, if the acts of saving grace be sincere, before
they be in this degree prevalent, Then this prevalency of the degree, cannot be
the thing that constitutes the sincerity thereof, much less alone be it; But
the former is truth, That act of love, faith, etc. is saving, which is
wrestling against its opposits, so as to win the heart to love God more than
all other objects, even before it attain it: For, we are to suppose this
method, 1. Gracious habites are supposed as infused, whereby the tree is made
good. Then 2. That these habites have their inclinations and acts, that lust
against the flesh, and fight with the flesh for winning of the heart to the
following of its motions: and as fighting goes before the Victory; so in this
spiritual combat, do these lustings and actings go before the prevalent
degree, and by these the heart is engaged to love God above all; whereupon
follows that prevalency as a degree of Victory. And yet we suppose, that were
the least sparkle of grace kindled in the heart, so that it were but smoking
in desires of love to God and faith in Him, it cannot be denied to be sincere;
although it has not broken out in a flame. For, if this prevalent degree be in
some respect an effect of these stirrings, these stirrings must be sincere
before they come this length, as to prevail: for, they were acts before, and if
not gracious acts, then how could acts that are of themselves unsound, produce
an effect that is sincere, seeing the cause must be of the same nature, and as
noble as the effect? And so consequently its sincerity does not flow from this
degree; but on the contrary rather, this degree is attained by these stirrings,
because such stirrings, are acts of sincere love and grace: whereas they are
extinguished in another, and come not up that length (at least in the former
respects) because these stirrings were for their kind unsound: and so natively
the actings and stirrings of grace of any kind, must go before, either the
prevalency or repulse thereof. For, supposing creatures once to have the heart
of man, there is first an eslaying (as it were) by some inward motions to gain
the heart from these, before actually it be gai^ed. Now, we say, that which
makes some motions gain the heart deliberately to prefer God above all, is,
because these motions are sincere, and do suppose as antecedaneous to that
degree, at least in order of nature, 1. An inward gracious principle ^itting
the heart so to conceive of God, and making it capable to be swayed by
spiritual and supernatural motives, and in sincerity to act on them as such.
2. It presupposes an actual putting forth of this gracious principle in its
considering God as such a good in Himself, and for its happiness in Himself
desirable, and lovely in an other kind than any creature: Whereupon, 3. The
heart is actually inclined as being swayed by such a motive, to wit, the
goodness of God Himself, and the spiritual happiness that is in enjoying of
Him, and as such, and upon that account to love Him, desire Union with Him, and
prefer Him above all; whereby self (as it is properly self, sinful and
corrupt) is shut by, and a spiritual motive bears sway in the act, and so
must be supposed in order of nature (at least) to be before it. 4. When the
heart is thus affected toward God, then the former three (to wit a spiritual
end, the enjoying of God, a spiritual motive, that is, a respect to His worth,
and a spiritual principle whereby he was enabled so to conceive of Him) do
concur for the eliciting of this act, and that in a new manner, upon that
object so considered; whereupon it acts otherwise in the closing with God as
God, than ever formerly it did. Upon which this prevalent degree and Victory
does follow, as the result of the hearts so acting on God, which cannot but
prevail. And thus it loves God above all, and shuts down all competitours,
because considering Him as such as He is, and to it in respect of the
understandings uptaking of Him, it does for such an end, from such a motive, by
such a principle, and in such a manner, act on Him, as so considered; which
others do not, who though they may have a sort of striving in them; yet their
fighting, not being according to the former qualifications, can never prevail,
as it cannot but in the end be a Conqueror in them that thus fight.

Further, supposing this sincerity to lie in that prevailing comparative
degree, we ask, what makes the love which is in one to prevail, so as to love
God above all, more than in another? Or what made Paul, after conversion, love
God in that respect sincerely, more than before? It must be said, that it
flows from the interveening work of the Spirit, both operating in the
infusing of habits, and cooperating in the bringing forth of acts; whereby
Paul, is now enabled to do that which could not be done, till first the tree
was made good. And if so, then there must be a real difference in the act it
self, as being the fruit of another tree, or of a tree that is changed: and if
the trees be different in kind, the fruits must be so also: for, grapes are not
gathered off thistles; nor contra: and so must it be said of these acts, either
they proceed from different habits, and so must differ in kind; or, both must
be from a gracious habit: which cannot be granted, seeing often these acts in
hypocrites evanish, which of gracious habits cannot be asserted: and to say
that different infused habits are not requisite to either, will not be urged by
any, as has been said.

We add, that acts of love that flow from common dispositions in a natural
man, may be considered as acts before they be thus prevalent: for, he loves,
fears, etc. and so they be acts, although not gracious acts or sincere; but we
cannot consider the acts of the gracious habits of love, faith, fear, etc. (as
that a man, as renewed, does love, fear, etc.) but we must conceive them as
such to be gracious and sincere: for, they are of the Spirit, and what is of
it, is of that kind; and what is but like to a grain of mustard seed, and
cannot be considered as less, is yet saving and true Grace, having the
qualifications foresaid; the least blossom on that tree being good fruit:
therefore there must be some difference in kind between common acts, and these
of saving Grace, beside any thing that can be conceived to be in the degree:
because in the one, the qualifications may be, and are separated from the act;
but in the other, no act can be conceived as influenced by the Spirit, and
proceeding from it, but it must be conceived as having these qualifications in
it, to wit, it has a spiritual end, is swayed by a spiritual motive, and
acts from a spiritual principle; and as such, is swayed to such an act. If
it be said, that it is the least degree of Grace when it is sincere, that is so
to be accounted, that is, when it is so prevalent; and that in that respect no
act as such, is in the least degree prevalent, but it is sincere. Answ. That
will not satisfy: for, here it is asserted that the act of love as proceeding
from these habits, cannot be conceived as an act; but must also be conceived as
gracious, and as arising from that root: but according to the other opinion,
these may be separated, that is, although love act; yet is it not sincere love,
till it act prevailingly; and so it may be considered as an act before it come
to that prevalent degree of acting, which cannot be in the other. Beside, if
so, then were not saving Grace, Grace, as having a different original from
common gifts; but as having different fruits or effects, or different degrees
of fruits. For clearing whereof, we may suppose gracious habits to be in one.
And, 1. do not the acts of love, faith, fear, etc. proceed from these infused
habits; and are they not actings of the New creature? And, ^. are not these
acts gracious as such? and because they are such, they are saving and sincere,
that is, because acts of the New-nature. 3. Do not these habit^ fit and
qualify one to act otherwise than one can do who has not these habits; and
that not only in respect of degree, but in respect of kind? otherwise these
habits would not be a different principle from common dispositions, or, as
infusing a different life, but helping one to exercise the life which he had:
which were absurd. 4. Do not men who are so sitted by these habits, act
accordingly in the producing of their acts otherwise than any other who is not
so qualified? And so, 5. must not then the acts produced, be differenced, which
are thus differently produced? And wherein can this difference consist but in
the kind? For, if it be said, they differ, because these gracious habits bring
forth acts in that prevalent degree, wherein the Lords interest has the
chiefest room, Then it may be enquired, 1. Is that the alone difference? or can
it be said that the new life has no influence even on the manner of acting?
considering that the person is furnished with new qualifications, both in the
understanding, will, and affections: and these cannot but concur in the act;
and yet must concur differently in respect of what one in mere nature can do.
2. It may be enquired, could that man have brought out these acts without these
habits? And if not, they must be then different in kind from what formerly he
did bring forth, seeing they could not be produced without a new and different
cause. 3. Neither can any acts proceeding from these habits be accounted common
acts; they must then, even the least of them be saving. And, 4. if they be
saving, and that as acts simply, it must be because of something that is in
their kind, without respect to their degree; as the least motions and actings
of corruption are sin, because they are from flesh, even when by Grace they are
kept from victory: So is it, on the contrary, with the least motions of the
Spirit.

Yea, if we were strictly considering this very difference, as it is proposed
in respect of the prevalent comparative degree, we will find it to infer a real
difference in the kind of the act, beside this comparative degree: for (suppose
in the act of sincere love) by one the Lord is preferred, and all other objects
are rejected; by another, He is loved, but some other thing is preferred to
Him: now that act of love, which respects God as the chief good, and as such
closes with Him, must be different in kind from that that takes Him, but not
as the chief good: and therefore loves some other thing more. For, in this act
there is not only a comparing of God with other things; but an act resulting
from that comparison, whereby the heart of one says, when this question is
proposed, Is God thy chief good? Yea: and so positively it closes with Him as
such: in the other, when the heart compares, it says, Nay, God is not the
chief good: and therefore closes not with Him as such; but refuses Him. Now
these two, nay and yea, to accept of Him as such, or to refuse Him, must differ
oppositly, and not in degree only. For the consideration of God here in the act
of the heart, is not simply if he be good: for, that cannot come under
consideration, but if He be the chief good, and so to it, and if it will take
Him as such; and so that act of love to Him must be such as determines that
question by yea, or nay; and in that respect the one yields, the other
rejects. Therefore here it is not yielding in this or that degree, but
yielding, or refusing; which in that pinch are contradictory. 2. By the one act
of love, God gets the chief room, and other things are casten down: it is
quite contrary in the other; and can these two be of one kind? Or can that act
of love which prefers many things to Him, act for its kind on God, as that
act of love that takes Him as infinitely preferable to all? Because the one
considering Him as the chief good, accordingly loves Him; and the other, not
doing so, but otherwise, This difference must follow thereupon. 3. That act
wherein there is this prevalencie, must either have somewhat peculiar in it
which does make it prevail over its opposits, as to love God above all, which
another has not, that loves created things above Him; or, it must have its
prevalencie from what is common to both. Now, this last cannot be said: because
so, it were man himself that did make himself to differ: there must therefore
be something peculiar in the other, as a cause producing that effect; and if
there be a peculiar cause, and some peculiar thing in the one which is not in
the other, differing the rise of this from the rise of the other, Then this
prevalent act of love which is the effect of that peculiar cause, must beside
this degree differ in kind also, as being peculiarly influenced by that cause
which the other is not. And seeing this peculiarnesse is presupposed to proceed
the prevalencie of the act, It must necessarily follow according to the same
grounds, that there must be some positive qualifications concurring for the
constituting of the sincerity of Grace beside the prevalent degree thereof,
And that therefore sincerity does not consist alone in it: and so, that
hypocrites cannot not do the same acts for kind, which the Regenerate may do,
without respect to this comparative degree.

To conclude then, we may illustrate all, thus, Suppose a dead body were by the
power of God made to move, or speak, as once Balaam's Ass did, There is motion
and speech there, suppose it be to the same object, and in the same words; yet
does it differ from the motion and speech of a living man that acts according
to reason. 1. A dead man is moved only from some extrinsick power without the
interveening principle of life from within: although he may be moved more
speedily and swiftly toward a certain object, than one that from an inward
principle of life acts himself; yet does the motion of the living man, differ
in kind (beside any comparative degree which can be in the act of moving) by a
positive concurring of an inward principle of life and a locomotive faculty
whereby he is immediately acted: So, natural men being dead in sins, what ever
acts are produced by them, are merely produced by the common work of Gods
spirit from without, without the interveening of any spiritual principle
influencing these acts, whereas the acts of a renewed man are indeed performed
by the power of Gods special grace; but ( mediantibus habitibus) by the
interveening of infused habits, whereby he not only is acted, but acts himself
in the bringing forth of these. As, A tree in the Springtime, does send forth
her buds, from the native season of the year its having influence thereupon;
yet also by the quickening of that natural sap and moistness wherewith it is
furnished within it self. 2. A dead man has no end before him in his motions
or actings, as a living man habitually has concurring in his act: so an
unrenewed man has no pure spiritual end in the best acts, which the gracious
man has; the one, eating, drinking, living and bringing forth fruit to
himself, Hos. 10.1. Zech. 7.5.6. and the other living, and thenceforth bringing
forth fruits to God, 2 Cor. 5.16. Hence, men in nature are said to serve sin,
and men in grace to become servants to God, Romans 6. in respect of their design
in the same acts. 3. Dead men, as they have no end before them, so have they no
reasonable motive, as a living man is supposed to have in his actings; so
natural men have no spiritual motive, supposing it be, in loving of God, it
is some carnal selfish-thing that swayeth them: for, having no spiritual
principle within, as matter to work upon, No spiritual motive can have
influence upon them, more than fire can be kindled by any blowing, where no
kindling, or combustible matter is: a renewed man as such has a spiritual
motive concurring with, and having influence on, his actings: and so, not only
loves God, because of some external benefit; but he loves Him, as being
provoked from that inward principle of the Divine nature that is in him, and
respect to Gods Commands and Goodness, whereby as such he cannot but love Him,
and these who bear His Image, and what is spiritually good: even as a natural
Parent, or Son, cannot but love his own Child, or Father, and that from another
special principle than they love any other Child or Parent; so also he has a
pure spiritual motive, warming this principle, and kindling the sympathy: and
thus he is swayed to love God, because of some spiritual good, as the subduing
of sin, the conforming of him to Gods Image, the manifesting of Himself to him,
and such like: and he loves Gods People, because he takes them to be beloved
of God, or to love Him, or be like Him, as suppose a Woman did carry affection
to a Man, it may be from some carnal principle, as his furnishing of her in her
vanity, and his being subservient to the lust of vanity, pride, etc. in her;
yet afterward, being matched with him, might love him because he were her
Husband, and had condescended to marry her, although he should not serve her
vain humor as formerly: in this respect, her love does differ from what it
was, as having a conjugall motive added to it, which it had not formerly. 4. A
living man, in his actings, is swayed to them as good, and as good to him; and
it is impossible for him to will any thing even though it be good, but as it is
considered as such by him; yea, even things that are hurtful are in his
desiring of them considered under this notion as good to him; but there is no
such thing in the motion of a dead man: so, a renewed man, not only acts on
that which is spiritually good, suppose in the loving of God or His People; but
also he is swayed therein, and acts therein upon this formal consideration
as it is such, that is, he loves God as He is good in Himself, and to Him in
what is spiritually good; and others as they are such as have title to Him,
that is, Mat. 10. To love them in the name of righteous men, that is, upon that
formal consideration as such, to love them. And this is that wherein mainly
Godly sincerity and singleness does kythe, when we are not only moved to do
what is good, and that from a spiritual motive upon the matter good; but are
swayed to that thing, by this motive, as they are such, and so considered by
us: and thus, this as does not only respect the object, as it is conceived by
the understanding to be such; but it does respect the act, as it is inclined
to, undertaken and performed by the will, to wit, it wills it as such:
although the act it self be not in respect of its degree every way adequate to
such an object, that is, though God get not so much of the heart as it becomes
Him to have; yet, the heart, considering Him as such a God who deserves the
heart, and ought to have no competitor with Him, and as sufficiently able of
Himself to make it happy, does so will Him; and upon that account, does love
Him and delight in Him, although it be exceedingly defective in the degree of
both, and they be but conceived as such, to have a being. Now, as a man is to
try the truth of his life, not only because he moves and speaks, but because
he moves and speaks so, in respect of the kind formerly mentioned; So a
renewed man, is not simply to try his new life from his acts, but as they are
so qualified, as is said.

If it be objected, That hither to this seems to admit no motive that
concerns our selves, as suppose one loved God, for being good to him; or,
heaven, because they expected to be happy in it? and that as if no motive could
be admitted in loving God but for himself; or* how may this motive be
differenced in the love of a natural man, from one that is renewed?

Answ. There is no such thing as the first intended: it will only say this,
that as the natural man is swayed in the persuing of moral good, as it is so
considered by him; so a renewed man does that which is spiritually good, and
that as it is considered as such by him. Hence there is this difference, that a
natural man in his considering any act, which in it self is spiritually good,
and materially agreeable to the Law; yet in his yielding to perform it, he does
still consider it as a natural good, or moral at the best; as suppose in loving
of God, he is considered by such, as good to them, on a natural, or (as to
them) a sinful account, as he loves God, because He has gotten temporal
peace, deliverance from bodily hazards, an easy or honorable life; it may be,
because in providence He has prospered him in some sinful course, this the
learned forementioned Author, page 203. does justly call one of the greatest of
all sins, when the holy God is made a pander and servant to our flesh: and no
question, many do love God upon such an account; or, if they love God for the
hope they have of being brought to heaven by Him (which is one of their highest
motives) it is because they hope to get heaven from Him, and access to their
sinful lusts here also; thereby supposing, because of His goodness and mercy,
that they may sin, and serve their lusts, and expect even heaven also
afterward: or, they love Him under the hope of heaven; not because there they
do expect or desire spiritual or heavenly satisfaction in Himself, in being
satisfied with His likeness (which they never delight in here) But because
they have a supposed opinion of a greater degree of that same happiness, which
now they hunt for: and so heaven is never considered by them as a spiritual
good: or, they may love God, as supposing Him to love and esteem of them,
because of some loveliness and excellency that is in themselves: and upon
that ground expect, even heaven from Him, and love Him, because He so esteems
of them: and this is to think God like themselves, and not to love Him upon any
spiritual account, as is said.

Again, The renewed man as such, is swayed by spiritual motives in these
things, that are but naturally and morally good; and under a spiritual
consideration He acts on them, to wit, as they are commanded of God, tend to
His honor, and are useful to help one in the worshipping of Him, and so
forth: and thus He may be acted even in Eating and Drinking, and things that
are spiritually good in themselves, as the loving of God, studying of
holiness, etc. He acts in them as such, that is, he loves God, because He
is an infinite spiritual good in Himself, and because he hops to be made
blessed and happy in Him: thus, to love God, and desire union and communion
with Him, that we may not simply be happy, but happy and blessed in the
enjoying of Him, and in being made conform to Him, is no carnal, sinful or
mercenary love: because, this the Lord Himself does warrant: and it supposes a
spiritual principle, withdrawing one from common satisfactions and delights;
and it loves God as God, because thus God is considered as the chief good,
sufficiently and only able to make happy in Himself: and therefore He is
desired, because no other thing is accounted sufficient or meet for happiness,
but he. And so, love to God for himself, and love to Him because we expect to
be happy in Him, or have already gotten spiritual good such as Regeneration,
Sanctification, Repentance, etc. from Him, are no way inconsistent together:
and therefore, when we speak of loving God for Himself, it is not to exclude
all respect to our selves, and our own good in Him; but it excludes all carnal
respect to our selves, or respect to our selves as carnal, and delighted with
things that are such; and to show that the good which we expect from God, and
for which we love Him, is a spiritual and heavenly good, having the enjoying of
Himself joined with it: which does commend all other good to us; so that it is
respect to God, and our enjoying of Him, that does make these things lovely.
And so we love God, because He is good, and because He hears our Prayers, and
because He furnishes us with what is needful, and so forth: not because any
fleshly lust is pleased, or temporal end is gained; but, because He confirms
our faith or spiritual joy in Him: which many that have the same things which
we have obtained from Him, and are also carnally cheerful in the use of them;
yet, are not joyful upon this account, but are delighted in the things
themselves, or what pleases their natures in them, but not in God Himself, and
so in other things.

Before we close, it will be of concernment for the understanding of all this
Question, to take up rightly the true difference between a moral specific
difference (which is acknowledged) and a physical difference, which is denied.
This physical difference does flow from some positive qualifications concurring
in the act it self, which are not in another act, that has other, or contrary
qualifications in the place of these: again, a moral difference, as it is
expressed, does not consider the act with respect to any positive
qualifications in it self; but, in respect of some extrinsick consideration; as
a pound of gold, and an ounce of gold, are of the same kind in respect of their
qualifications physically; yet, suppose one had hired a servant for a pound, or
had conditioned so much for the rent of some lands by a subscribed Contract and
Covenant; in this respect, the pound would differ from the ounce morally:
because the pound, by virtue of such Covenants, would become the servants hire,
and the landlords rent, which the ounce would not be. This is a moral
difference, and flows from the bargane, wherein it was conditioned that so
much, and no less, should be accounted so; so says the forenamed learned
Author, that this moral difference of Grace, does flow from the consideration
of the Covenant, whereby only it can be determined what is saving Grace,
according to the tennor thereof, whereby Justification or Salvation are
bestowed upon any act, page 205. And therefore, Grace, that is thus
comparatively prevalent in degree, is to be accounted true saving Grace:
because, by the Covenant of Grace that is called for, and only accepted as the
condition thereof, page 226. where also he does say, That the sincerity of
Grace does lie in the degree, not formally, but materially only: because the
form of these gracious acts, consists in their being the condition on which
Salvation is promised. Where, 1. To forbear the Authors esteeming of all Graces
equally, and gracious acts indifferently to be the condition of the Covenant,
(which yet necessarily this opinion does presuppose, and so is the more to be
adverted unto) There are two things to be observed, wherein the mistake lies
here. 1. That it accounts nothing to be saving, or an evidence of what is
saving, but what is called for, or accepted by the Covenant as the condition
thereof, whereas any thing that consequently will prove one to be renewed, will
also prove him to be justified; although it be not that to which his
Justification is covenanted; but is something that does necessarily presuppose
it, and follow after in a justified person, and can be in no other else: for,
if an act, so and so qualified, will prove one to have the habits of Grace,
without which he could not produce it; Then must they prove him to be renewed,
and so to be justified: because, these acts are holy acts, and fruits of the
Spirit, as they are called, Gal. 5. and motions of the Inner-man, Romans 7. and
fruits of a good tree: and therefore, must prove that the tree is good. 2.
There is a mistake in this, that it supponeth the Covenant not to accept of
Graces (whether as the condition or otherwise) suppose of love, faith, etc. but
at such a comparative degree only; and not simply to accept of them as sincere,
although not as fully perfect. As suppose one by covenant had farmed some
portion of land, that does for the time bear nothing but brambles, upon this
condition that he should have returned to him so many wine grapes, bigger than
the brambles that grow thereon; in this respect, one that really gave grapes,
could not expect to have these accepted, as being the covenanted fruit of the
vineyard, or the rent of his lease, if they were not bigger than the brambles
which formerly did, or does continue to grow therein: whereas the tennor of the
Covenant in the condition that it proponeth, and in its acceptance of Grace
(to speak so) does ever propose and accept these Graces, simply considered as
such, that is, it accepts of Faith: and the Believer is to be accounted a
Believer, and in Covenant, not only because of the degree of his Faith in
Christ; but because he, considering Him as the Savior of sinners, and as sent
of God for that end, is drawn, out of respect to the faithfulness of God in
His Word, to receive Christ, as He is offered to him; and upon that account,
according to the terms of the Covenant, to submit to His righteousness, and
rest on Him for attaining of Salvation. Likewise in Repentance, Pardon and
Justification are not knit to any degree of sorrow (as was formerly hinted)
that is, that God will account him a penitent, whose sorrow for sin does exceed
his delight in it; but unto true Repentance, which is for its qualifications
such, is the promise made, whosoever r^pents, etc. And in this respect, Gods
Covenant runs not, that He will have grapes bigger than brambles, or gold of
more weight than the person himself; but, if they be true grapes, growing upon
a good tree, and not grapes of Sodom, or brambles, He does accept of them, and
says, destroy not, for there is a blessing in it, though it be like unto the
smallest berrie upon the uppermost tops of the boughs, and although still He
call for perfection in the degree of all as the Covenanters duty. And if it be
gold, and may abide the touchstone and fire, and not be consumed, He rejects it
not, of what ever weight it be in the scales, as 1 Cor. 3.13, 14, and 15. is
clear. Now gold abides the fire, not as it is in quantity but as it is in
kind, and for the quality upright: and no place is there which does express
Gods way of trial more plainly; and it has the promise to the man whose work
in any degree will abide the fire, though the dross that is with it (which
shall be consumed) be in the quantity far beyond what is solid. Hence we will
find in Scripture, that such expressions are used as do ever lay the weight of
the sincerity of men's acts, and place the difference of gracious and sinful
acts in the kind thereof, as accounting all of such a kind to be gracious,
without such respect to its degree, as when it is said, a tree is known by its
fruit, Mat. 7. the meaning is not, that it is known by fruit of such a
bigness, but by their kind; so it is not every tree, that brings not forth
fruit at such a degree, but that brings not forth good fruit, that is, of
such a kind; that is h^^^n down, Mat. 3. A vine is known to be a vine, by its
grapes of the smallest bigness; ye^, even by its blossoms. Hence so frequently
in the Song, the Lords trees are differenced by their buddings, and
blossomings, and most tender grapes, or first buds: which could not be, if it
were not the kind of fruit that evidenced the difference of trees: for, men
gather not grapes (even of the smallest bigness) from thorns, nor figs from
brambles. So all true Believers, are said to have the same spirit of faith, 2
Cor. 4.13. and the like precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.2. Which does hold forth thi^,
that as all Believers, who have faith, have the same for kind, though not for
degree precious; so also, all these who partake of that faith, that is true for
its kind, must also necessarily be Believers, and in Covenant with God, of what
ever degree it be, if it be the same for its qualifications and kind with the
former, it is precious; otherwise, even Believers have not the like faith in
degree: the likeness then and preciousnesse thereof, must be in the kind,
which no hypocrite can have, and it cannot but be accepted by God; so true
Repentance, and worldly sorrow, are differenced, 2 Cor. 7. not in respect of
any degree, but in respect of the kind; and the one is Worldly, and the other
is sorrow ( v. 9.) after a Godly manner, and ( v. 11.) after a Godly sort:
which must be because of positive qualifications concurring in it, which the
other has not. And the instances that are brought to prove their sorrowing
after a Godly manner, in the word^ following, do confirm this, to wit, their
carefuln^ss^, zeal, etc. 1 Pet. 1.22. there is unfeigned love; and else where
unfeigned faith, which are differenced from counterfeits in hypocrites, as that
which has reality, is from that which is only in appearance. For although they
may have really Historical faith, and a kind of natural love to God (to let
these go, as supposed) yet, can they never have justifying faith, or real
spiritual love, or of that kind: otherwise, it were not fained, and could not
but be accepted, seeing what is unfeigned is ever accepted. Now, love and faith,
cannot be called fained simply in these who have truly the same kind of acts of
love and faith, or yet true acts of some kind: they must therefore be in this
respect fained, that though they be in their own kind, true acts of Historical
faith, and common love; yet in this they are fained, that they seem to be of
another kind than they are of, to wit, saving and gracious: and therefore
common acts in an unrenewed man, and saving acts in him that is renewed, must
differ in kind, as that which has reality and such a being, does differ from
its counterfeit, and that which is but in show.

The same might be followed in all such Scriptures, where some practices are
differenced from other in respect of positive concurring qualifications, as to
do with a perfect heart, is frequently in the History of the Kings, to walk
with godly simplicity, and sincerity, and that as in the sight of God, 2 Cor.
1.13. and 2.17. to have zeal qualified according to knowledge, and so forth,
and almost ever when a gracious act is described: yea, we will find it even in
outward duties, suppose in the duty of Praying, or Preaching: that is
acceptable Prayer to God, which is Praying in the Spirit, in the Name of
Christ, and so forth: otherwise the Gift of Prayer may be, where the Grace
thereof is not, and no intensnesse of the exercise of the common gift can make
it, without these qualifications, to be acceptable, etc. whereas the least sigh
or groan rightly qualified, and arising from the right root, cannot but be
acceptable.

To come then to say a word to the third thing proposed, to wit, that this
inquiring for the truth of Grace, in its kind, and not in its degree only and
simply, but at least in its degree and kind together, is no way prejudicial but
helpful to the exact and safe search of our selves. This seems to be the
reason that moves that learned Author (who is an eminent batterer down of
presumption, and a presser of holiness) to place the sincerity of Grace in
this comparative degree, that thereby presumptuous hypocrites be not
strengthened in their self delusions, who may abuse this maxim, which says,
that the truth of Grace lies in the kind and not in the degree thereof: for,
readily do they think they are assured they love God, and belie^e Him truly,
etc. But there is no ground for fear of that here.

Therefore, 1. We say, that this degree being well understood and expressed, is
indeed necessarily knit with saving Grace; so that if any man deliberatly and
habitually prefer the interest of flesh, or any carnal respect to the interest
of God and His way, or love any thing more than God, or equally with Him, that
man can never warrantably conclude that he has saving Grace, this being
inconsistent with it; and also one who loves God sincerely, cannot when he
acts deliberately, and according to the former qualifications, but love Him
beyond all, because that is the nature of sincere love.

And, 2. We do not seclude this, but add the former qualifications of the kind
thereof; and therefore this way must be both more convincing to discover a
hypocrite, when he must not only look to the degree but to the kind also: and
on the other side, be more satisfying to the poor Believer, when he has not
only his mark to gather from the degree, which often may be exceeding dark and
doubtful to him, when he considers many Idols that may have great place in
himself, and how far hypocrites may come in that respect; but when he may also
reflect within himself upon his end, motive and manner of acting, etc. he may
be helped to discern the sincerity and honesty of his own act and purpose,
and have the help of his conscience testimony in reference to these also; and
so come more confidently to conclude concerning himself.

It is true, it is a most hard task (though a most necessary task) to discover
the nature of sincerity and saving Grace for the comfort of a tender Believer,
so as presumptuous hypocrites may not justly stumble thereon to their own
ruin; yet, are they, to wit, hypocrites, more apt to flatter themselves in the
truth of their grace, suppose of faith, love, etc. in respect of the kind
thereof, than in respect of the comparative degree thereof. And are they not as
confident and persuaded of this, that they love God above all, and trust and
lippen to Him more than to any other thing for attaining to life? And will be
ready to say, there is no ^^her thing they can lippen to; and in this they are
fixed so, as none shall be able to convince them of the contrary, because Gods
soveraignity in that respect, is so naturally fixed in the conscience, that
they never debate it, but thinks themselves through in it, the conviction of
its reasonableness is so strong on their judgments. And indeed upon what has
been said, if we will separate the degree from the kind and qualifications
formerly mentioned, they will have much seeming reason for them: and yet even
then, they will bewray that love, faith etc. which they esteem to be in this
degree, to be unsound in its kind, as being but the fruit of nature, and
somewhat (readily) which is of age equal to themselves, etc. and therefore
cannot be found. Therefore we add, that this way will be more useful to
convince natural men, than the other is: because generally, they are persuaded
of the truth and reality of their grace: and to say that their grace were but
defective in its degree, would, 1. keep them from the through conviction of
their gracelesnesse, and the right uptaking of their deceitful nature; which
yet is mainly and principally necessary to the work of conversion. For it would
make them suppose that they had already att^ined some beginnings, whereas this
placing of the sincerity of true Grace in the kind, does at the first, point
out to them the necessity of a change, and more easily discovers the
unsoundnes^e of every thing that grows from the natural root of an unrenewed
condition. 2. This placing of it in the degree, does put hypocrites only to
amend or quicken their pace, and to be adding to their building; but not to
take a new way, or to lay a new foundation: now this exceedingly suit^ with a
presumptuous hypocrit's humor, who easily will grant that their faith is weak,
but not that it is unsound, and are ever desirous to increase what they have,
which will prove but a building upon sand: and if this were the alone mark of
trial, whether God had the chief room by this comparative degree in their acts,
they would be exceedingly confirmed in their opinion that all is well. It Is
like when Nicode^^^ came to our Lord, he would not easily have been convinced
that he loved or trusted any thing more than God; neither does our Lord take
that way for convincing of him; but does show the unsoundnesse of what he had*
in respect of the kind thereof, and that the tree behoved to be made good and
of another kind, before any fruit thereof could be approvable: and therefore He
Preaches to him the Doctrine of Regeneration, and the necessity of being born
again, and does not insist to show any defect of degree, but of kind, as in
that, Io^. 3. is clear, that, says He, which is born of the flesh, is flesh,
that is, what ever fruits may be in a natural man, they are of a corrupt kind
as the root is: whereby He would obviat a secret objection that Nicodemus, or a
formal hypocrite, might have from the degree or abundance of seeming good acts
of zeal, love, prayer, etc. (as may by Nicodemus his words to Christ be
gathered to have been in him) be it so, says He, let there be many fruits, and
that in a great degree, that is not the thing that makes them acceptable^ for,
they are still but flesh, that is, of a corrupt kind: and thus He rejects
them all at once, and stops his mouth without comparing them in reference to
their objects, wherein Nicodemus had not been so easily convinced. And on the
contrary, says the Lord, What is b^rn of the spirit, is spirit: whereby He
does not only show, that there must be fruits of another kind, to wit,
spiritual; and that nothing of whatsoever degree can be accounted sincere,
except it proceed from this principle, to wit, the Spirit; but also it shows
that there is nothing which does come from that principle, if it were but the
least motion, but it is spirit, and acceptable according to the root that it
comes from, without consideration of the degree thereof. And seeing our Lord
took that way, to discover and convince, it cannot but be safest. 3. This way
also would be dangerous to many poor tender Believers, if they were put to try
the sincerity of their Grace by this prevalent degree alone: for, do not they
often find their unbelief or leaning to creatures (at least in their sense) to
exceed their faith in God? And do not they find love to things of the world
more frequently carry the heart to delight therein, than in God alone? And
shall they cast all as unsound in such a case? What had Paul done if he had
walked by this mark, when the motions of sin captivated him, Romans 7. and yet is
he still comforted in the sincerity of His Grace, and in the actings of the
innerman: which cannot be grounded upon this comparative degree; but upon the
kind thereof. Now, if this maxim were true, these things would follow it, 1.
He could have no evidence of his sincerity, except he had more grace (and that
still in exercise) nor corruption, and that to his sense: for, every grace has
some opposite corruption: and if it were not prevalent over its opposite
corruption, then could he not conclude that he were gracious, and so not except
he were more gracious than corrupt. 2. If any grace were prevailed over by its
opposite corruption, he could not conclude that he were in a gracious estate:
because this is certain, that where one grace is sincere, there all graces are,
they being all members and parts of the new creature, which in Regeneration is
brought forth; and it being certain also, that for a time, some graces will be
exceedingly prevailed over by their opposites, more than others, as the fear of
men will keep a Believer under in a particular more than the fear of God, Then
it will follow that either he has true fear of God at the same time; and so
the sincerity of this grace of fear does not consist in the prevalent degree
thereof, or, has no grace sincere at all, because where one is unsound, all is
unsound, and contra; or, one grace must be sound and another unsound, which
cannot be said simply, upon the ground formerly given. The Believer then, in
such a case, must either conclude himself to be unsound; or, he must try it by
some other mark from the kind thereof. And though a Believer ought to account
himself greatly faulty, when any one corr^ption prevails; yet it will not
follow that he should reckon all to be unsound, which this would infer, and so
contr^dicteth the Saints practices in such cases.

From all this we conclude, that it is more safe to keep both the common
doctrine and expressions: and although we have been longer upon this than
possibly may be thought suitable to our purpose; yet we have adventured upon
it, if so be it may conduce any thing to the clearing of that wherein the
trial of men's states is so much concerned; or, if it may occasion some more
unanimous expressing of this matter, by others who may more dexterously perform
it, that so this be not stated as a new controversy in the Church, at such a
time when she is almost overwhelmed with intestine debates already. For we are
sure in the general, that these qualifications formerly mentioned, of the end,
motive, reduplication, etc. are necessary to the constituting of any act to be
sincere, as has been said. And if they be necessary, they must either be
comprehended under the expression of this prevailing degree of the act, and so
it is but ((...)) a striving for words, which are not to be contended for. And
so both these are upon the matter one. Or, if they be not comprehended under
that expression, then they must be somewhat different from it; and so there
must be more requisite to constitute the sincerity of grace, and to difference
it from common works in hypocrites, than this degree foresaid. Or, we must say,
that these qualifications must be accounted common to the acts of hypocrites,
and these that are renewed: which is a thing that we cannot admit, upon the
grounds formerly laid down: although we still acknowledge that the pressing at
the most eminent degree of grace, even in that comparative respect is exceeding
necessary, and useful for attaining to the clear discerning of the sincerity
of grace: for, often Believers do make their own search exceedingly difficult,
because of the want of this. And the agitation of this question, being somewhat
new, we hope what is said will be the more favorably constructed: especially
this being our fear, that by such expressions, or assertions, as this opinion
has with it, grace may come to be looked on as too common a thing, and it and
nature, to be thought more sib than indeed they are.

LECTURE IIII.
Verse. 8. And unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna, write, These things says
the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive.

9. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I
know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews and are not, but are the
synagogue of Satan.

10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: behold, the devil shall
cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.

11. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches,
He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death.


THe second Epistle, is directed to the Church of Smyrna: and as her case does
differ from the case of Ephesus, and that both in respect of suffering and
integrity; so does the Lords message to her differ, and is wholly comfortable.

There is no charge against this Church, as in many of the rest: this does not
imply an universal freedom from guiltiness of all sorts; But, first, that this
Church has been free of gross evils, and has been in honest simplicity
aiming at their duty. And, secondly, it ^eareth out the Lords tenderness in
passing over many infirmities in an honest Church where there is much suffering.

It is not our purpose to insist in these Epistles (the matter being clear, and
ye having good opportunity of hearing them more fully opened) we shall only
give a view of the ^cope, to keep the coherence of the whole Book.

The Epistle has the division common with all the rest, in those three general
parts; to wit, first, a Preface or Inscription, comprehending the Person from
whom, and to whom, this message is directed. The Titles given to Christ, the
Sender, were spoken to, chap. 1. They are two, 1. He is the first and the last:
this sets out the eternity of His Godhead, of His eternity as He is God. 2.
He is styled, He that was dead and is alive: this sets out Hi^ O^fice with
the effi^a^i^ of His death, and the victory that He had obtained by overcoming
death, and the devil; and being now above death and suffering, to live God and
Man in One Person for ever. These Titles are specially chosen here for the
consolation of this suffering honest Church: for, His suffering and dying
commends Him as pitiful and compassionate; and His Godhead and Victory,
sets Him out as sufficiently able: both which being put together, do
exceedingly comfort His people, who cannot but live, seeing He lives, and
cannot but continue so for ever, Psalm. 18.46. Ioh. 14.19.

Secondly, The Body of the Epistle, is contained, verse. 9, 10, 11. it
especially runs on these two, 1. To hold out Smyrna her case, and that both
in respect of what was present, verse. 9. and also in respect of what was to
come, verse. 10. 2. It holds out the consolations which are allowed to her for
her encouragement in reference to both, and these two are intermixed.

Her present case has two things in it. 1. Her outward afflictions are
mentioned. 2. Her honesty and integrity under them, is taken notice of, and
approven by Jesus Christ. And this last, is a main ground of consolation
against the first.

Her outward afflicted condition, is expressed in these three words. 1. They
were under tribulation, that is, sad and greatly straitning pressures, as the
Word signifies: and by this may be understood the afflictions of body, name,
and estate, and the sad consequents following thereupon, which the Godly are
put to by the persecution of wicked men. The 2. word is, poverty; I know thy
poverty: we take it literally to be understood of such pinche^ and straits in
their outward estates, as plundering, sequestration, finings, and other means
of that kind use to bring upon men: unto this sort of affliction the Christians
in the primitive pe^secutions were exceedingly liable; who yet joyfully
suffered the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. This is indeed no little part
of trial, when parents and children are casten loose of all temporal things,
and have not for the refreshing of themselves and their families. The 3. part
of their affliction, is, the reproach of wicked men that wanted not altogether
profession; I know (says the Lord) the blasphemy of th^se which say they are
Jews, and are not, but are of the synagogue of Satan. Amongst all the Saints
crosses, there are none more bitter than cruel mockings, as they are called,
Heb. 11.36. and mockings from Jews that pretended to Worship the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, would be more heavy than the reproaches of
heathens: there were none also more bitter revilers of the Son of God and of
His follower^, than these hardened Jews; who having synagogues in considerable
Cities, did ever with all their might join themselves to reproach and persecute
the Christians. It is like that they had a synagogue in this place, pretending
to worship God according to the manner of His Law; but because of their
obstinate maliciousness, they are by the Lord denied to be Jews; and are said
to lie, and to be of the synagogue of Satan: because indeed they looked liker a
combination for the devil, th^n a Congregation for worshipping of God, who slew
the Lord, forbade to speak in His Name, and did persecute His Ministers and
People, as the word is, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15.

From which we may see, 1. That the most honest and tender, may be liable to
most sharp afflictions. 2. That often rods and crosses of several kinds are
joined together. 3. That reproach is not the least part of affliction of the
people of God; and the shame thereof, being well endured, will be accounted
honest suffering of a cross, as if it were a bodily affliction. 4. There is no
person more bitter and invective against those that are sincere* than such as
have had some engagements to God by profession, and have fallen from the same.
5. Pretended friends (as these Jews were) may come to be most gross enemies,
which is both their sin and their plague: therefore, 1 Thessalonians. 2. -- 16. it is
said, that wrath was come upon them to the uttermost. 6. Gods people may look
to be met with, and entertained by men, as the Lord Jesus uses to be: if He be
well entertained, so will it be with them; if He be despised, as He was by
these Jews, let them look to be blasphemed and despised also: for, it is enough
to the servant that he be like his Master.

The consolation that is proposed against the foresaid affliction, is two ways
set down, 1. More generally, I know thy works: which does not only relate to
His Omnisciency, as is usual in these Epistles; but here it takes in His
approbation, as the word after clears. Also it is opposed to His taking*
notice of their enemies malice, I know the blasphemy of them that call
themselves Jews, etc. Therefore, His knowing of their works, must include His
respect to their honesty, as His knowing of their blasphemy points out His
detestation of the same. It is no little part of Believers consolation in any
strait, that the Lord Jesus knows how it is with them, and can bear testimony
to their integrity, when they are even almost overwhelmed with reproaches
before men. It is no little encouragement ^lso, that He does take notice of
enemies their malice, as here is observed.

The second way the consolation is expressed, is more direct, by Christ's plain
testimony in these words, thou art rich, that is, what ever men think of thee,
as being most despicable, or, whatever thou be in thy own estate, most poor and
desolate; yet really, and in my estimation, thou art rich, that is, thou art
indeed strong in the grace of God, well furnished with Promises and
Privileges, and abundantly rich in faith and good works, Iam. 2. verse. 5. 1 Timothy 6.18. In which things, true riches do consist. This seems to be a
strange paradox unto the men of the world, thou art poor, and yet thou art
rich; yet often have the Saints found this to be a truth; as having nothing,
and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. And if this were believed, it might
allay the fervor that men have in pursuing after temporal riches: for, the
having of them cannot make them rich, (the greatest men in Smyrna get not this
testimony from our Lord Jesus, that they are rich) and the want of them cannot
make them poor: and therefore Smyrna, even in her poverty, is rich. This also
would make the heavenly Riches to be esteemed of, if men believed that their
life did not consist in the abundance of the things that they enjoy, as it is,
Luke 12.15.

The future case of Smyrna, which is set down, verse. 10. is also an afflicted
condition; and has its encouragements suitable thereto, laid down. It is, 1.
generally proposed to be suffering, Fear none of these things which thou shall
suffer. This Church had been suffering; and though honest, was yet to suffer
more.

Obs. 1. Sufferings when they begin, oftentimes are not instantly at a close.
Yea, 2. The Lord will sometimes exercise these that are most tender, with one
cross upon the back of another. 3. He Himself is notwithst^nding still tender
of them, even when they suffer, as may be gathered from this comfortable
message to Smyrna.

2. These sufferings are more particularly described, 1. In the kind of
suffering, to wit, I^prisonment: this is not so to be understood, as if they
were to be tried by no other kind of suffering; but it sets out a main part
of their cross, to wit, that some of them should be cast in Prison, and
liberty taken from their persons, which it may be, heretofore they enjoyed. 2.
It is described in the principal Agent and Instrument of their suffering, The
devil shall cast some of you into prison. Heathen Emperors, wicked Governors
and Soldiers, were isntrumental therein; yet it is ascribed to the devil, as
if it were immediately acted by him, for these reasons, 1. To show what
influence the devil has in the acting of wicked men, so that in effect their
deed, is his deed, they are so subservient to him. 2. It is to show from what
author all persecutions do flow, to wit, from the devil, who is a murderer and
a liar from the beginning, and father thereof, Ioh. 8.44. 3. It is to aggrege
the horriblnesse of this sin of persecution, as being a main piece of the
devils business, be isntrumental therein who will. 4. It serves also to
comfort and encourage the suffering people to patience and constancy, seeing the
devil is their special enemy, they ought therefore not to faint in opposing of
him, nor to stumble in being opposed by him.

3. Their suffering is described by a designation of the persons, who were
especially thus to suffer, he shall cast some of you into prison, etc. By you,
we understand especially the Ministers; some whereof, says the Lord, were to
be cast in prison; and yet but some: to show that He was not altogether to
extinguish their light. The reasons why we understand it especially of
Ministers, are, 1. Because that does especially prove a trial to the Church,
when her Ministers are set upon. 2. Because the p^eserving of some of them, i^
a special comfort against affliction, according to the promise, Isa. 30.20,
21. And were it not to be understood of Ministers, it might have a fulfilling,
though they should ^ll be cast in prison. 3. The sensible ^lte^ing of the
number from (...) in the singular, to you in the plural number, does clear that
the same party is to be understood by both: and seeing by the first, the Angel,
collectively taken, is certainly to be understood; this shows that in this
^ast place, such, to wit, Ministers, are also to be understood. This form of
changing the number, will be more clear in verse. 24.

4. This future affliction, is described in its end, that is, trial; that ye
may be tri^d: this is neither the end that the devils or persecut^rs have
before them; but that which the Lord intends, who, by this suffering, minded to
discover some infirmities to themselves, and to bring forth the solidity and
str^ngth of His grace, to His praise and their comfort before others.

5. It is described in its height, and conti^^ance: it^ height is tribulation,
that is, very sore and great pressures* its continuance, is, ^^^^yes, in
definite, for an indefinite time* and does set out, 1. That their afflictions
in general were determined by the Lord, to a day. 2. That it was not long; it
was but for days. The saddest affliction of the people of God have an end.
Yet, 3. It is for ten days: to show that it was for some continuance, and that
the people of God ough^ not to look for freedom from their crosse^ in the
first, second, or fifth day. Some apply it to the persecution that followed in
the days of Trajan, for the space of ten years; but we conceive the most
general acceptance is safest.

The special encouragements that are expressed, are two: (for, some are
employed in the former words) The first, is, fear none of th^se things, etc.
This is a general comfort, frequently given by the Lord, fear not, etc. Isa.
41.42, 43. etc. And certainly though it be general; yet being spoken out of
Christ's own mouth, must be very comprehensive and massy. By which we learn,
That the Saints consolations flow not from their freedom, or being pres^rved
from crosses, (for, that is not their comfort here) but they flow from Christ's
being engaged to sustain them under the same, and from His Word, which ought to
keep them from anxiety and fainting in the greatest tribulations. The second
encouragement, is subjoyned to an exhortation, Be thou fa^thfull unto death,
and I will g^ve th^^ ^ crown of life. The Lord subjoyneth the promise to the
exhortation, 1. To show the necessity of steadfastness, even under suffering,
seeing without it there is no promise of reward. 2. It is done to mol^ifie and
sweeten the p^remptorinesse of that exhortation by such a sweet encouraging
promise annexed to it. The promise is of a crown of life: which looks to the
eternal happiness that Believers are to enjoy after this, as 2 Timothy 4.7.8. It
is called life: because of the cheerfulness of that condition, where Mortality
is swallowed up of life: and the life that is here, is not worthy of that name.
And it is a crown of life: to show the dignity and excellenty thereof; and also
to intimate that it is ^ prize to be obtained (as Crowns usually were given)
after a fight. Also, the Lord says, I will give it, if thou be faithful unto
death: to show, that faithfulness and perseverance therein, is a necessary
pre-requisite to the obtaining of this Crown; yet that it h^th no meritorious
influence to alter the nature and freeness of it, it is still a gift of grace
even to those that persevere.

Observe, 1. That faithfulness and perseverance in Holiness, are no less
necessary than Heaven: for, a man cannot attain the one without the other. 2.
What ever pinches a Believer may have, the Crown of Glory ought to make all
sweet in the very hope ther^^^: therefore is it proposed here. 3. It is not
every one that have this promise, nor every one that may warrantably apply the
same, although most men usually exceed in this, and beg^ile themselves.

The Conclusion (which is the third part of the Epistle) follows, verse. 11.
Wherein there is, 1. The common advertisement to all that have an ear, to hear:
which shows how careful men ought to be in hearing of this Word, even as if
particu^^^ly it were spoken to them. 2. There is a spec^^^^ promise made to
overcomers, he that ov^^c^^et^, shall not be hurt of the s^^ord (...). The
person to whom the promise i^ made* was form^^ly spoken of: it is not the man
that pleases himself, or yields to ^ll sort of ^en^atio^^, or for^a time
seems to be dilige^^^ but he that fights and overcom^th* The thing
promised, is to be ^eeped from ^he hurt of the second death there is a first
death which is a separation of the Soul from the Body, common to good and bad*
there is a second ^^^th, which i^ to b^ eternally separated from the presence
of God and the Lamb, ^specially at the day of Judgment* to wi^ when all the
wicked as d^gs, sorcerer^, and li^rs, shall be cast into the lake, which is the
second death, Rev. ^1.8* In sum, the promise is, he: that overcomes shall be
kept from hell.

From which we may gather, 1. That there is a second death after men are laid
in the grave. 2. That this death is most horrible and dreadful. 3. That it is
a singular care and special favor and privilege to be kept from that
second death. ^. It is employed, that the generality of men, who ^re slaves do*
their lusts, and war not against them for Christ, shall be made liable to this
second death, and forever be a pr^y to the same* 5. It shows what is the
Believers advantage by Christ's moyand and friendship that lives for ever, he
shall be freed from this. And lastly, from the scope, we may gather, that if a
man may ^e kept from the second death and wrath to come, he may the more
patiently endur^ what ever else he may meet with in this world, though it were
even the first death it self.

Concerning the influence that the devil has on some wicked men's actions: and
how he does carrie-on the same.
ONe thing may be further inquired here, to wit, concerning the devils
influence on men^ actions* for, that this effect is attributed to the devil, (
the devil shall cast some of you into prison), it holds forth a special hand
that he has in acting men to do evil, so that their deed is his. Concerning
which, we may in general say, that the devil may have and often has great
power on men* especially wicked men, in making them subservient to his designs.
Thus, he makes men cast some faithful Ministers in prison here: he reigns,
as having men at his command, in the next Epistle* and leads them captive at
his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. he fights with Michael, and stirs up Heresies as
well as persecution, chap. 12. he deceives the Nations, chap. 20. And often
his power is spoken of in this Prophecy: and it is certain that it is very
great, 1. having effects upon the bodies of men, to carry them from one place
to another, as he did to the body of Christ, Matthew. 4. to afflict them by
sickness, pain and sores as he did Io^: and the Woman ( Luke 13.16.) whom,
being a daughter of Abraham, Satan has ^ound, says Christ, lo, these eighteen
years, etc. 2. Upon the external senses* he can delude ears, eyes, etc. either
by misrepresenting external objects, or by inward disturbing of the faculties
and organes, whereby men and women, may, and do often apprehend that they hear,
see, etc. such and such things, which indeed they do not. 3. Inwardly he may
have influence to disturb the reason, and mar the judgment, as he did in these
men whom he possessed, Matthew. 8. verse. 28. He has influence on the
understanding, and so he is said to blind men, 2. Corinthians. 4. verse. 4. 4. He
may work on the memory and affections also, as by stealing away the Word, Mat.
13. verse. 19. and also wakening hatred, lust, envy, etc. Yea, some way he may
work on the will, and so he is said to put resolutions in the hear^, as it is
said of Ana^ias and Sapphira, to li^ to the holy Ghost, Acts. 5.3. and of
Judas, to betray Christ, Ioh. 13.27. So, 1 Chronicles. 21. being compared with, 2 Samuel 24.1. it is said, that he, that is, Satan, did move and provoke David to
number the people. All which in the effects* are clear: therefore is he said
both to reign in some at his pleasure, and to deceive or delude others by wiles
and subtilty, 2 Corinthians. 2. verse. 11. which are his devices. These are all
certain: Although we cannot fully show how he effectuateth them; yet, this we
may say;

First, He has no ^bsolute independent power to do what he will, but is
limited, ordered, and bounded by the Lord. And, secondly, He has no
infallible, insuperable way of acting by himself on men; but as men through
their sin yield unto him: for, he is dependent, Job 1.7, 8. and can violent
none to sin. Thirdly, He can have no immediate infallible acquaintance with
what is in men's hearts: for, that is Gods property. Fourthly, He has no
immediate determinating influence on the will of men: so that although he may
persuade violently; yet he cannot determine men to follow: that is the Lords
prerogative alone, to have hearts in His hand, Prove. 21. verse. 1. to turn them
whithersoever He will. And therefore, whatsoever way the devil prevails, it
is but by a mediate way of alluring, or deceiving, by making use of means for
that end. Fifthly, He can infuse no new corruption, nor can he create any
inward species or representations, thereby to tempt: for, that is a work of
omnipotency; but, he must work upon what is within the person that he acts
upon, for producing of these: yet, being permitted of God, he may use most
powerful persuasive means, by his skill and agility to draw men (being now
corrupt) insensibly to many gross sins; or, at least, to tempt them. Which
temptation, meeting with corruption in us, and the Lord justly giving over some
to it, Satan may prevail over them by such and such like means, as,

1. He may by signs know men's particular inclinations and predominants
(although he reach not to the understanding of the thoughts immediately:) and he
may gather what snare may most readily prevail with men for the time, according
as evidences may appear in their way, either by their not praying to God, or,
by what kythes in words and other carriage, wherein certainly he goes beyond
any man, to wit, in taking up of men's inclinations. 2. He may suit and fit
external temptations to their distemper, and tryste them so as there may be
access to the venting of such lusts: thus, he makes Judas his inclination to
covetousness and the Pharisees envy, to tryste together; David to behold
Bathsheba in such a posture, when he is somewhat secure, etc. 3. He may jumble,
confound and put through other the inward frame, by working on what is natural
in the humors of the body, for awakening lust, passion, revenge, suspicion,
fears, etc. whereby men are some way disposed to yield to the tentation
offered, which he timeth with this. 4. He may cast-in representations in the
mind, of such and such things, diverting the imagination from objects which
might mar his design; and so he may order what is within, as out of it, or by
it, to form representations in the imagination of such and such things:
whereby, proposing them (as it were) objectively to the understanding, he may
mediately offer them to the will: and for that end also, for a time keep such
thoughts in the mind and in the memory. Thus, often the Saints cannot be free
of imaginations (by his abusing of the fantasy) which they hate, and at which
they have horror: and therefore, these cannot be thought natively, and
naturally to arise from themselves, which are so strange and uncouth to them.
Thus, some things come unexpectedly, by Satan's furnishing the thoughts with a
sinful midse for attaining of an end, that is desired; and, it may be, is
desirable. Thus also he may darken Scripture, offer diverse senses to it,
furnish objections against the truth of it, or against the true meaning of it,
obstruct their taking up of the weight of any reason against their Errors, etc.
as he is said, to blind. (2 Cor. 4. verse. 4.) the minds of them that believe
not, etc. and to spew out a flood of error, Rev. 12.15. He may not only
objectively thus present such a thing; but he may continue to bear it in, and
to use motives drawn from seeming reason to engage the will to yield to it, as
he did to Adam and Eve at the first: and thus, he stirs not only natural
humors of the body; but natural corruptions, engaging all the lusts, as they
may have influence to prevail with the will, for yielding to these tentations;
So Judas his covetousness, is engaged to deal with him to sell his Master:
for, the devil though he infuse no covetous humor; yet he may act on what
there is: and he stirs the Pharisees envy to concur and make them accept of
that offer. And in this does lie a main part of the tentation, and the devils
wiles and devices, whereby he deceives, to wit, in making seeming reasons to
have weight, as if there were force in them, and true grounds to be rejected as
not for such a time, etc. nor of such weight. Thus he prevailed with Eve,
presenting the tentation with its plausible, (though false) reasons. And this
way, though indirectly, as the Apostle says, 2 Corinthians. 11.3. he continues to
deal with Adams successors; to prevail with them as he did with Eve by his
subtilty: and thus he leads men at his pleasure, by proposing to them what he
will: otherwise he could have no such dominion over men in the world as he
has: and thus, many sins are born-in on men, without any connection with their
natural complexion: and if it were not thus, one man might prevail in some
respect more with another (for he can deal by reason with him) than the devil
could, if he had no objective influence on them: and the tentations being often
unto particular designs, it shows, that the d^vil ^ath a moral objective way
of dealing with men: otherwise it were no more to say that the devil put it in
Judas heart to betray his Master, than to say he stirred him up to love money;
but this shows, that to him who loved money formerly, the devil proposes
this, as a fit mean to gain somewhat of it. Also, Acts 5. it said to Ananias,
Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie? etc. so that (as it were) when it was
objected within themselves, what if it be asked whether the Lands were sold at
so much? the devil furnishes the answer: say (says he) i^ was: and he makes
it probable that none should know it, seeing both man and wife were to agree in
their answers: and so he presents that to them, by which their covetous and
distrustful humors prevailed with them; and they both yielded: therefore it
is also said, Acts 5.4. Why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? And,
v. 9. How is it that ye have agreed together? The seed, as it were, comes from
the devil who injected it; the conceiving is from our corruption, which
entertaineth the motions stirred up by him. And how can it be otherwise said
that he blinds men's eyes that they should not understand the Gospel? for, if
it were only by a natural stirring of humors, it would distemper them for
every thing; but here lies the tentation, that they are wise in all other
things, but in spiritual things, the devil blinds them, and makes the Gospel
seem foolishness to them. Thus, he ^etteth on Ahab by entysing him without by
his prophets, and swaying him within out of pride; and he prevailed with the
false prophets, by stirring them up to lie, and that in reference to that
particular design, which no mere influence on the body could have done.

By all which we may see, that it is not without good reason said, that the
devil goes about seeking whom he may devour; he is near the heart, and is
often upon folks counsel when they are not aware. And this shows, what need
there is of watchfulness, that we give not place to the devil, and that he get
not occasion to tempt: for, with much subtilty can he make use of it; and act
men in executing of his orders, when they know not what he is doing, as likely
it was with these persecuters whom he engaged thus to persecute these
Ministers: which way of his, being frequently mentioned in this Book, we have,
once for all, said this of it.

From this we may also gather, how little weight is to be laid upon the
testimony of this devil, whose work it is to suppress the Truth of Christ,
and to traduce His Servants: for which cause, our Lord and His Apostles, would
not suffer him to speak, even when he pretended to confess Him; because, he
was a liar from the beginning, and the father thereof. It Is therefore not
unworthy the observing how contrary to our Lords way the Jesuits are in this;
who, to supply the defect of other testimonies for their way against the
Calvinists, (as they call them) do carefully and industriously gather and heap
up testimonies from the devils mouth, and insult therein as a proof
incontrovertible: for this end, L^rinus, in cap. 5. act. v. 16. having cited
some pretended Histories holding forth the little weight the Lutherans had with
the devil, does subjoyn this as an infallible confirmation of their compliance
with him, Sed and ex ore energumenae Laudunensis tota Gallia, ac toto orb
Christiano celebratissima, Calvinianos daem^n irrid^ns, nihil sibi ab illis
timendum cla^^^bat ^^nctis audientibus, Anno 1566. quoniam amisi essent, and
foederati, sicut ^estantur act^, Gallice samma fide scripta, etc. It is in sum,
this, That the devil out of the mouth of one that was famous for being
possessed by him, did mock the Calvinists, crying out, and that openly before
all, that there was nothing to be feared from them, for they were friends and
confederates: and for confirmation of this, he asserteth the thing to be with
great faithfulness recorded: as if the weight did only lie in the matter of
fact, and that there were no cause to question his faithfulness who gave this
testimony. But of this enough: we have reason to thank God, that our faith in
the Truths of God, and our clearness of the Errors of their way, are built
upon a more sure foundation* and that our controversy with them, is not at the
devils decision, from whom indeed the Calvinists might expect no favorable
sentence. But the Lord is judge Himself, To Him be praise for ever.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 12. And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamos, write, These things
says he, which has the sharp sword with two edges,

13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and
thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days
wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan
dwells.

14. But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that
hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before
the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit
fornication.

15. So have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which
thing I hate.

16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them
with the sword of my mouth.

17. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches,
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give
him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows,
saving he that receives it.


Follows now the third Epistle, directed by the Lord to the Church of
Pergamos: the estate of it is employed in the Body of the Epistle to be a
suffering condition: and though having much integrity, honesty, and constancy
under her sufferings; yet in some things reproveable and defective; especially
in her zeal against false Teachers: for which cause, the Lord does here, though
with great tenderness, reprove her.

The division of the Epistle is common with all the rest. The Inscription is in
the 12. verse. The Body of the Epistle, in the 13, 14, 15, 16. verses. The
Conclusion in the 17. verse.

The direction, (which is the first part of the Inscription) is, To the Angel
of the Church of Pergamos, a famous City in Asia the less, sometimes the seat
of Kings; and for that present time, a seat of the Roman Governors: a place
full of sin, Idolatry, and cruelty; Yet has our Lord a Church here, to which
He writes, when He takes no notice of the Governor, or of these who were most
eminent: which does show, 1. The power and efficacy of the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, in reaching whom He pleases, though in the most desperate condition.
2. It shows the freeness of grace, that condescends to gather a Church here.
3. It shows His tenderness to, and care of those whom He has gathered to be
a Church unto Himself, beyond any other in the World.

The iTtle He takes to Himself, is, He who has the sword with the two edges:
the sword with the two edges, is the word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. Heb. 4.12. which
we heard ( Chap. 1. v. 16.) did proceed out of Christ's mouth. It shows, that
Christ has the command of the Word, to make it effectual for the good of His
Elect; and for the convincing, smitting, wounding and slaying of His enemies by
spiritual plagues: and it is chosen in this place, because He does make use of
this as His sovereign privilege in the threatening, for stirring up the Angel
to his duty.

In the Body of the Epistle (besides the common assertion of Gods Omniscience)
we have, First, the commendation of this Angel and Church, verse. 13. Secondly,
the reproof, verse. 14.15. Thirdly, an exhortation to duty, with a sharp
threatening added, as a motive to press the same, verse. 16.

In the commendation, we have, 1. the thing commended. 2. Some excellent
aggravations, (to call them so) or commending qualifications of this
commendation. The thing commended, is in two expressions to one purpose, Thou
hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith: By name, we understand the
Doctrine of the Gospel, whereby Christ's Name, that is, Himself is held forth
and manifested: for, in the Gospel, to preach Christ's Name, and to declare it
to the Gentiles, is all one with preaching Himself, or His Gospel. By faith, is
understood the Doctrine of faith in Him, which is the same thing. The holding
fast of His Name, is a zealous adhering to the profession of His Truth, as it
were, holding it by both hands; and not denying His faith, is an open avowing
of the same by a public profession, and honoring Christ by their avouching of
their faith in Him, without fainting, or shifting in the same, notwithstanding
of any peril that might follow thereupon. For, this negative, Not denying His
faith, does import more than is expressed.

The commendation, is amplified by two special circumstances, that serve to
heighten the same, 1. From the place where; And, 2. from the time when; they
express this constancy. 1. For the place: it is where Satan's throne was. It is
not much to avow a profession in some places; but to do it in such a place as
Pergamos, where Satan had a seat or throne, (as the word is) is much. Satan's
having a throne, implies not only a sinfulness in that place, common with
other places; but it does insinuate such an open avowed opposition to Christ
and His followers, and such an adhering to Satan, that, on the matter, it
looked as if Satan had commanded expressly there in chief: for, not only was
wickedness tolerated; but carried on, and established by a law: nor only had
he a seat in hearts, as he has in all men by nature; but in the Magistracy and
Judicatories, whereby orders were given in public, in reference to persecution
and profanity; and men did so walk, as if directly orders had been given by
Satan, and taken from him, in that place: he did so effectually without
control (as it were) obtain his will, the Lord so permitting and ordering it
in His wise and secret providence and Justice.

From which, 1. We may see how tyrannously the devil would manage every thing,
if he had things at his disposal. 2. At what great height he may have his
dominion, even beside the Gospel, and in the place where it is. 3. How fully
men naturally are slaves to the devil, he being the prince of this world, that
works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. And, 4. We may see what
need there is to pray that Christ's Kingdom may come, and how thankful we ought
to be, who are in any measure freed from this tyranny.

The second circumstance in this commendation, is, the time, that is, it was
even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was slain
among you, where Satan dwells. This is also an excellent part of the
commendation, that it was not only in such a place, that was wicked and
profane; but at such a time when wickedness and profanity was exercised in its
height, which is proven by the death of a faithful Martyr, who was then
violently slain amongst them: at such a time to hold fast His Name, was indeed
commendable. Whereby we see how the Lord does take notice of the commendable
circumstances of His peoples duties, as He does of the aggravations of their
sins. What this Antipas was, there is no more mentioned in Scripture concerning
him: it is recorded in Story that he was a Minister in Pergamos, and it is not
improbable, seeing these are most ordinarily the object of persecuters malice
and violence. However, the Lord puts three great titles upon him, 1. He is a
Martyr: this signifies a witness, and that not only such a witness, as
witnesses by word and profession, but as seals it with his blood: thus Paul
speaks of Stephen, Act. 22.20. when the blood of thy Martyr Stephen was shed.
And therefore in the Primitive times, Martyrs were distinguished from
confessors, thus, Martyrs, were such as suffered to death; confessors, were
such as suffered imprisonment, mutilation of some member, whippings, or such
like, for the faith of Christ. 2. He calls him a faithful Martyr: to show that
not only the cause was honest, for which he suffered; but also that he was
honest in his suffering for the same. 3. He is my faithful Witness: which
sets forth, 1. The end of Antipas suffering, which was to bear witness for
Christ. 2. It holds forth the Lords owning of him in that testimony, and now
by this, as it were, from Heaven writing this kindly and honorable Epitaph
upon him, he is my fatithfull Martyr. It may be, he was stoned in some tumult
as a seditious person, or one not worthy to live, because of some reproaches or
other put upon him; yet thus does the Lord own him, to wipe all these away, and
to make his memory to be the more savory; and witness bearing for Christ, to
be the less scared at; that so others may be animated and encouraged to be
followers of Him.

From all which we may gather, 1. That it is exceeding commendable to be
zealous, and steadfast in such a place, and at such a time as Religion is
hazardsome and dangerous. 2. That the death of any of the Lords people,
especially when it is in witnessing for Him, is exceeding precious in His
sight. 3. That honest witnessing for Christ is a most honorable thing Antipas
being particularly named with these titles, for setting forth the
honourablnesse of his suffering. 4. We may see also, that there is an implied
distinction of Martyrs, some are faithful, and, it may be, some dying the same
death, and before men for the same cause, may yet not be accounted faithful
before the Lord. If it be asked, What is necessary to make one to be accounted
a faithful Martyr before God? We suppose these four are necessary, 1. That the
person suffer as a wel-doer, so it must be for the Truth of Christ, or
righteousness sake, Matthew. 5.10, 11. for, non est mors, sed causa mortis quae
facit Martyrem. 2. Not only would suffering be stated upon a particular
account, wherein they have the side that is right comparatively; but they would
be right simply in the main Truths of Christ, as for instance, sometimes
Arrians and Jews, after Christ's coming in the flesh, and other Heretics, did
suffer by Heathens, either because they would not worship their Idols, and
disclame the true God; or, because they would not simply deny themselves to be
Christians: they had indeed the better, if we look to the Question as stated
between them and Heathens; yet they cannot be called Christ's faithful
witnesses, seeing they did not faithfully give testimony to Him in His Person,
Natures, and Offices. 3. It is necessary that the person be, as to his state, a
Believer, without which none can be a faithful Martyr, although possibly his
testimony may be a faithful testimony: for, without faith it is impossible to
please God, especially in such a great thing as suffering for Him. 4. It would
be gone about in the right manner, so as thereby the testimony given to
Christ, may be made the more to shine, to wit, there would be blamlessenesse in
the man's conversation, singlnesse in his end, deniednesse, zeal, humility and
love kything and in exercise in his undertaking and undergoing those
sufferings, as we may see in Stephen, Acts 7.51. etc. And this is to suffer as
a Christian, and not as an evil doer, and busy body, 1 Pet. 4.15, 16. and
according to the will of God, by which such may be encouraged to commit the
keeping of their souls to Him in well-doing, Ibid. verse. 19. This is also
confirmed from, 1 Corinthians. 13.

He does again repeat where Satan dwells. 1. To show that the devils dominion
in that place, was not by starts and fits; but that he had a settled, and (as it
were) a constant residence there. 2. To commend their honesty and steadfastness
the more. 3. It is to show the great evidence of the devils dominion, to wit,
that faithful men were put to suffering for the cause of Christ.

The reproof follows, verse. 14, 15. First, generally, but I have a few things
against thee: this is not to be understood as if the faults were little in
themselves; But it is thus expressed, 1. To show how tender He was of them,
when (as it were) He heightens their commendation, and extenuates their faults.
2. It is to encourage and hearten them to mend cheerfully that which He
reproves.

Hence Observe, 1. There may be corruption and defects, where there are very
many things commendable. 2. Where there is honesty in the main, and a suffering
condition for Christ, there He is no rigid or severe censurer; but a most
tender constructer of His Peoples infirmities.

Secondly, More particularly He sets down by way of similitude the ill
reproved, verse. 14. Because thou have there them that hold the doctrine of
Balaam, etc. which He apply eth, verse. 15. It is not to be thought that there
were any professed followers of Balaam in that Church; but the intent is, to
show, that, upon the matter, the doctrine of the Nicolaitans did agree
therewith; and if Balaams practice was hateful, theirs must also be such. And
so, by proposing the hateful way of Balaam, He discovers the odiousness of
the doctrine of the Nicolaitans: which will be found, upon the matter, to be
the same. The History of Balaam is recorded, Numb. 22, 23, 24, and 31.
Chapters. In sum this, he was a greedy covetous wretch, who greedily aimed at
the wages of unrighteousness; and being restrained from cursing the people of
Israel by the Lord, he gave subtle advice to Balak to draw the people of
Israel into a snare, that thereby God might be provoked against them; and so,
in the close, they might be prevailed over. Josephus, in the fourth Book of the
Antiquities of the Jews, expresses it thus, That he advised Balak to send some
of the beautifullest Women of Midian to wander about the Camp of Israel; who,
though they should intertain the Israelites familiarly, yet that they should
not yield any thing to their lust; but that they should pretend to run from
them, till they should partake of their Idol feasts with them: in reference to
both which, they prevailed with the Israelites, and drew them both into bodily,
and spiritual fornication: which were the two great faults of the Nicolaitans,
to wit, liberty in fornication, as if it were not sinful; and indifferency in
eating of things sacrificed to Idols, without respect to offense, as was showen
on verse. 6. Therefore the Lord here speaks of the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, as being indeed tho reviving of Balaam's old condemned Error: And
so they became guilty before God of his practices, as if they had expressly
professed the maintaining of the same, It is said, That Balaam taught Balak to
cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, etc. His wicked advice
gets that name: because, it proved an occasion of falling and stumbling to
the Israelites, as if a stumbling block had been cast in the way of some man,
to make him fall. Thus many sinful practices have not only the consideration of
guiltiness, in respect of the persons themselves, who commit the same; but
have also the consideration of offense, as they are apt to prove occasions of
falling, and ruin unto others. This also, to wit, of laying a stumbling block
before others, will agree well in application to the Nicolaitans: who, as they
were guilty in the sin of uncleanness; so were they careless in reference to
offense, not regarding how offensive their way was unto others in the use of
indifferent things, such as eating of things sacrificed, etc. which in these
primitive times was to many the occasion of stumbling, when Christian-liberty
was not rightly bounded, as we may gather from, 1 Corinthians. 8.9, 10. And these
two also often go together, to be careless of guilt before God, and of offense
before others.

From which we may gather, 1. That the most vile Errors and delusions may
increase exceedingly: This of the Nicolaitans had spread in Ephesus, Pergamos,
and several other Churches, even in the days of John the Apostle. 2. That
new-upstart gross abominations, are oftentimes indeed but the reviving of some
old buried and condemned practices or doctrines. Thus the Error of the
Nicolaitans, is but indeed, on the matter, the putting of Balaam's practice in
a doctrine, and maintaining the same under another name. 3. We may see that it
is an allowed way of confuting new start-up delusions, to show their agreement,
on the matter, with former old acknowledged and condemned Heresies. Thus the
Lord does here; and in the Epistle following, he compares them to Iezebel:
for, often men will more impartially judge of bypast Errors, than of what
seems to be new: and therefore the devil uses most cunningly to disguise
those things, and to endeavor to have old Errors vented under the notion of
new lights, and depths, when indeed they are but old rotten delusions.

If it be said here, That ordinarily the most gross men use to brand the most
Orthodox with this, as being revivers of old Heresies, whereof many instances
may be given. For Answer, We say, That a simple asserting of this, is not
sufficient to bear it out: we would therefore propose these qualifications, 1.
That the thing esteemed to be an Error or Heresy, be indeed incontrovertibly
such, and that in some fundamental thing: indeed sometimes, even the Ancients,
do put somethings in the Catalogue of Heresies, which will not be found to be
of such weight. It is not those we speak of, nor is it such that are mentioned
here. 2. The application also would be clear; and men would not charge others
with Heresies of an odious name or nature upon prejudice, or upon mistake of
some expression: nay, not upon some seeming consequence, which the Authors do
deny, and, it may be, others cannot demonstratively show the inference thereof.
Here it is not so, the practice and doctrine of the Nicolaitans, is so clear,
that they cannot deny it in particulars, though it may be, at first, they would
refuse it to be the doctrine of Balaam. 3. Such an application would be made in
knowledge, and from through acquaintance with the alleged old Heresy upon the
one side, and with particular tenants of others, who are supposed to maintain
that error, upon the other side. Oftentimes men speak in those things, what
they know not, or with a too lightly passing view; or, upon some probable
resemblance, or appearance, are ready to ground such an application. 4. This
would be remembered, that the old condemned Heresy must be such as is
condemned in Scripture, and that still the Word is to be acknowledged as the
supre^m rule. All which agree in this application; and where they agree, it is
not a little prejudice to an opinion, to say, it is, on the matter, the same
with such and such an old Heresy, that is, to men's conviction long since
condemned upon grounds from the Word of God.

This was a foul Error: and it is not to be thought that this Angel, who is
here so commended, was guilty of any of these evils, by any positive accession
to them; but this is the fault charged upon him, That thou have them that hold
the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, that is, the Angel had such in the Church, who
continued to be Members, and were not by Discipline cut off. This is his fault:
for, it was not the Churches fault that such lived in Pergamos, because they
had no civil Authority to impede that; yet it was their fault that they lived
Church Members there, because they had Church Authority to remedy that, which
yet was not put in exercise against them, as by Ephesus had been done.

From which we may gather, 1. That the Church is invested with a Power and
Authority for cutting off of corrupt Members. 2. That it is a most horrible
fault where there is defect in this. Our Lord Jesus quarrelleth the want of
this in Pergamos, where He commends much honesty: and He commends it in
Ephesus, where there wanted not inward defects: because there is nothing that
more occasioneth the Name of Christ to be reproached, His Ordinances to be
despised, His people to be offended and stumbled, than the suffering of corrupt
Members that are tainted with Errors to continue in the Church. Therefore much
of the Churches commendations or reproofs in these Epistles is founded on this,
as it is rightly, or, partially exercised. 3. By this it appears, that our
Lord Jesus is no friend to Toleration; and that the tolerating of corrupt
Teachers, can no way be approven of Him. It is true, this is directly spoken
against Churchmen their tolerating of corrupt Teachers; But will any think
that that will be approven in civil Powers, which is so hateful in the
Church Officers? or, that Jesus Christ will account Toleration in the one to be
hateful, and in the other to be approvable? 4. There is diversity of tempers
in Church Officers, and diversity of conditions in Churches, even where there
may be real honesty in both: Ephesus had much coldness within, and yet much
zeal against those Nicolaitans: Pergamos again, is much commended for their
zeal and constancy in suffering; and yet reproved for want of zeal against
these corrupt Members. 5. Men may be very straight and tender in the work of
God, and bold in reference to suffering; and yet faint and be defective in the
prosecuting of Church Censures against erroneous men. This appears both from
this Epistle and that which follows, where their particular condition and
public carriage in other things, is exceedingly commended; yet is there a
notwithstanding in both in reference to this.

If it be asked, What can be the reason that honest, tender, and zealous men
should be so often defective in this, who yet may be zealous and fervent
against scandalous practices?

Answ. These reasons may be given, 1. It is more difficult to get the
impression of the odiousness of corrupt doctrine on the heart, than of gross
outward practices: because gross practices offend nature more directly, and
are hateful even to natural men: and even some good men are ready to foster
such an opinion, as if grace were more consistent with error than with
profanity. Upon this ground the Lord Himself, and the Apostles do more
frequently give people warning to mark and abstain from them that cause
offenses contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, than they do in matters of
gross practice. 2. Persuing of persons that are erroneous, has often little
fruit with it as to the persons themselves, there being but few that are
recovered out of that snare of the devil, and to whom God gives repentance,
who once deliberately oppose themselves to the Truth; but on the contrary, they
seem to be more bold, and to make a greater stir than if they had not been
taken notice of, as we see in Corinth, and Galatia; the more that Paul pressed
them, the more they seemed to despise him, and they go on in their
contradiction and blasphemy, as in the History of the Acts, and instances of
Hymeneus and Philetus, is clear. This makes that even sometimes good men, out
of fear of the inconveniences that may follow, and the difficulties that
accompany such a work, may be too prone to oversee and forbear them. 3.
Sometimes respect to the persons of some who may be carried away, may have
influence on this, as suppose some persons for a name of piety, sometimes
favorie, should be seduced; preposterous tenderness to those may make men
cruelly to spare them to their prejudice. This fault the Lord seems to
quarrel in Thyatira, that they suffered his servants to be seduced. 4. There
may be also a design by more gentle means to restrain such an error, and
recover such as are fallen, whereby they may come to exceed and turn to be
defective in not using the means appointed, as if such censures had been
needlessly appointed, or, as if the Lord did not make use of mediate means for
the restraining of error. 5. Such businesses also have often their own
mistakes among many tender members of the Church; some whereof, may be too
favorable constructers of the most gross seducers, and so fear to offend
them; and love to keep all in peace, oftentimes may steal in to have weight to
the prejudice of the Lords Ordinance. It is written of the Schism in Phrygia,
which arose for Montanus, that many did construct too well of him; as not
thinking it impossible but he might be a good man, who, therefore could not go
along in the thoughts that others had of him. There is readily something of
this amongst the weakest sort where deluders come, which getting way for a
time, does rather increase than diminish; and so leaves this duty in a greater
none-entry than at first.

We come now to the remedy, or duty exhorted to, which is laid down and pressed
verse. 16. It is in short, Repent; that same which was proposed to Ephesus,
verse. 5. The Lord hereby signifying, 1. That when sins are fallen into, it is
not enough to forbear them, but there must be an exercising of repentance for
them. 2. That there is no expectation to be kept free from wrath where there
has been sin without repentance. 3. That ommissions are sinful and to be
repented of, even as commissions are. And, 4. That sinful ommissions in a man's
public Station (such as this is, which is reproved) are to be repented of, as
gross personal faults are.

The threatening annexed, is, in these words, or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. It has two
parts: The first, respects the Church or Angel of Pergamos, I will come unto
thee quickly, that is, if thou repent not, I will one way or another come in
judgment against thee. We conceive it relates to the Angel especially, it
being in the singular number: because this fault being a defect in Discipline,
is not so to be imputed to the People, as to him whose place it was to take
order with such corruptions: which will appear more clearly afterward. The
second part respects these gross members that were suffered to be in the
Church, to wit, the Nicolaitans, I will fight against them with the sword of my
mouth, that is, seeing ye are guilty of defect here, if there be not repentance
for it, I will come in an extraordinary way and my self punish those whom ye
have suffered. For clearing of this threatening, we may consider, 1. Wherein it
consists. 2. How it can be a threatening to the Angel. 3. Wherefore he is so
peculiarly threatened.

To the first, It is clear here, that the party immediately threatened, is the
Nicolaitans, whom the Lord threatens to fight against with the sword of His
mouth: which looks not to any external, or corporal plague: for, the sword of
His mouth, is not the weapon that inflicteth such: But it looks especially to
these, 1. To a discovery of their wickedness, and of the hatefulness of their
way, by His Word. 2. To a censuring, threatening, and sentencing of them by the
same. 3. To a fruitlesnesse of such discoveries, threatenings and sentences, as
to any spiritual or saving work upon them; but that they should be by such
clear convictions and sentences, in Gods secret Wisdom and Justice, more
hardened, convinced, irritated and affected with spiritual plagues, than if they
had not been so dealt with: in this respect often in the Scripture we have
mentioned, hewing by the Prophets, and slaying by the words of the Lords mouth,
as Hosea 6.5. and fighting with Antichrist, and destroying him by the Spirit of
His mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and elsewhere the like expressions to that purpose.
This is a sad plague, when the Table of the Gospel becomes a snare, and when
through men's own corruption they become more drunk with their own delusions,
even under convincing Light; and when the Word of God, which is the only Weapon
whereby they may offend their enemies, is through their opposing the Light
thereof, turned to fight against them, as they have turned themselves to fight
against it: the event here as to them, cannot but be desperate.

For the second, It may be questioned how this can be a threatening to the
Church or Angel that the Lord would take such course with these corrupt
Nicolaitans? It might rather look like a favor to them? Answer, If we consider
it more particularly, we will find it a threatening in these respects, 1. That
it implies Christ to be angry at their neglecting of their duty; and that this
extraordinary way does insinuate His esteeming of them not to be worthy to have
this employment: therefore he takes their duty off their hand, and provideth
Himself of some others for the performing thereof. Thus, when Paul is
threatening the Corinthians, 1 Epist. Chap. 4. verse. 21. What, shall I come unto
you with a vod? etc. whereby he shows himself to be angry. In the beginning
of the next Chap, he reproves them for suffering the incestuous person, and
commands him to be Excommunicated: which bears out this, that Paul's coming
over them to press such a duty, was a stroke or note for their defect in the
same. 2. It is a threatening in this respect: because the taking of some
extraordinary way and mean as in reference to these Nicolaitans, has
strange-like and uncouth effects oftentimes following upon it: thereby the
Church is put through other, and revolutions follow; and often the Wheat is
trod upon, when the Tares are a weeding: which cannot but be hurtful to the
Church. 3. It supponeth a laying-by of this Angel and making use of some other
for this work of convincing, reproving, and confounding, etc. of those wicked
men, which should be to His disgrace, when he should have no hand in so good a
work: and so the meaning of the threatening, is, to the Angel, if thou spare
these wicked men, and do not thy duty in reference to them, I my self will come
in another way, and lay thee by, and follow my purpose in sentencing, and
censuring of them by some other mean. And this is to give another his Crown,
which is so often commended to the Angels in those Epistles to be kept. Thus the
threatening is not to remove a Ministry or Church Estate from Pergamos as was
in the case of Ephesus; but it is the Lords threatening to lay aside such
particular Ministers, and notwithstanding thereof to carry on His Work.

Now for the third, To wit, wherefore this threatening respects the Angel more
peculiarly, than that of Ephesus, did. Answ. The reason was formerly hinted, to
wit, Ephesus sin and defect was in the practice of the power of Godliness,
common to Ministers and people: therefore does that threatening extend almost
equally to both: this sin again, which is reproved here, does peculiarly
resfect upon the Ministers: and therefore the weight of the threatening does
peculiarly respect them.

From which we may learn, 1. That fainting and unfaithfulness in the Work of
the Ministry, may procure an interruption by one mean or other in the exercise
thereof, or a blasting of a man in Gifts and Parts, who sometimes has been
useful. 2. It shows that sometimes God may keep His Word in a place, and
exercise it in reference to some persons, between whom and Him there is a
standing or stated fight, they fighting against Him and not receiving the love
of the Truth, and He fighting against them by giving them up to hardness of
heart and strong delusions; and, in His secret and holy Justice, making His
Word and Ordinances to promove the same. 3. It follows also, that it is a
most dreadful thing when the Lord and His Word become our party, and when He
fights against a people with that Sword: it is here a more terrible
threatening to fight against those with the Sword of His mouth, than if He had
sent the Sword, Famine, or Pestilence upon them. 4. It implies, that this is a
plague, and a way of punishing, that the Lord in His Justice often sends and
exerceth upon deluders and corrupt Teachers, who have not received the love of
the Truth, and have perverted the Word of God to their own destruction, to wit,
that it should be a weapon of Gods indignation for the inflicting of Spiritual
plagues upon them.

The Conclusion follows, verse. 17. and has two parts common with the rest;
1. All that are spiritually affected, and have the sense of right hearing, are
exhorted to hear what God says by His Spirit to the Churches, as if
particularly it were spoken to them. This is so far from supposing that men
naturally have ears to hear, that it does imply the contrary, to wit, that it
is not every one that has ears to hear, but that he is a rare man that has
them; for, none can hear spiritually what the Lord says to the Churches, but
such as have gotten them as Moses word is, Deuteronomy. 29.4.

The second part of the Conclusion contains some encouragements to the
wrestling Believer, as all the rest of the Conclusions do. The party to whom
the promise is made, is the same, to wit, him that overcomes, or he that is a
overcoming, as it may be read: which points at the zealous, single, constant,
and faithful Wrestler, though he has not yet obtained the victory. The
encouragements given him, are, on the matter, the same with the rest, to wit,
the happiness that may be expected in heaven; but are set down in three, or
four different expressions, for commending of the same. The first, is, I will
give him to eat of the hidden Manna. Manna is called, ( Psalm. 105.) Angels
food; and, Ioh. 6. bread from heaven. It is, in a word, the most excellent, and
refreshing food; yea, Christ Himself, who is called the true Bread from heaven,
Joh. 6. of whom whosoever eats shall not die. It is hidden Manna, possibly
relating to that pot of Manna that was kept within the Ark of the Testimony:
and so it points at such food as is hid with Christ in God, and to be enjoyed
with God in the heavens: which was typified by the most Holy. However, it
imports, First, The excellency of this food, and the satisfaction which the
overcomer may expect: it is inconceivable and inexpressible, The eye has not
seen, the ear has not heard of it, nor has it entered in man's heart to
conceive thereof, Isa. 64. Secondly, It imports its sickernesse: it is bid,
it cannot but be sure to the overcomer, seeing it is kept in the secret place of
the most High. Thirdly, It imports the rarity and singularity of this
excellency, being a thing altogether unknown to the world, as if it were
hidden: in which respects ( Coloss. 3.3.) our life is said to be hid with
Christ in God. The second expression, is, I will give him a white stone: white
stones were used in those days, for two ends, as may be gathered from Heathen
writers, 1. In their wrestlings and games, he that overcame, and was victor,
got a white stone, as a badge of honor put upon him. 2. It was used in civil
Courts (when men were accused and challenged of crimes) to be given as a sign
of absolution: thus a man that was found innocent and absolved, got a white
stone, and he that was condemned got a black stone: both answer well here,
where Christ promises to give to the overcomer a Crown, in pledge of his
victory, and a full, public, and open absolution in the great Day, before men
and Angels. 3. This white stone has a new name written upon it: a Name, is
some honorable thing; a new name, is something eminently honorable: It was
the Lords way to change the name of some, whom He eminently loved; and for
confirmation of His favor to them, He gave them new Names: so he did to
Abraham, Jacob, etc. This says that the believing overcomer shall be made by
Jesus Christ quite another thing, where He shall have such Glory and Majesty
bestowed upon him, as will need a new Name to express the same, and make him
think himself another thing than ever he thought to have been. We take it, on
the matter, to be that same which is expressed, chap. 3. v. 12. by having the
Name of God, and Christ's new Name written upon them. 4. It is a Name which no
man knows saving he that receives it. This must be an excellent motto that
only the spiritual senses of the receiver is able to discern the excellency
thereof, so that no on-looker can tell what the satisfaction, dignity, and
honor of such a person is; but he who is possessed with the same: and
proportionally, these who are made joint Heirs of the same Glory. These
promises may in some part be applicable to the first fruits of the Spirit that
the Believers are partakers of here: which, in respect of carnal delights, are
unspeakable and glorious, and such as pass all understanding; yet the proper
fulfilling of them, and the main scope of the place, is to be applied only to
the enjoyments that Believers have to expect in heaven; when they shall reap
the full Harvest, and be brought to the possession of the Kingdom prepared for
them: for, all of them do presuppose a full accomplished victory before they
be attained: which cannot be expected in this life. O but heaven must be an
excellent happiness: seeing the satisfaction thereof is so inexpressible I even
the Apostle Paul who was ravished to the third heavens, must give it over, and
say, he heard what was impossible to be uttered. 2 Cor. 12.

LECTURE VI.
Verse. 18. And unto the Angel of the Church in Thyatira, write, These things
says the Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet
are like fine brass,

19. I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience,
and thy works, and the last to be more then the first.

20. Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer
that woman Iezebel, which calls her self a prophetess, to teach and to
seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto
idols.

21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not.

22. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her
into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.

23. And I will kill her children with death, and all the Churches shall know
that I am he which searches the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every
one of you according to your works.

24. But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not
this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, I
will put upon you none other burden.

25. But that which ye have already, hold fast till I come.

26. And he that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I
give power over the nations:

27. (And he shall rule them with a rod of iron: as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken to shivers) even as I received of my Father.

28. And I will give him the morning star.

29. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.


THis is the fourth Epistle, directed to the Church of Thyatira. The division
is common with the rest of the Epistles, To wit, 1. An Inscription, verse. 18.2.
The Body of the Epistle, verse. 19.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. The Conclusion is in
the rest.

In the Inscription, Christ takes three Titles to Himself; The first is, Thus
says the Son of God. This is (to say so) His royal Style, than which there
can be none higher: For, 1. It bears out His Godhead: for, Christ is not the
Son of God by Adoption, as Believers are; but He is the Son of God by an
eternal Generation, being begotten of the Father in an inconceiveable way: in
which respect, He is frequently called the only begotten of the Father, 1 John
14.18. and the brightness of his glory, and express image of his person, Heb.
1.3. 2. It points out the unity of the Essence of the Godhead, which is common
to the Father and the Son: for, this same that is the Son of God here, as being
a distinct person from the Father, is the first and the last, who is, who was,
and is to come, the Almighty, Chap. 1.8.11. which are essential Attributes of
the Godhead. 3. This title being compared with the Vision in the former
Chapter, wherein Christ was spoken of as true Man, does point out the Union of
the two Natures in one Person: for, the Son of Man, is the Son of God; and the
same Person who is the Son of God, is the Son of Man. All which, are
considerations that bear forth excellency in Him; and give ground of comfort to
His People. The reason why He takes this style to Himself in this place, is,
because He is Sovereign to reprove faults in, and to give directions unto, His
Church; and that with severe threatenings in reference to persons that were
guilty: therefore, to make all the more weighty, He takes this style.

The other two Titles, are taken out of the Vision, Chap. 1. To wit, Who has
eyes as a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass. The first of them,
sets forth His Omnisciency, that is able to reach the secrets of hearts, and
discover the hypocrisy of the most subtle hypocrite. Answerable to this title
( verse. 23.) He is said to search the heart and the reins: and His being
manifested to be such, is His being known to have eyes like unto a flame of
fire. The last title, and his feet like unto fine brass, shows the
incorruptnesse and justness of His way in mannaging the affairs of His House,
and His sovereign irresistible manner in promoving His designs; as having both
absolute Authority to Govern, and absolute power to execute what He intends.
Answerable to this, ( verse. 23) He is said to render to every one according to
their works. He takes the first of these two titles: because He is to discover
the hypocrisy of a counterfeit Prophetess. And He takes the last: because He
is to threaten her and her followers.

In the Body of the Epistle (beside the general asserting of His Omniscience)
there are four main things, 1. There is a commendation, verse. 19. 2. There is a
quarrel, with some aggravations thereof, verse. 20. and 21. 3. There is a
threatening, including a duty, or, comprehending the way how the thing threatened
might be prevented, verse. 22. and 23. This is in reference to them that were
corrupted. 4. There is a mitigation of the threatening, or, a consolation laid
down in reference to these that were kept free from these corruptions, verse.
24, 25.

The commendation is great, both as to the extent of the matter commended, and
as to the qualification thereof. Beside the general, I know thy works, the
things commended in them, are set down in five words, exceeding comprehensive.
The first is, their charity, or love: this sets forth the inward frame of
their heart in reference to God and the Saints: and is, in effect, the sum and
fulfilling of both the Tables of the Law. This was defective in Ephesus. The
second is, their service: this looks to their ministering to the Saints of
their substance, and otherwise; and is a fruit and proof of the former. The
third is, their faith: which respects not only the purity of their
profession, by their keeping themselves from Error; but mainly it looks to
their exercising of faith in Him, and dependence on Him: for, it is faith, to
wit, the grace of faith that is commended here, as it is the grace of love,
patience, etc. The fourth thing, is, patience: which is a fruit of faith; and
imports their submitting to suffering for the Gospel of Christ, without
fainting or shifting in respect of the outward profession before others, or
fr^ting in respect of the inward frame of their spirit as to themselves,
notwithstanding of all these sufferings. The fifth word is, and thy works;
which generally looks to the strain of their carriage, which by this the Lord
holds forth as commendable. All these being put together, they show an
excellent frame this Church once had, and withal, give a Copy unto us. Yet
there is a circumstance or qualification added, which does exceedingly heighten
the commendation, that is, and the last to be more then the first, The meaning
whereof, is, although thou have been in a good condition for charity, patience,
works, etc. since the beginning; yet thy last works are, for extent in
practice, for liveliness in the degree, and for a spiritual manner of
performing of them, beyond what they were; so that he^ present condition is set
forth to be a growing condition, which does confirm her to have been really
sincere and in a most lively frame. The commendation was excellent; but this
qualification puts the crown upon it: for, where a decay comes upon the
graciousnesse of a peoples frame, (as was in Ephesus) or, where there is an
up-sitting without progress, these become as a dead she that makes all the
box of ointment to stink.

The challenge follows, verse. 20. and 21. 1. Generally proposed. 2.
Particularly expressed. 3. It is aggreged. Who could have thought that the next
word to such an excellent commendation, should be a notwithstanding? But this
shows, 1. The deceitfulness and desperatnesse of our corruption, that may
have its influence beside much grace, he has been frequently marked. 2. It
shows the Lords condescending and graciousnesse, who gives such a testimony,
even where there are faults. The general expression is, I have a few things
against thee: which is the same, upon the matter; and so to be understood as
was spoken to Pergamos. verse. 14. We shall therefore say no more of it.

More particularly, the quarrel, is, because thou suffer that woman Iezebel,
which calls herself a prophetess, etc. For clearing of which, we would, 1.
consider Iezebels fault, which the Lord charge upon her. 2. The Angel's
fault, for which he is charged, who yet was free of her gross evils.

For the first: Iezebel is described by her name and practice. It is not to be
thought that there was such a woman, bearing such a name, or owning the
practices of Iezebel Queen of Israel, who is recorded, 1 King. 16.31. etc. But
it is like, there has been in this Church some impudent woman, who, for her
furthering the abominable Sect of the Nicolaitans, gets this name Iezebel,
to make her and her Tenants the more odious, even as in the former Epistle,
some were said to hold the doctrine of Balaam, for this very end. For Iezebels
practice, 1 King. 16, etc. is recorded to be infamous for these two, 1. For
gross idolatry and the spreading thereof. 2. For painting and fairding herself
in an impudent way, which insinuates her being guilty of Adultery and
uncleanness. Which two being the faults whereof this counterfeit prophetess
was guilty, the Holy Ghost gives her this name of Iezebel: thereby to scare
His People the more from her, etc. for, what ever she intended, she was, upon
the matter, but a Iezebel. By this it appears also, that she has been some
special promoter of the Sect of the Nicolaitans: for, we will find her practice
and Tenants to agree therewith. 1. She calls her self a prophetess, that is,
she took on her, and so gave out her self, as if she had been extraordinarily
inspired by the Holy Ghost, thereby to gain more credit to her opinions. It Is
marked in Ancient History, that there was never almost an eminent Heresy or
Heretic, but had some special women for the promovers thereof, who oftentimes
took to themselves the name of prophetesses. Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 16. (which
is cited in the second Centurie. cap. de Hares.) marketh it of many: Simon
Magus had his Helena; Carpocrates his Marcellina; Apelles his Philumena;
Montanus had two, whom he called prophetesses, to wit, Priscilla and Maximilla:
and Augustine frequently mentions one Lucilla, who was a great ringleader of
the Donatists: so it is like the Nicolaitans had such a prophetess, for
furthering of their design.

If it be asked, Why the devil seeks thus to engage women, and to put them on
the top of such designs?

Answ. These reasons may be given, 1. Because often women are most easily
engaged and carried furthest on in the delusion; and it is not so easy to make
a man give out himself for a prophet, as a woman to take on her the name of a
prophetess. This general we may gather from, 2 Timothy 3.6.7. 2. Women are most
eager, vehement, and diligent in pursuing what they are engaged into: even late
times may teach how they may prevail and insinuate on many by their diligence,
if we consider what is recorded of Mistress Hutchinson and some others,
mentioned in that little Story of the Rise, Reign, and Ruin of Familists,
Libertines, etc. in New England. 3. Women are oftentimes less suspected than
men; and any seeming parts or abilities, which in the Lords secret Justice they
may be furnished with, is usually more admired and taking than in men, as if it
looked like a thing above nature. This same consideration, occasioned a Schism
in Phrygia, because some had more respect to Montanus his prophetesses, than
was fit. 4. Women also have more secret, and private access to tempt and
infect others, than men can have: for, partly, they are less suspected;
partly, more slighted and despised by others; partly also, more forborne because
of their sex than men would be: whereupon often they arrogate to themselves a
greater liberty and impudency in speaking when they are corruptly principled,
than would be suffered in men. And lastly, There is more access for them to
converse with women, and to infuse their venom in them than there is for men.
Eusebius marketh this as a reason of such Heretics associating with women,
that thereby there might be the greater facility to seduce the simple of both
sexes. Sometimes also they were helpful by their means and credit to further
Sect-masters in their designs, and to hold them on in them: sometimes again,
they were exceeding dexterous and diligent in venting and spreading false
reports upon honest Ministers, and to beget a favorable opinion of these that
were erroneous. All which tend exceedingly to the promoving of Error and to the
hurting of the truth. And we will find Augustine often complaining of the
malicious reports that this Lucilla used to spread upon them, whereby the
calumnies of the Donatists were strengthened. Upon which grounds and the like,
we may see what the devils design is in seeking to engage such in the head of
such a design. This then is the first fault charged on her, that contrary to
truth, and without warrant from God, she did call her self a prophetess; even
though she had not proposed any Error.

Her second fault is, that she teaches: this was forbidden, 1 Cor. 14, 34. and
1 Timothy 2.12. And it appears, that even these Prophetesses, who had an
extraordinary Gift from God, as Philips daughters had, Acts 21. Yet were not
publicly and Authoritatively to Preach: for, Paul commands them silence, 1
Cor. 14. even when he is speaking of extraordinary Prophets. And we will not
find in the New Testament (at least) any ground for a woman publicly to
officiate in the Ministry of the Gospel, as an Authorized Office-bearer.

The third part of her challenge, is, that by her Teaching she did seduce:
which is a challenge to her, though she had been guilty of none of the former
two. This, to wit, seduction and leading of people out of the way of Truth,
does ever almost follow upon persons usurping a Calling to themselves, or upon
persons stepping without their own bounds and station to Teach; and we will
seldom find persons to run unsent in any of the former respects; but itching
after some new thing, has had influence upon them, to carry them without their
bounds, as we may see in Iezebel here, and ordinarily through the Scripture and
Church-historie. The particulars wherein she seduced her hearers, are two. The
first is, to commit fornication, that is, by her asserting fornication to be no
sin, she occasioned and stirred them up to take liberty therein, which possibly
otherwise they would not have done. The second is, to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, that is, by propounding the indifferency of meats, and pretending to
Christian-liberty, she induced them without all respect to scandal, to eat of
these things, to the stumbling, grieving and wounding of others that were weak
and tender: which two, are the very doctrines and practices of the Nicolaitans,
as was shown in the Epistles to Ephesus and Pergamos.

But it is a different quarrel from this which the Lord has with the Angel:
it is expressed thus, because thou suffer that woman Iezebel, etc. that is,
not that they countenanced her in her Errors, or did hear her in her Teaching;
but that they suffered her, and did not impede her. If it be asked, How they
can be quarrelled for suffering of her, seeing they were not Magistrates, nor
had civil Authority to restrain her? Answ. That is not the quarrel; but this,
that they being invested by Christ Jesus with Church Power to censure corrupt
Ministers, and cut off rotten Members, did not exercise the same in censuring
and Excommunicating of this false Prophetess and these that adhered to her, as
Ephesus had censured the false Apostles, verse. 2. So, on the matter, it is the
same fault which is condemned in Pergamos, verse. 15. who had such corrupt
Members in their society, and did not by Excommunication cut them off: which
shows that the Church is invested with such a Power (for, no civil Power can
be alleged here) and that the neglecting of the exercise thereof, is
exceedingly displeasing to Christ Jesus.

If it be asked, 1. How Church Censures, when backed with no civil Authority,
can impede one to teach? 2. Why the Lord is so displeased with Church-rulers
their suffering of corrupt teachers? 3. If this relate any way to civil Powers
as well as Ecclesiastic?

To the first, we answer, Although Church Censures have no civil compulsion
with them or bodily violence or strength to restrain any from corrupt teaching;
yet they have a threefold weight, when rightly gone about: they have an
authority and weight as to the conscience of the gain-sayer: because censures,
being the Ordinance of Jesus Christ, and, as it were, a seal put by His
Authority to a conditional threatening, they have a stamp of His Majesty upon
them: and so they serve to humble men, or to revenge their disobedience: and
therefore these who seemingly profess to despise sentences, want not an inward
apprehension of the terror of Excommunication, and would gladly not have that
sentence past upon them. 2. If men obstinately suppress the weight of the
censure upon the conscience, as well as of the Word; yet, being a mean
appointed of God for the restraining of such evils, it is oftentimes
countenanced by Him, if not to the humbling, yet to the blasting of such
persons in their designs: whereby in His secret Providence and Justice it
often comes to pass that sentences against such persons, are eminently owned
and countenanced by Him, with some concurring dispensation, evidencing His
ratifying of the same, as sometimes, such, are in Justice given up to more vile
delusions, sometimes to gross out-breakings in practice, sometimes their very
natural judgment and senses are blasted, their credit and reputation
evanisheth, and, it may be, some way He does signally follow them with His own
immediate Hand by some stroke upon their Estates, Persons, or Families, even
when they seem to be countenanced by civil Power, as it is written in
Churchstory He did to Simon Magus, and Arrius after he was Excommunicated, by
taking him away in the very height of his insolency, who having again recovered
Court and being in a solemn manner with many attendants coming to appear for
his pretended vindication, was smitten as he thought with a desire to ease
himself, and for that end withdrawing to a retiring place in one of the streets
of Constantinople, he did instantly expire, and having been waited-for long by
his attendants, was at last found dead in the seat, his intestines being
dissolved and voided. That little Book (formerly cited) of the Rise, and Reign
of the Familists, etc. has some dreadful instances of this. Thus the Lord
has often made such a way to stink, by smiting the head thereof in some
extraordinary manner. And though this be not the proper end of Excommunication;
yet when it meets with men's corruptions, it is often a just consequent
thereof. And these, or such like ways of disappointment, cannot be so
warrantably expected where this Ordinance is not improven: because it has the
promise, and is a mean appointed for this end, that men may learn not to
blaspheme, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 1.20. 3. It has weight as to
others, to scare them from countenancing of such; and is, as it were, a Mark or
Beakon set upon them, thereby to give warning to others for eschewing of their
company, as it is, Romans 16.17.18. and in many other places: and if it have this
fruit, it cannot but in a great part blast their design. Now, the neglect of
this sentence, made all these restraints void, as if no weight had been in
Christ's Ordinance: this was the Angels fault.

As to the second, to wit, wherefore Christ is so displeased with the suffering
of corrupt Teachers, we may gather the reasons thereof from what is said: For,
1. it shows little zeal to His Glory, when His Name is suffered to be
blasphemed. 2. It shows little love to His People, when they are suffered to
be seduced. 3. It shows little respect to His Ordinances, when they are not
made use of for the end appointed, and when corrupt men are suffered to invert
the order appointed by Him: in a word, Error and false Teachers have brought
more reproach upon the Name of Christ and Profession of the Gospel, and have
made Religion more despicable to profane men, than any gross out-breakings
have done: also, more souls have been destroyed thereby, and that speedily with
swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. and, as it were, carrying them away with a flood,
as it is, chap. 12. Lastly, Other sins are fallen into, by some more pretext at
least, of tentation and corruptions prevailing, but this is done with a high
Hand, whereby men not only break the command themselves, but teach others so to
do, Matthew. 5.19. And therefore it is called a Teaching of rebellion against the
Lord, Ier. 28.16. and is fallen into, with more deliberation than other sins:
for which cause, an Heretic is said to be condemned of Himself, Tit. 3.11.
Which being put together, with many other aggravations of this sin of corrupt
Teaching, and ills that follow thereupon, it is no marvel that the Lord Jesus
who is jealous of His Glory, and affected with the hazard of His People, be
exceedingly displeased at the neglect of such a duty, as is the using of the
Authority which he has given to His Church Officers for edification, and
particularly for the curbing of corrupt Teachers, and the taking of the foxes
that spoil the Vines. Song. 2.15.

We suppose now, it is not difficult to Answer to the third Question, to wit,
If the suffering of corrupt Teachers be reprovable in men, who have civil
Authority to restrain the same? for, the same grounds that ought to awaken zeal
in Ministers against this ill, ought also to stir up Magistrates zealously in
their places to use their Authority for vindicating of the Name of Christ, and
preventing of the hurt of His Church and People, seeing the Sword is not
delivered to them in vain, but for the terror of them that do evil, Romans 13.3.
Sure we are, in the Old Testament, Magistrates were included within the command
of restraining and punishing such as did intise to false Worship, as well as
the Priests were, Deuteronomy. 13.1. etc. And, in the New Testament, we find no repeal
of the same: and though there be no instance thereof in the Gospel, or Acts of
the Apostles, because Magistrates were not then Christian; yet, in the
progress of this Book of Revelation, we will find, that when Magistrates
became Christian, it is looked upon as reprovable in them that countenanced
Antichrist; and it is highly commended in these, that out of zeal to God, should
withdraw from the whore and burn her with fire, chap. 17. verse. 16, 17. And
seeing in the Scripture, all Sect-masters are accounted Antichrists, as, Mat.
24. 1 Ioh. 2.18. 2 Epistle, verse. 7. etc. can there be any better rule to try
what is duty in reference to them, than by what is approven of God in reference
to him who is the prime Antichrist? And this is clear, that the Lord has not
more clearly engaged Himself to fight against any Error by His Word than this;
yet, He will not have that a pretext to Magistrates for shunning to exercise
their civil Power against Him. We see also in Church-historie, that the most
tender Magistrates, when they were in the best frame, have ever been most
zealous in this, as by the examples of Constantin, Gratianus, Theodosius, etc.
is clear: and the most untender friends, or greatest enemies of the Truth, have
striven to have all sorts of Religions equally tolerated, or, at least, to have
a sort of harmony amongst them, by the removing, or burying of all Laws Civil
and Ecclesiastic, that did strike against some Errors. In reference to the
first, it is observed by Ammianus, an Heathen writer, and a great friend to
Julian, that amongst other devices that Julian used to root out Christianity,
this was one, that he gave toleration openly to all the different Professions
that were amongst Christians, (which then after the Council of Nice were very
many) and required no more of them, but that they should abstain from civil
discords; and so without fear follow any Religion they pleased. The words are
(as they are cited by Ludovicus Molineus, page 560.) ut consopitis civilibus
discordiis, suae quisque Religioni serviret intrepidus. And certainly, it can
be no acceptable service to Jesus Christ, to follow that way, which this expert
child of the devil made use of against Him. And Anastasius also, is condemned
for this, that he endeavored such an oblivion, or (...) in the Church, as
tended to suppress all the former Cannons, Decrees, or Confessions, which had
been enacted in the former famous general Councels against gross Errors, as
may be seen in the beginning of the sixth Centurie of the Church-historie.
Lastly, This is also sure, that the asserting that Magistrates ought not de
jure, or might not de facto, meddle with restraining of Heretics, was ever in
the Primitive times accounted a gross Error. Augustine professes himself
sometime to have been of that opinion; yet often in his writings does he
profess himself to have been convinced with the reasons of his brethren, and
with the experience that he had both of the necessity and advantage of the
Magistrates interposing in such a thing; so that he became a most vehement
presser of this, as in his Epistles is clear: and he fears not to account the
opposers of this, (to wit, such as pleaded for toleration from Magistrates)
amongst Heretics; and often names them under the Title of Rogatiani, from one
who it seems, was some eminent pleader for this forbearance, and one of the
Donatists party.

It is not intended that Magistrates, or Ministers, should account alike of all
Errors or Heretics; much less that indifferently the highest degrees of civil
punishments, or Church Censures, should be execute against them; but that
according to Spiritual prudence, both Civil and Church Authority should be
exercised, for the restraining of such evil workers from, and punishing of
them, for hurting of the Church of Christ and dishonouring of His Name. In
which, Christian prudence will make difference, 1. between Errors that destroy
the foundation, and are called damnable, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, etc. and other Errors,
which are consistent with the foundation, although they be as hay or stubble
built thereon. 2. Difference is to be made between Errors that are simply
Doctrinal, such as these that are about the object of Predestination, order of
Gods Decrees, or such like: wherein certainly there is a right and a wrong, yet
are they not so intolerable as Errors that imply a Schism in practice to the
renting of the union of the Church, as these Errors of the Novatians and
Donatists were. 3. Difference also is to be made, betwixt a man who
entertaineth an erroneous opinion, and an other who is an Heretic, that is,
who not only after admonition, does continue in the same opinion; but also does
persist to vent and propagat the same to the hurt and offense of others. 4.
Although he that is seduced is guilty, as the seducer is; yet reason would put
a difference between him that actively teaches and seduceth, and him that is
out of weakness seduced, and is but a follower of such a leader. 5. There may
be a censuring in some degree either by civil or Church Authority, when yet
there is no procedour to any high degree in either: and thus the censuring in
some cases, may be distinguished, not only from forbearance and negligence; but
also from such censures as may appear rigid, or unseasonable: thus Paul
sometimes reproves and threatens in the Epistles to the Corinthians and
Galatians, when yet he will neither altogether forbear them, nor pass the
highest sentences upon them. Christian prudence is to lay weight upon such and
such considerations in the managing of such an Authority; but still so as
nothing extinguish that zeal which Magistrates and Church Officers ought to
have for exercising of their respective Authorities in restraining of such an
evil. But we will insist no more on this.

Follows now, that we should consider the aggravations of the Lords quarrel,
both in respect to Iezebel, and to the Angel. They are two, relating to both:
1. She seduced Christ's servants: and this is the greater guilt both in
reference to her practice, and also to their suffering of her. 2. It Is aggreged
from this, verse. 21. I gave her space to repent of her fornication and she
repented not: whereby it appears, that she had continued for a time in her
practice, and, notwithstanding of Gods forbearance, had not amended: therefore
her sinful practice, and their neglective forbearance, became the more
inexcusable.

Concerning the first aggravation, we are to consider, 1. Who are to be
understood by this Title, Christ's Servants. 2. Why they get this Title in this
place. To the first we say, By Christ's Servants, are not understood men
indifferently: for, heathens and those that are without the Church, get not
this name; but it is peculiarly applied to the whole house of Israel, Lev.
25.55. and so here it is to be applied these two ways, 1. To Christians and
Church Members: so Iezebel aimed not to seduce Pagans, and infect them with her
Errors, but Christians and Church Members. 2. It may respect some more eminent
in the Church nor others for Parts or Profession: and so amongst Church Members
she aimed most to seduce these that were found in the matter of Doctrine, and
infected with no Error; and these that were clean in their conversation and
free of gross scandals, rather than such as were gross and offensive in their
carriage. Both these are clear in matter of fact by experience: and by
proportion it will follow, that as Heretics, upon their own considerations,
seek to infect Church Members rather than these that are without; so among
Church Members they will seek rather to engage these who are eminent for parts,
blameless in their carriage, or appearing to be gracious, than others, who are
not of such esteem. For the second, to wit, why Christ gives them this Title
in this place who were seduced? We may give these reasons for it, 1. It is to
aggrege the guilt of both, as has been said. 2. It is to give the alarm and
warning unto these that are His own People, seeing even His Servants may be
seduced. 3. It is to show His own resentment of the success of Error in His
Church the more, that it draws away these that stand in such a relation to
Him, and (as it were) diminishes the number of His Family and Servants.

For further opening of this aggravation these things may be enquired into, 1.
If any truly gracious may be engaged by false Teachers and seduced to Error?
2. What may be the reasons that makes the devil aim at the seduction of
Christ's Servants, rather than others? 3. Why Christ does so expressly aggrege
this guiltiness upon this account?

In Answer to the first Question, we say, first, That these that are truly
gracious, are not so readily and frequently seduced to Error, at least to be
leaders therein and promoters thereof, as they are unto gross practical
offenses: For, 1. we will not find in Scripture so many examples of the one as
of the other. 2. It is a most rare thing for an opposer to get Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. and therefore the Believers; yea, even the Elect before their
conversion cannot be said frequently to fall in this evil, 3. It Is an ill that
is followed with more deliberation, and comes not from the surprising of some
particular tentation, as other gross evils do: therefore cannot be so
consistent with gracious principles, and a spiritual walk, as particular
outbreaking wherein a person is captivated. 4. To be a Teacher of Error, is to
be a Teacher of rebellion against the Lord, Ier. 28. and to be a Minister and
promoter of Satan's kingdom, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. which at first appears to be
abominable unto any of a gracious principle, and more than a sin of infirmity.
5. Also the promises seem especially to relate to Gods guiding of His People in
the way of Truth, and keeping them from being seduced by false Teachers: which,
though it be not to be extended simply to all; yet it appears it is to be
extended further than in reference to practical scandals.

Yet secondly, we say, That it is possible, even for these that are truly
gracious to be seduced to Error: for, 1. There are promises indeed, that they
shall be kept from the sin against the holy Ghost, and from total and final
apostasy and impenitencie in respect of any ill; but there is no promise that
a Believer otherwise shall be kept from any ill incident to one that is
unrenewed. 2. Even Believers have corruption, and so have much darkness and
ignorance in their judgment, and much perverseness in their inclination and
affections. It cannot be thought strange then, that they be capable to be
carried away by a tentation to Error, there being no ill but it has a party in
them to take part with it. 3. The many warnings that are given in Scripture,
even to Believers, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces, to
beware of false Prophets that come in sheeps clothing, etc. show, that they
are not without the reach of the hurt of such a tentation. 4. Experience also
does confirm this: for, it seems that in some measure Solomon wanted not his
accession to this evil, if we consider what is recorded, not only of his
suffering of corrupt worship to be within his Dominion; but also of his
countenancing of the same, by building altars and otherwise, although we
cannot particularly determine. Neither can it be denied, but that some of these
that were seduced by false Teachers in Corinth and Galatia, might be gracious:
and in aftertimes also it has been out of question.

To the second, to wit, wherefore Satan aims to seduce Christ's Servants unto
Error rather than others? We may answer in these reasons, 1. He does it,
because his hatred is most at such; and it is their ruin, which especially he
hunteth for. 2. Because men that are in Error and profanity already, are his
own; and it is no gain for him to take pains to seduce them unto such delusions,
so long, at least, as they continue such. 3. He has other more suitable baits
for other men that are given to gross ills: therefore he reserveth this for
others. 4. In some respect, these who have a form of Religion, or some
inclination toward it (especially if weak in knowledge) are in some respect
more obnoxious to this tentation than grossly profane men are: for they, like
Gallio, care not what be Truth and what be Error: but one, who has some
tenderness, and withal weak, is more ready to debate, and inquire for Truth;
and so not being strong enough to rid himself of difficulties, he is the more
easily entangled. 5. Gross tentations to profanity, are not so taking with
them: therefore the devil assayeth them by this, that under the color of some
new discovery of Truth, or some more perfect way of Christianity, or such
like, he may draw them to Error: and, by this more subtle tentation, whereby
he transformeth himself to an Angel of light, he does often prevail when other
tentations would not. 6. It Is most advantageous to his way, to have some
eminent for piety and parts engaged for it: for, by this, he gains credit to
it, and makes it the better digest with others, who often respect an opinion,
as they respect these who own the same: thus he aims at this as a main engine
whereby he may prevail with many; whereas the engaging of profane men brings
no credit to such a way; neither is it his advantage to divert them from their
profanity. It was a great stumbling in old, especially in the case of the
Novatians, that many confessors and eminent men were drawn away with that
Error: and this was often cast-up to the Orthodox, as a matter of great weight:
whereupon Cyprian, in his book De unitate Ecclesiae, takes occasion
particularly to Answer this Objection, that people be not prejudged at Truth,
because of some men's name; especially, considering that there were many more
more eminent of the contrary mind. And, by the way, this slight of the devil
may be observed, that men will make more work, and greater noise in commending
Error by the name of one or two that favors the same, as if that were of so
great weight, than they will allow to Truth, though it have many more eminent
names standing for it. 7. When men are aiming to be serious in Religion, the
devil casts this stumbling in their way, that if he prevail not to draw them
to Error, he may at least mar them or divert them, by putting them through
other, in making them debate such and such needless Questions; and so keep
them from the more serious and profitable exercise of Repentance,
self-examination, making of their Calling and Election sure, etc. Hence it is,
that while men lie in security or profanity, they are not much troubled with
this tentation; but being once awakened, then he sets upon them, if so be he
may extinguish that wakening, or give them a wrong set before they be fully
formed and settled. And this is one reason why Errors and delusions do often
accompany the first rise of the Gospel amongst people. 8. By seducing of these
that appear to be Godly, the devil brings most reproach upon the Name of
Christ and Religion, and makes it the more to be stumbled at by these that are
in nature, as being but some fancy and conceit, which would not follow upon
the fall of many profane men: therefore he aims rather to seduce them that
are Christ's Servants and appear to be Godly.

To the third, We may see why the Lord especially aggregeth His quarrel from
this, 1. Because His Servants come more near to Him than others. 2. He will
have us knowing that Error is not to be extenuated or commended, nor false
Teachers to be tolerated, even though many of His Servants should come to
countenance the same: yea, on the contrary, it is the more aggreged and to be
abhorred. 3. He does by this show the Church Officers, that the more that are
engaged to love Error or follow false Teachers, they ought to be the more
stirred up with zeal in their duty against seducers, that they have prevailed
with many of His Servants. And by this, He shows His tenderness to
affectionate Professors, rather to censure for their sake corrupt Teachers whom
they respect, than to forbear them. 4. This is also mentioned, to show this
woman, and all corrupt Teachers, what they gain by having most success against
Christ's Servants, to wit, this, that they have the more guilt, and are the more
obnoxious to Christ's quarrel. 5. The more advantages the devil has to his
kingdom by the seduction of Christ's Servants, it concerns Him the more in
that to oppose him, as in a thing, which in a special manner reflecteth upon
His honor; which makes Him so to quarrel for Iezebels practice, and the
toleration of the same.

From all which, what we have said, is confirmed, to wit, that corrupt Teachers
are not to be tolerated in a Church, even when civil Powers do take no notice
of them: it is well known from the History of the Primitive times, that
several Godly and zealous men have censured; yea, and even Excommunicated many
Heretics, as Arrians and others, when they have been sure to be instantly
persecuted for the same: and it is recorded of some, who though they were
threatened before hand, that yet having first provided their Churches with well
qualified Successors, they did afterward proceed to pronounce sentence;
thereby showing their readiness to undergo what ever trouble might follow upon
that same account, and withal their zeal and tender care of the Churches
edification.

We come now to the second aggravation, which is in verse. 21. and it is made up
of these two, 1. There is a forbearance upon the Lords side, I gave her space
to repent, that is, I did not suddenly and at first execute judgment upon her;
but did for a time forbear her, thereby giving her an opportunity to repent:
and indeed His long suffering and forbearance, does of it self lead to
repentance, according to what is said, Romans 2. verse. 4

The second part, is, but she repented not: which holds forth the abuse of
this mercy upon her side, to wit, that notwithstanding of the Lords forbearance
she continued in her former practice without repenting of, or turning from, the
same: therefore she is the more inexcusable, and they also in suffering of her.
This aggravation does import these four, First, that the Lords forbearing of a
sinner, ought to be an inducement to them to repent, as is clear from that
place, Romans 2.4. Secondly, It imports that sometimes God will give time and
opportunity to repent, by His forbearance, unto most gross sinners; and suffer
with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fired to destruction, Romans 9.22.
Thirdly, It imports also, that such opportunities are often abused; and
particularly, that it is a rare thing for an opposer of the Truth to repent, The
Apostle puts a per adv^nture in it, 2 Timothy 2.25. in meekness instructing
those that opose themselves, if per adventure God will give them repentance,
etc. We find also, Chap. 9. and 16. of this Book, that on the back almost of
every plague upon Antichrists kingdom, it is marked, that yet they repented not
for all that.

If any should ask the reason, Why repentance is so rare in reference to this
sin?

We answer, 1. It Is a sin of a high nature, being deliberate and against
sufficient grounds of conviction: and therefore in Gods Justice, is plagued
with impenitency beyond other sins: and as in some respect, it comes nearer
to the sin against the holy Ghost than other sins in its nature; so also in
Gods Justice it comes nearer to it in its punishment. 2. The nature of this
sin is such, that men tai^ted with it, are thereby in a greater incapacity to
repent than these who are guilty of gross ills in practice: because, 1. Nature
does not so challenge and convince for sins against the Truths of the Gospel,
at for sins against the Moral Law. 2. Because men in Errors and delusions have
their judgments so engaged, blinded and prejudged, that they think often such
Errors are no Errors: and therefore there is the greater difficulty to bring
them to the acknowledgement of the Truth, and of their being wrong; and yet
this must precede their repentance! 3. The Lord also by this does for a mark
upon this sin, to scare all from the same: men oftentimes think little of this
ill. He has therefore put this mark of His displeasure thereupon the more
expressly. Hence it is, that His threatenings are more clearly and expressly
annexed to the second and third Commandments than any other, that He may make
men know He is jealous of His Truth and Ordinances, and will by no means acquit
such as take His Name in vain, whatever men think of these sins. In the fourth
place, this aggravation impor^^^^, that when time and good opportunities are
abused, guilt becomes the greater and the more inexcusable, and the Lords
controversy becomes the more sharp.

There are two Conclusions aimed to be drawn from these words, by some, which
no way they will bear, 1. Some say, that Iezebel had an ability and power to
repent, seeing she has time allotted to her for it, and God expects it of
her. For Answer, To say nothing of this general, which is found to be an
untruth from other clear Scriptures, which hold out men to be dead in sins,
Ephesians. 2.1. etc. and unable for any spiritual good. These things will vindicate
this place, 1. If we consider who this party is, to wit, a most vile Seducer
and Adulteress: and even such Patrons of nature, will grant, that such high
and gross sins do justly deprive persons of any ability to repent, and do
incapacitate them for exercising of the same. 2. If we compare this with 2 Timothy
2.25. we will find that patient waiting upon opposers, and thereby giving them
opportunity to repent, is one thing; and to have repentance given them, is
another: for, many have time allowed them, when yet it is at a peradventure if
God shall give them Repentance. Which shows, that Grace to exercise
Repentance, when an opportunity is, must be given of God as well as the
opportunity it self: otherwise no opportunity can be rightly improven: which
shows again, that men in such a case, have not this ability of themselves to
repent. 3. The words do not speak out her ability; but what was her duty under
such a long suffering dispensation, as the opening of the words clears.

If it be said then, How can she be more inexcusable?

Answ. 1. Because this inability is of her own on-bringing. 2. Because it was
not inability that swayed her to continue in her sin, and reject Repentance;
but it was her positive inclination to these Errors, and her averseness from
the Truths of God. And what ever men may dispute for the patronizing of nature
against the Justice of God, now; yet when He comes to judge, and when the
conscience bears witness of the vehement affection and delight which men had
to, and in their, wickedness, There will be none who shall dare to enter a
defense upon their inability, seeing in conscience they will be convinced, that
that was not the thing which made them willingly choose such and such evils,
and made them reject all means tending to recover them. 3. This also will make
her, and such as she, inexcusable, that they did not improve such opportunities
so as they might, and did not abstain from the following and committing of such
gross evils, which even many unrenewed men have done; who yet had not ability
to repent of themselves more than they: and thus, none in such a case will be
able to say in judgment, that they did make such use of the Word and other
means as they might have made, even in such a condition; or, that they have
come that length in outward Reformation, that they might have done.

The second Conclusion pretended to be drawn from this, is, That the Lord has
an universal will to have all men saved, seeing He gives her time to repent.
This we say does not follow hence: For, 1. suppose it might be said in some
respect, that he willed the Repentance of such a particular person, who lived
under His Ordinances, It will not follow thereupon, that He wills the
Salvation of all; even of such who never heard of Repentance. 2. It will not
follow, God gives some time, which ought to be improven to Repentance, and
does not instantly execute His Judgment, Therefore He wills such a persons
Salvation: for, God for a time forbear Pharaoh, even after he had evidenced his
purpose in so doing, to be the exalting of His own Glory in his destruction, 3.
If it were so, what might be said of such as the Lord does not forbear, nor
give time to repent; but takes away in their sin, as he did Zimri and Cozbi?
It cannot be said on this ground, that He wills their Salvation; and so not
the Salvation of all. 4. It will not follow, Christ wills persons to repent,
Therefore He wills their Salvation: because He may be said to will them to
repent, when he requires it of them as their duty: and thus, their duty of
repenting, is the immediate object of His revealed and preceptive will: but a
persons Salvation is the proper object of His will of good-pleasure, or of His
decreeing and purposing will. And no otherwise can He be said, to will such
persons Salvation (because He commands them to repent) than this, to wit,
that in His Word He has signified Repentance to be such a persons duty, and
that He has appointed a connection between Repentance and Salvation; which
still relates to His revealed will: even as when God made the first Covenant
with Adam, it might be said that He willed Adam to be holy, and that by that
Covenant He had made a connection between holiness and life; yet it is not
proper to say, that the Lord willed life to Adam upon that condition: because
that looks to the event, and respects the Lords will of purpose: which
cannot but be effectual. And if the Lords willing of men (at least such as are
under His Ordinances) to be saved be thus understood, as including only the
duty which God lays upon men, and the connection that He has made between it
and Salvation in His Word, It may be admitted: but if it be extended to any
antecedent will in God Himself, distinct from that which is called His revealed
will, This place and such like will give no ground for such an Assertion. If it
be asked then, Why did He give her space to repent, if He intended not her
Salvation? Answ. To forbear deciding of what might be His purpose to this
particular person, (who happily may be an Elect,) because nothing is decided of
her final condition in the Word; These reasons may be given, 1. thereby the
Lord commends His Grace that does so condescend to such a person. 2. The
aggravation of her guilt and inexcusablnesse, are the more clear, as has been
said; and thereupon He has the more access to manifest the spotlessenesse of
His Justice, as is in the threatening, verse. 23. 3. It does the more comfort and
encourage a penitent sinner, to step forward in the hope of Mercy, seeing even
such a person as Iezebel has had such an offer; and that she, if penitent and
believing, would have been accepted.

The third thing in the Body of the Epistle, is, the threatening, verse. 22, and
23. Whereby He again wonderfully presses her, and these who were seduced by
her, to the exercise of that much slighted duty of Repentance. The threatening
has three parts, 1. Something is threatened. 2. An exception is put in, leaving
a door open to Mercy. 3. The scope or effect of the Lords executing this
threatening, is set down. The thing threatened, is threefold, according to the
several parties that He threateneth. 1. For Iezebel, Behold, I Will cast her
upon a bed: which points out some remarkable stroke or plague threatened to be
inflicted upon her, whereby she should become a spectacle to others, and yet
not be instantly removed. 2. For them that commit adultery with her, I will
cast them into great tribulation, that is, I will bring upon them that partake
of her sin, whether in respect of spiritual or bodily adultery (for she was
guilty of both) grievous and public temporal strokes. And, 3. I will kill her
children with death: for, her children, it is like were children begotten in
their unclean conversing together: them the Lord threatens to remove; and
thereby to give an evidence of His displeasure at their way, as He did David's
child for his adultery. For, we conceive, the children of her spiritual
whoredom are understood under that expression, these that commit adultery with
her. From which we may see, that gross Errors may procure many temporal and
bodily crosses, as was formerly said.

Yet secondly (as is said) even this threatening has a door open in it, and is
not absolute, but conditional, except they repent, etc. which does indeed
exceedingly set forth and commend the Grace of God.

The third thing, is, the Lords end, which is the manifesting of Himself in two
or three of His Attributes, to wit, His Omniscience, Justice, and Power, as was
hinted in the entry. When the Lord forbeareth wicked men, He is either thought
not to see, or know such things; or not to be just, and powerful to redress
and avenge the same: and when He severely and publicly inflicteth judgment
upon such, then He is known not only to be Omniscient, but also Just and
Powerful; and this is that which He aims at, especially in His Churches.

The last thing, is, the mitigation of this threatening, verse. 24, 25. Wherein
we may consider these two, First, To whom it is directed. Secondly, What is the
mitigation it self. 1. It Is directed, to you, (...); to you, in the plural
number, that is, to the company of Ministers, who were designed by the Title
Angel, at the entry. And to the rest in Thyatira, that is, the Members of the
Church, contradistinguished from the Ministers. It Is added, that have not this
Doctrine and have not known the depths of Satan, etc. This is to dinstinguish
the Church Members, that were pure and clean, from these that were corrupted
with Iezebels doctrine. So there are three parties implied here, 1. The
Ministers. 2. The pure Members. To both these this consolation is directed. 3.
There are some led away with these corruptions, which are not included. The
pure Members, are qualified and distinguished by these two, 1. They have not
this doctrine, that is, they own not, nor maintain, nor approve this corrupt
doctrine. 2. They have not known the depths of Satan, that is, they have not
loved nor approven the same, nor in their practice experimentally meddled
therewith. They, that is, corrupt Teachers, counted such doctrines and
practices, depths and high mysteries and seize in Religion: therefore
they gave them this name of depths. And it is not to be thought that they called
them depths of Satan; but the Lord adds this, to show indeed what kind of
depths they were: they are (says He) depths indeed, as they speak; but they
are the devils depths, or depths of Satan. Which expression, holds out these
two, 1. The great subtilty of the adversary of man's Salvation, the devil, he
has depths in his way; all his designs are not obvious; he can vail and cover
things and make them appear far otherwise than they are; and he exercises his
subtilty most especially and deeply, in the carrying on of Error, and drawing
of souls from the Truth: these are his depths here; and his subtilty is spoken
of, 2 Cor. 11.3. his wiles and cunning craftiness and special slight, Ephesians.
4.14. whereby it comes to pass that he intangleth, and, as it were,
bewitcheth, Gal. 3.1. many with the most gross delusions. 2. It holds out
what influence delusion will have upon poor creatures; it will even make them
cry up the most absurd Errors for mysteries and depths, as if there were
nothing in Religion so excellent as these.

The mitigation it self, is in two expressions: the first, is negative, verse.
24. I will put upon you none other burden, that is, in sum, I will not give you
any other direction, nor prescribe to you any new duty, beside what formerly ye
have had given unto you, and to which ye have submitted: for, though burden
sometimes signify some weighty threatening, or denunciation, or judgment, as may
be gathered from Ier. 1.23. Yet in this place, it cannot be so understood; but
must be understood as it implies some new duty beside what formerly was
imposed upon them, as the exposition in the next verse does clear. And so
sometimes in Scripture, duty is compared to a burden and yoke: not because of
its burdensomnesse and troublesomnesse, in respect of it self; but because
every duty has some obligation with it, which in respect of our corruptions
and infirmities are burdens, though by Christ Jesus they become light.

The second part of the mitigation, is positive, verse. 25. and will help to
expound the former, But that which ye have already, hold fast till I come:
which does imply, First, That they had some duties prescribed unto them
already: whereby it appears that an other burden, did signify some other
duty: for, that was the thing they had already. Secondly, It shows, That by
having of such duties (to speak so) is not only understood the having of them
prescribed unto them; but their being a great length in the obedience thereof,
as may he gathered from the like Phrase, chap. 3.11. where hold that fast which
thou have, does signify their endeavor to keep what they had attained to. And
thus the meaning of this mitigation here, is, I have prescribed to you that are
pure in Thyatira, no other duty or direction; but that with all sincerity and
zeal ye keep the directions prescribed unto you, and continue to walk in the
way which hitherto ye have followed, unto the end. This is pressed by Christ's
second coming, 1. To let them know He was to come again. 2. To let them know,
that at his second coming, He will reckon with His Churches according as they
obey or disobey His directions. 3. To teach all to walk so in making use of the
Word, especially in corrupt times, as they may with confidence appear and
reckon for the same before Jesus Christ at His second coming. 4. To show, That
Believers ought to set no other term to their persevering in duty, but Christ's
second coming.

From what is past we may Obseve 1. That in these Epistles, express difference
is made between Ministers and People: to you I say, relates to the Ministers,
and, to the rest, relates to the Members of that Church. And therefore in the
application of things contained in them, we would distinguish them also.

2. That by Angel, in the Inscription, is understood Ministers collectively: to
you, is in the plural number; and yet it is to these that the Epistle was
directed under the name of Angel, in the singular: and therefore are they
contradistinguished from the rest, which looks to the Members of that Church,
you and the rest being the same thing here upon the matter, that Angel and
Church were in the Inscription; save, that the rest, even as many, etc.
distinguishes the pure Members from the impure, the Church comprehending both.

3. That a Ministers guilt, or the guilt of Officers in not secluding
scandalous persons from Church Communion, does not lie on the people, as upon
the Ministers: therefore the duty common to the Ministers and people, is
commended to both, whereas that reproof was peculiar to the Ministers: and, the
rest, are taken-in only in the mitigation or consolation; but it was, Thou
suffer, in the reproof.

4. Christ thinks much of zealous executing of Discipline, and would not have
Ministers sparing it against Heretics or corrupt Teachers, more than other
scandalous persons: yea, the reasons from the hazard of infecting the Flock,
and the examples of it in Scripture, are most pressing in reference to them.

5. Here also we may see, That there is a Church Power and Authority, distinct
from what is civil; and censures to be inflicted by Church Officers on
scandalous persons, even where Magistrates are Heathen.

6. That delusion may come to a great height: As, 1. That a woman Preaches. 2.
That she calls her self a Prophetess. 3. That she seduceth Christ's Servants,
and they are sedu^ed by her. 4. That this is immediately after Christ, while
John the beloved Disciple lives. 5. That all these Errors and abominations are
covered with the title of mysteries and depths: what may we expect in our
times, when such was the lot of those who lived at that time?

7. The writings even of the Apostle John, could not prevail so far as to make
them renounce and abandon them.

8. See here, how Christ accounts of Members of a visible Church: He styles
such as were seduced to adultery and Error, His Servants: and they were
Servants still, who were seduced; and are afterward threatened, as Iezebel is.
Whereby it appears, that these Titles go more upon the relation, that
Church Members stand in, and the obligation that lies on them, than upon the
qualifications that are always to be found in them.

9. Our Lord Jesus, is no approver nor countenancer of separation from a true
Church, for the faults of some Members in it: neither do faults in some
Members, and defects in Ministers and Officers in executing Discipline, pollute
the Ordinances in themselves, or to others, who are free of that guilt: and so
do not necessitate a separation from such a Church, or any Ordinance thereof:
for, this, and the former Epistle, being compared together, these things are
cle^r, 1. That there were gross Members in the Church, Adulterers,
Nicolaitans, Seducers, etc. 2. That they were continued in Church Communion;
thou have them and suffer them, clearly import this: for, that Angel no
otherwise had them, but as Church Members under His charge. 3. That this Angel
sinfully permitted them to continue Church*members: and therefore is reproved.

Yet, we conceive also, it is clear in matter of fact, 1. That many who were
free, continued in Church Fellowship with this Angel, in that Church,
notwithstanding thereof; so, the words to you, and to the rest, a^ of that same
Membership* import, it being but one Church. And, 2. That our Lord did not
reprove them for their so continuing, even when He reproves the Angel for his
fault of being defective as to his censuring of Iezebel. Yea, 3. that He
approves their not separating, in His approving the general strain of their
carriage, which could not otherwise be approven, this being so obvious to
view, if it had been a fault, or if they had by it partaken with them in their
sin. 4. That our Lord warrandeth them to continue so; and lays no burden of
separating from them, on these who were honest: only, says He, Hold fast that
which ye have already till I come, that is, keep your selves according to the
rule given unto you, and according to your present practice.

Hence may be argued, 1. If where Church Members are polluted, and suffered
notwithstanding by Church Officers to remain in Church Communion, Christ does
not only, not condem the clean for keeping fellowship with them; but expressly
requires them to continue, as they did, Then He allows not separation on
that account: But the first is truth: He condemns them not, but requires
them to hold fast till he come. Erg^, etc. 2. If Christ lay upon Members no
other burden, but to keep themselves from personal pollution, Then He lays
not on them separation: (and it must be a burden not of His laying on) But the
former is true, Hold f^st that which ye have already. Ergo, etc. 3. If
separation thwart with Christ's direction to a Church in that condition, Then
it is not a duty: But if the honest Members in Thyatira had separated, they had
not held fast what they had already, but would have gripped to some new thing,
and so have thwarted with the direction laid on them. Ergo, etc. 4. If this
direction contains all their duty in reference to that defection, or these
polluted Members, Then separation is not a duty in such a case: for, it is
inconsistent with it. But this contains all, 1. Otherwise it would not befit
their case: which to do, is Christ's scope. 2. It Is not only negative, not
condemning them for not separating: nor only positive, giving them other
dire^tions inconsistent with it; but it is exclusive, I lay on you no other
burden, this, and no other. And though other particular duties may be alleged
to be comprehended under this general; yet separation cannot be comprehended:
because it is inconsistent with it, as appears: For, if the thing that Christ
calls for from these who were honest in Thyatira, be such a thing as was
consistent with their former practice of keeping Church Fellowship with such,
Then separation must be inconsistent with it; But the former is truth, and
appears thus: If Christ's direction to them be, to hold as they were, and not to
alter, Then certainly* it is consistent with their own former practice: But the
words are plain, I lay on you, to wit, that are clean, no other burden, but
abstain from their way, and hold fast. And certainly it would look very
strange, to say, that separation from them were commanded under that word, hold
fast, etc. And that so, hold fast, were to be expounded, separate from that
society; and yet that must be comprehended under this, or it is not a duty for
such a case.

Beside, This duty which Christ commends to them, is a duty which every one of
them ought personally to go about, though others did not. And if separation
were included here, according to that ground, it would infer many absurdities,
as, first, suppose the Minister to continue defective in his duty, are all the
pure members to separate from him? Or, Secondly, Suppose none but two or three
did lay that duty to heart, were these two or three to separate from all
fellowship with the rest, and quit all public Ordinances? yet, no question, in
such a case they were to hold fast what they had already. Thirdly, Suppose the
pure members to continue in fellowship with their Officers that were thus
defective as formerly they have done; yet keeping themselves clean in their own
stations, can it be thought that they disobeyed this direction of Christ, That
which thou have already, hold fast till I come? Or, Is it not rather to be
thought that they did more nearly conform to Christ's direction by so doing,
than if they had withdrawn, and separated?

We may also argue against separation in such a case, from this Scripture,
thus: If separation be an other burden to Christ's Church than what He laid upon
Thyatira, Pergamos, etc. in such a case when their officers were defective in
executing Discipline, Then it is not to be allowed in the Church of Christ
afterward in such like cases; But the former is true. Therefore, etc. If these
two things be clear, this Argument will be clear, 1. That though these Churches
were in such a case, yet there was not separation from the Ordinances in
practice or exercise amongst them upon that account; This, we suppose, is clear
from what is said. 2. If this also be clear that the pressing of separation
upon such a ground, will prove a burden unto the people of God: Then it will
follow, that Christ does not lay it on upon these Churches, seeing He expressly
signifies that He intends to lay no other burden upon them, but to hold fast
what they had already. It must therefore be an untender thing to burden honest
souls with the apprehension of being polluted from the personal faults of
joynt-Worshippers or Communicants: for, first, this puts them to try all
that they so keep fellowship with: and they cannot have peace, except they have
some confidence that others, by their joint Communicating, do not pollute the
Ordinances: and this confidence cannot be, till sufficient trial be made
thereof; and yet Believers find it sufficiently difficult to try themselves. 2.
It puts them to an utter uncertainty, in respect of any comfortable fruit of
Ordinances: because so, it hangs not only upon their own frame and good
condition; but also upon the good frame and disposition of these that
Communicate jointly with them. And so, supposing that a Believer may be out of
the present exercise of grace, and a joint Communicater with them; in that
case, the Ordinance is polluted unto them, because they are polluted even to
that Believer that is in such a case. And, can any have confidence that no
natural person, or indisposed Believer has Communicated with them? Neither
will it remove this difficulty, to say, that men may have peace, if the
offenses or indispositions of others be not known unto them: For, 1. What if it
be said, if trial had been made, they might have been known? 2. Suppose it
were not possible to know them; yet if the Communicating of corrupt men did not
only pollute the Ordinance to themselves, but also pollute it in it self, that
is, make it want the nature of such an Ordinance as to others; Then, whether it
were known or not, the Ordinance were no Ordinance, because of its being
polluted in something essential to the being thereof: otherwise, the same
Ordinance might be an Ordinance to one who knew not of such scandals; and no^
be an Ordinance of Christ to another, who knew such things, though, it may be,
in his own particular case, no less gracious, and lively than the other: for,
it cannot be our knowing that such a person is scandalous that Communicates
with us, that can pollute the Ordinance to us, except upon supposition that the
being of such a thing did pollute the Ordinance in it self before we knew the
same. 3. If this ground were laid, it might be a scruple to a tender Believer
to Communicate with himself, to say so: for, he has corruption in him; and it
will be hard to say, that the corruption of others, will have more influence to
pollute an Ordinance to him, than his own can have: especially considering,
that he is most thoroughly acquainted therewith: and it will be as hard to say,
that Christ's call does warrant a Believer to Communicate with peace,
notwithstanding of his own seen corruptions; and yet that that same call will
not warrant him to Communicate with peace, if he be in his own duty and frame
approveable, notwithstanding of the corruptions of others. All which, being
grievous burdens, cannot be supposed to agree with our Lords scope in this
place.

Hence also we may see, that Christ does not rigidly cast off Churches, for
defects in Discipline, and grosnesse of particular members, when, in the main,
the foundation is kept: and though the Lord never look on these but as
faults, and as reproveable where they are, as we may see in many of these
Epistles; yet, to allow separation from a Church, because of these, and to
account it no Church, is with Him all one, as when He calls His people from
Babel, Chap. 18.

We come now to the Conclusion of the Epistle, which is contained in the 26,
27, 28, and 29. verses. Wherein, 1. Some promises are laid down, in the first
three verses; and the common advertisement, is repeated in the last verse, as
is usual in the rest of the Epistles. The object of the promises, is the same,
to wit, the overcomer: only here, he is described by an other property, which
interprets that general, to wit, He keeps my works unto the end, that is,
one who in the sincere practice of Religion has ceased from his own works (as
it is, Heb. 4.10.) and has given up himself to live to Me, as it is, 2 Cor.
5.15. that is, to have My glory for his end, and My Will for his rule; and does
continue to prosecute that end according to that rule, notwithstanding of all
difficulties to the end. This is the overcomer, and the person to whom all
these promises of being admitted to Heaven, are made, and who may expect the
same.

There are two excellent promises made to such a person in these words, 1. To
him will I give power over the Nations: which does indeed speak out an
excellent Dominion, but no earthly Dominion: For, 1. This promise is to be
performed after the full victory. 2. All overcomers are not capable of
temporal Power over the Nations. It imports then these two. First, an
excellent Dominion that the Believer may expect. Secondly, a joint sharing in
Christ's Conquest over the Nations: in which respect, it is said, 1 Cor. 6. They
shall judge Angels and all the wicked in the day of judgment. This Dominion is
two ways amplified, verse. 27. First, In respect of the absolutnesse thereof
over all the wicked, they shall be bruised with a rod of iron, as the vessels
of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: this is a figurative expression,
tending to set forth this, that though often Believers are now oppressed by the
wicked of the world; yet the day is coming, when it shall be otherwise:
Believers shall not only be free from their oppressions; but shall be as
absolute Kings, having Dominion over them in the morning, as it is, Psalm.
49.14. when the condition of the wicked in Gods Justice shall be most
miserable. The second way how it is amplified, is, even as I received of my
Father: which respects, 1. The thing given, they are made joint partakers of
that which Christ receives. 2. It respects the security whereby it is given:
and so I will give him power, even as I received of my Father, imports that the
Believers Dominion shall be no less sure unto him by Christ's gift, than
Christ's Dominion is sure unto Him by the Fathers conferring the same upon Him.

The second promise, is, and I will give him the morning star: by the morning
star, is understood Christ Himself, as He Himself expounds it, Chap. 22. verse.
16. I am the bright and morning Star, so it is, I will give him my self. The
first promise was much, but this is more: and though heaven be much when it is
promised; yet this promise contains more: for He that built the house, is of
more worth than the house. Christ is called the morning Star for these reasons,
1. Because the morning Star is most eminent amongst the Stars; so is Christ
among the Sons, Cant. 2.3. He has an eminency beyond all other consolations
whatsoever. 2. He is called the morning Star, because when He is bestowed upon
any, the dark night of their former miserable and disconsolate condition is put
to an end, as the Day Star puts an end to the preceding night. 3. Christ
brings in the Dayspring from on high unto the soul who receives Him: and
never was the Day Star so refreshfull to a Traveller wearied with the darkness
of the night, as Christ will be to the wrestler, who is longing to have the
Day Star arising in his heart, 2 Pet. 1.19. And although these be hints, to
shadow out the excellency of Christ, yet the truth is, neither Day Star, nor
Sun, nor Moon, nor all the Stars put together, can sufficiently resemble His
worth and lovely beauty, and refreshfull seasonablenesse to a soul, when He
manifests Himself to it.

If it be asked, why Christ promises to give Himself to the overcomer, and
under that name? Answ. It is for these reasons, 1. Because there is no other
thing that can be absolutely satisfying to the Believer, but Christ Himself: and
seeing Christ aims at the satisfaction of the Believer, this glorifieth His
Grace and Love, that He will for that end bestow Himself upon them 2. It is, to
teach them where to expect their happiness when this life is ended, and so
where to seek it while they are here: this is not to be had in, and amongst
creatures, but is to be sought and looked for in Christ Jesus Himself. 3. It is
done to comfort and encourage the Believer: for when Christ bestows Himself
upon him, what will He not else communicate to him that may be for his good? as
the Apostle reasons to this purpose, Romans 8.32. Believers may be encouraged
to wrestle a while; this night will have an end, and the Day Star will arise:
after which, there shall be no more night, nor darkness, nor Sun to give
light, but the Lord God shall enlighten them, and the Lamb Himself shall be a
light unto them; for holding forth of this consolation, is Christ expressed by
this name in this promise.

In the 29. verse. the Epistle closes with the common advertisement, He that
has an ear to hear, etc. which is not done for the fashion; but is the Lords
commending of what has been said unto the consciences of the Hearers: because
what is said, is said by the Spirit to the Churches; and it becomes well these
who have ears to hear, to hear what is said by Him.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. ANd unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write, These things says
he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars; I kn^w thy w^rks,
that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead.

2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die:
for I have not found thy works perfe^t before God.

3. Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and
repent. If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy.

5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will
not bl^t out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his Angels.

6. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.


THis is the fifth Epistle, directed to the Church in Sardis. It has the
division that is common to the rest, to wit, there is, First, an Inscription,
verse. 1. Secondly, the Body of the Epistle, verse. 2, 3, and 4. And, Thirdly, A
Conclusion, verse. 5, and 6.

The party unto whom it is directed, is, the Angel of the Church of Sardis:
this was spoken of, Chap. 1. verse. 11. It was once the seat of the rich King
Cresus, abounding in much wealth, and also in much sin, and profanity; yet
Christ by His Gospel begets a Church in this place. Although it be directed
in common to Ministers and People, and for that end does contain what
respects the Church in common; yet we conceive it does especially and
principally relate to the case of the Minister, and to the People as joined and
agreeing with him in that dead condition, as the Exposition thereof will clear.

The person from whom the Epistle is sent, is set forth by two titles, First,
He has the seven Spirits of God: this was expounded, Chap. 1. verse. 4. and it
is again repeated, Chap. 4. verse. 5, and 6. By these seven Spirits are
understood the holy Ghost, in His several Gifts, Graces, and Operations.
Christ is said to have these: because He has committed unto him the dispensing
of these Gifts and Graces of the Spirit to the Church, and does jointly with
the Father, send the holy Ghost the Comforter for the good of His People, as is
clear from Ioh. 14. verse. 16, 17. and Chap. 16. verse. 7, 8, etc. and many other
places. He takes this title in this place: because having to do with a dead
Minister and People, He would both make them know what must quicken them, to
wit, the Spirit; and how they may attain the same, to wit, by Him. It is no
little part of Christ's glory, nor of the Believers consolation, that Christ
has the dispensing of life, and liveliness unto His People. The second title,
is, which has the seven Stars: this is in part taken out of Chap. 1. verse. 16.
where Christ is described as having in His hand seven Stars.

By Stars are here understood Ministers, as Chap. 1. verse. 20. is clear. Christ
is here said to have them, as He has the seven Spirits: which does import. 1.
His special interest in, and title to Ministers: He has a peculiar right to
the Church beside what He has to the world; yet has He a more peculiar right
to the Ministers, as having their Commission from Him, and dependence on Him,
in a more special manner. Therefore, Psalm. 68. verse. 18. He is said after His
Ascension peculiarly to have received gifts for men, or in the man: And yet
these gifts, are no other but the gifts of Apostles, Pastors and Teachers, etc.
which He again gives to His Church, as is clear from Ephesians. 4. verse. 8. and
11. Secondly, This title imports Christ's absolute Soveraignity over His
Ministers in a special manner; for, he has them: And so they being His, He may
dispose of them at His pleasure, for f^rthering of them in His work if they be
faithful, and for blasting of them if it be otherwise. Thirdly, It points at
Christ's care of His Ministers, who does in a special manner keep and preserve
these Stars, as something that is much esteemed of by Him. Christ takes this
title unto Himself in this Epistle, 1. That He may provoke this lifeless Angel,
to seek life in Him, seeing He who had the seven Stars, had also the seven
Spirits; and so especially they, to wit, His Ministers might expect to be made
lively by Him, if He were improven by them, and so this title does back the
directions that follow. 2. It is also to let them know that are Ministers, that
though they be in an eminent place; yet are they subject to Christ who is their
Sovereign, and so ought to be dependent on Him, otherwise they are liable to
His trial and censure, who can dispose of them as He will: and so this title
adds weight to the threatening, which is contained, verse. 3.

The Body of the Epistle follows in the close of the first verse, with the 2,
3, and 4. We may take it up in these four, First, The Lord discovers the
hypocrisy and deadness of this Minister and Church, verse. 1. Secondly, He
proposes many directions as remedies, fit for their recovery. Thirdly, He
presses the practice of these directions by several weighty reasons and
threatenings; and these two are intermixed, verse. 2, 3. Fourthly, There is a
qualification of this charge, and a consolation in reference to some Members
that were free from this challenge; and this is held forth, verse. 4.

The case of this Minister and Church, is, in two expressions, 1. Setting out
what they were thought-of by others. 2. Expressing what indeed they were before
God. Before others they had a name that they were living, that is, they were
thought to be in some good and lively condition more than ordinary, and were
thought by others about them to be a Church, in better condition than other
Churches: for, to have a name, does import the esteem of somewhat in her, which
was not ordinary; yet, says the Lord, notwithstanding of that name they were
dead, that is, very unsurable to that they were esteemed to be; and in respect
thereof, indeed but spiritually dead. By this deadness we understand, First, A
simple deadness in hypocrisy, and so it is to be understood, there are but
many of you mere hypocrites, although ye have a fair show. Secondly, Deadness
may be understood comparatively, that is, either in respect of what they seemed
to be, and were thought to be by others, or what they ought to have been; or,
in respect of what sometimes they had been. And so even Believers may be thus
charged, who having some life, yet in these respects were defective. And by
considering what is said, v^. 2. where somthings ready to die, are spoken of,
it will appear that this charge is so to be applied in reference to declining
Believers in part, as to others who were altogether hypocrites. It is like this
Church has been free of gross Errors; for there is no mention of the
Nicolaitans in the same as in other Churches: It is like also there has been
no inward division amongst themselves, or gross profanity of practice, or such
like: for there is no mention of such in the reproof, nor would such have stood
with an eminent name; but on the contrary, it is like they had Ordinances in
frequencie and purity, the Minister had Gifts in some eminency, external
subjection was given to the Ordinances, and they were waited upon; and, it may
be, there was zeal in outward Reformation, as was in Ephesus. Upon these, and
the like grounds, they came to be esteemed-of by others, as being in an
excellent frame; the Preachers were thought excellent Preachers, and no Church
thought more happy than the Church of Sardis; and it is like, it was counted a
blessed thing to live in such a place: and, it may be, that the Minister and
People had their own too great esteem of themselves, as being privileged
beyond others, because they were free both of the Errors in Doctrine, defects
in Discipline, and also of the crosses and trials, which we find other Churches
lying under: whereupon they are said to have a name; and yet they were indeed,
and before the Lord, in the respects formerly mentioned, dead, and unanswerable
to that name: which is indeed a sad charge, and a most dangerous condition.
Whence we may observe, That a Church, or Minister, or a particular person, may
have a great esteem from others, and also have much esteem of themselves, and
have some seeming grounds for the same; and yet either totally, or in part, and
comparatively, be but dead and lifelesse; and in no such estimation before God.
This may make all, both Ministers and People, to tremble, and to beware of
being pleased with forthy and empty names, which oftentimes are found to be
exceeding light before God.

It may be enquired on this occasion, 1. as to a private person, what grounds
one may have to account himself living, when yet indeed he may be dead? For
answer, We conceive that the Lord in His wisdom has made a peremptory decision
of this Question to be impossible, to wit, how great length an hypocrite may
go, and yet be still in the state of hypocrisy; as also of that other, to wit,
how far a Believer may decline in the estate of Grace, and yet continue to be a
Believer? because the deciding of these, as to the maximum or minimum quod sic,
does not tend to edification: And He would have His People keeping a distance,
even from the borders and marches of these things in their practices. Yet we
conceive, that it is clear from Scripture, that a hypocrite may have very many
things that may be the occasion of a name to him; and yet really he may be
still unfound. We may, for example, instance them in these particulars, 1. If
we look to negatives, they be justly chargeable with nothing before men, either
as to ommissions or commissions: and in this respect Paul was blamlesse, even
while a Pharisee, Phil. 3, 6. 2. If we look to the common gifts of the Spirit,
which come under that name of Gratia gratis data, they may come a great length
here, as, to speak with tongues, to understand all Mysteries, to have all
knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.2. And in this respect they may Preach well, Write well,
Dispute well; yea, even to the edification of others; and, as to the exercising
of a gift, Pray well also. And, no question, Judas and others, whom the Lord
will not own for His in the day of Judgment, were eminent in all these, as
they were for casting out of devils and the working of miracles. 3. If we will
look to the performance of external duties, it will be found they may come a
great length in this respect. That Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12. prayed and fasted
often, and gave tithes of all: and that man, Matthew. 19.20. said, All these
things did I keep from my youth: which might be true, as to the outward
performance of duties, and so as they understood them; which also is confirmed
from the example of Paul. 4. If we look in to the spiritual meaning of the
Law, as it does obliege the inward man to a conformity thereto, we will find
that hypocrites may go a length even in that: thus we find a discreet Scrib (
Mark 12.32, 33.) acknowledging, that to love the Lord with all the heart, with
all the understanding, with all the soul, with all the strength, and to love
our neighboar as our self, is more than all burnt offerings or sacrifices. This
is indeed much, to prefer internal moral duties to external ceremonial
performances; and is more than usually was acknowledged amongst them: for which
cause, the Lord says in the next word, Thou art not far from the kingdom of
God; yet He insinuates he was not in the Kingdom of God, and so not really
found notwithstanding. 5. They will sometimes have seeming fruits, even as to
suffering: although no hypocrite can have a sincere end therein; yet it is
clear, that many of them may suffer many things materially for the Truth of
Christ. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. supposes that one may give his body to be
burnt, and yet want love: and, Gal. 3.4. he supposes that there may be much
suffering in vain. And certainly experience in all ages of the Church, has
made this appear to be truth. 6. If we look further in reference to Gospel
duties, there may be fair flourishing in this respect also; as first,
convictions of sin may be carried on a great length: Saul was often brought to
say, I have sinned; Felix trembles, while Paul preaches to him, Act. 24.25.
and even Simon Magus is brought to desire the help of Peter's prayers, as being
convinced of his hazard, Act. 8.24. Secondly, This conviction may be followed
with something like Repentance, and sorrow for the committing of sin: thus,
even Ahab humbles himself, 1 King. 21. verse. 27, 29. and these that are
mentioned, Psalm. 78. verse. 34. etc. did seek and enquire after him who slew
them. And certainly there wants not sorrow and bitterness in Judas his
repentance, Mat. 26.3, etc. when he did really rue what he had done. Thirdly,
There may be also something like faith; whereby one may in part be brought to
believe the general truths of the Gospel concerning Christ, etc. and to his
own apprehension be persuaded in himself, that he has received him; and so
carry within himself as if indeed there were ground to expect what is promised
in him. This is clear also from the many instances of historical and temporal
faith, that are recorded in Scripture: and in this respect, it is said of the
temporary Believer, That anon he receives the word with joy, and goes forth
as if all were well. Thus Agrippa, is by the force of the Word almost persuaded
to be a Christian, Act. 26.28. And, Isai. 48.1. and 2. some are said to call
themselves of the holy city; and stay themselves on the Lord God of Israel
(which supposes an exercise of faith, at least in their account) and yet, it
was not done in truth and in righteousness. In the seventh place, we may
instance it in the common operations of the spirit on the affections within: we
have already hinted something of convictions for sin, of fear, of wrath, and
destruction of the soul, which certainly may sometimes affect many hypocrites;
also of grief and worldly sorrow, which may seize upon such, and in an high
degree; who yet may have nothing of God in them: upon the other side, there may
be much of it also in respect of the flashes of joy, tenderness, and meltings
of heart, which hypocrites may have at one time, either in some public
Ordinances, or possibly in secret, or otherwise, more than at other times; and
yet there be nothing but the common operations of the spirit, such as were in
many of John's Hearers, who for a srason rejoiced in his light, Job. 5.35. and
in the temporary Believer, as was formerly cited: for, the Lord that dispenses
the common gifts of the Spirit as He pleases, does also dispense of these
common effects of the Spirits operation, such as liberty, fear, joy, sorrow,
and the like, according to his Sovereign pleasure, without respect to the
eternal state, good or bad of the person on whom He bestows them. Now seeing
these things and such like may be where yet sincerity is not, what wonder is
there that a person be said to have a name by others, or be thought to have
reality by himself, when yet indeed there is nothing but deadness? Oftentimes
men (that are ordinarily admirers of themselves and what is in themselves) are
brought to think highly of themselves, and of the sincerity of their own state,
and that with great persuasion, upon less grounds than these that are laid
down, as we will find in the Epistle to Laodicea.

If it be asked, (supposing such things to be,) What can further be defective
to reality?

Answ. To say no more, all these things may be, and yet there may be defect in
these three, which are simply necessary for the differencing of a sincere
person from an hypocrite, First, There may be a want of the new nature, and the
person not yet be born again, as it is, Ioh. 3.3. Secondly, All these may be,
and yet the person not be brought really to deny his own righteousness, and
positively to receive Christ offered in the Gospel, and to rest upon Him, for
the attaining of life through His righteousness and satisfaction: although
they may be convinced it is good to do it, and although they may think they
have done it, (being blinded by their own pride) and although they may some way
comfort themselves as if they had done it in this their presumptuous dream;
yet, really it is never done: for so, they could not but be saved, because of
the immutable terms of Gods Covenant, which say, Whosoever believes in him
shall not perish, but have eternal life. Thirdly, All these things may be, when
yet there is defect in the nature of the inward duties (to say so) and in the
manner of performing what is outward, that is, they may be both without the
qualifications required to the constituting of sincerity and sincere acts
spoken to, Chap. 2. So that still these fruits, are but fruits of the old tree
and flesh, and are not brought forth by faith in Jesus Christ, without which
nothing can be pleasing to God; neither is His glory singly aimed at in them,
etc. without which the most glancing fruits, will be but rotten before the Lord.

Again, Secondly, considering this, Thou have a name that thou live, and art
dead, with respect to the Minister: it may be enquired, 1. What kind of
Minister this is, who may be said to have a name that he lives, and is dead,
2. What may be the reasons that make even Ministers to rest satisfied in the
applause of others, and in such things as may gain an approbation before men,
without that which may make him approveable before God?

To the first, we say, that in the describing of such a Minister, we must, 1.
look to something^ which he has, that give the ground of his having a name.
And, 2. to something which he has not, the want whereof, proves him to have
no more but a name. First then, A Minister may be in his particular condition
such an one as was formerly described with many commendable things in his
outward carriage. Secondly, he may have some good measure of gifts, and a
pleasing quickness and dexterity in Preaching and mannaging of other duties
that belong to his Calling. This gift it seems was in many Church Officers at
Corinth, which made them appear exceeding eminent. Thirdly, he may have a
frequency, and accurate formality in the discharge of all duties, as bearing
forth much diligence and faithfulness in the discharge of them, with a seeming
fervor and earnestness. It is like that these who preached Christ out of
envy, Philip. 1.15. wanted not a good measure of this. Fourthly, he may have a
great plausiblnesse, and a familiar kind of humanity, and discretion (to speak
so) in his conversation with others, which often tends to gain applause from
them, as if it were a special sign of humility, and an evidence of love and
respect, whereby men oftentimes are engaged to esteem of such a Minister, more
upon such an account, to wit, as being particularly friendly to them, than for
their works sake, as the word is, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. It is like, that these false
Teachers that got such a name, as, who but they, in Corinth and Galatia, had
much of this way of insinuation: and also these mentioned, Philip. 1. cannot
well be thought to be free in this respect, seeing they Preached Christ out of
envy and strife, verse. 15. as minding to gain a name thereby beyond Paul.
Fifthly, Such a Minister may also have seeming countenance in his Ministry
with Authority and respect amongst his people, and seeming countenance and
fruit in outward things, as in the bearing down of Error, the suppressing of
gross scandals and outbreakings, and the bringing of his people to some
conformity in public and private duties: in which respects, his Congregation
may be more formal than many others. Upon these and such like considerations, a
Minister may have a name of a very eminent and excellent Minister; and yet
there may be much unsoundnesse in two respects, 1. As to his own personal
condition, he may be without life, or at the best without liveliness in any
suitable degree. 2. As to his public Ministry, he may be in many things
defective as to the sincerity of his practice before God, even when he
appears to be found and diligent before men, as it is here, verse. 2. I have
not found thy works perfect before God. Where we shall consider this more
particularly: and do therefore now leave this first Question.

The second Question, is, What may make a Minister so ready to please himself
in the having of Gifts, and a name before others, when yet he may be so faulty
before God?

Answ. The deceits of men's hearts are very deep: and although it be exceedingly
to be regrated that Ministers should fall in this evil of resting in the
applause of others, when in the mean time they want Gods approbation in a great
part at least; yet it cannot be denied to be a truth: and what is written to
the Angels of Ephesus, Sardis, and Laodicea, does abundantly confirm the same:
and these reasons may be given thereof, 1. Because oftentimes Ministers,
especially such Ministers aim too much at the pleasing of men, and at the
gaining of respect and applause amongst them: this may be a tentation to the
most sincere, but it is really that which unfound men are swayed with, as it is
clear, Philip. 2.21. and therefore when what they principally designed, is
attained, it is no wonder that they rest therein. 2. Of all men in the world,
Ministers are most obnoxious to this tentation of vanity, and seeking
approbation from others; because, most of their appearances are in public
before others, and that in the exercise of some Gift of the mind, which is
supposed to hold forth the inward worth of a person more than any other thing.
Now, when this meets with applause, it holds out a peoples estimation of
such a persons worth, which has a great subtilty in its pleasing and tickling
of him, and so is ready to incline him to rest satisfied therein. 3. Many
Ministers are not traveling in birth to beget souls, and to have success as
to the Salvation of many, as well as outward fruits; but are at best studying
to exoner themselves as having been diligent in their duty. Now, when such meet
with applause from others, it is interpreted by them, as some confirmation of
their diligence and seal of their exoneration in their Ministry: for, men
being naturally willing to absolve themselves, are easily induced to admit of
any testimony, which may seem to confirm their own integrity. 4. Oftentimes
Ministers take more pains in external duties of their Ministry that are
obvious to the view of others, than they do in the inward secret duties of
Christianity upon their own hearts, such as self-examination, the making of
their own calling and election sure, the keeping of themselves in the love of
God, the exercising of Faith, Repentance, etc. whereby it comes to pass, that
often that may be their regrate which is spoken, Song 1.6. They made me the
keeper of the vineyards, but my own vineyard have I not kept. And from this
it is, that though their condition be exceeding defective before God; yet, they
being unacquainted therewith cannot be affected with the same. An^, no
question, many Ministers have much carnal quietness in their Ministry, who
could not entertain the same, if they knew how things were with them before
God. 5. This evil also is incident to Ministers, and has great influence upon
the other, that their having such Gifts, seeming fruits and approbation before
others, is oftentimes made use of to counterballance, and bear down any
challenge that may arise concerning their own unfoundnesse, as if all these
were testimonies to the contrary: and so, as oftentimes outward prosperity
does, through men's corruption, bear down challenges in some private persons,
which adversity does waken up in others; so an outward prosperous Ministry (to
say so) does often smother many challenges of a man's inward unfoundnesse, which
readily had been more taken notice of, had there not been such Gifts, outward
countenance in external duties, and approbation from others. Hence we see, That
as often the most tender Christian is under the cross, so it is the most
lively Minister who labors most under the sense of his own insufficiency
and short-coming in Gifts, who has most gross out-breakings in Errors, and
profanity weighting him amongst his people; who meets with most disrespect,
and maniest disappointments among the people and such like; these are often
blessed of God to keep such a person lively, when others without these do sit
up and forget themselves. O but Ministers that have a name, and some seeming
countenance in the exercise of their Gifts, great applause and acceptance
amongst the people, had need to be humble and watchful, lest they be liable to
this charge, Thou have a name that thou live, but art dea^! And, no question,
many inadvertantly are slain by such things themselves, when they Preach to
others.

We come now to the second thing in the Body of the Epistle, which is the
directions that the Lord gives both to Minister and people, for the recovering
of them out of that condition, verse. 2, 3. And because the reasons whereby he
presses these directions, are intermixed, we shall speak to both in order as
they ly. The directions are of two sorts. The first respects their present
duty, and their carriage for the time to come, in reference to what might
occur; the other respects what was past, and their carriage in reference to
that. The first is in the 2. verse. comprehended in two directions: both which
implie their former guiltiness. The first is, be Watchful: which looks both
to watchfulness in the private duties of Christianity, and also to a more
watchful sympathizing manner of going about the duties of the Ministry: which
implies, that what ever name they had before others, that yet really there was
much deadness and security, unwatchfulnesse, and untendernesse in both these
respects before God. The second direction is, and strengthen the things that
remain, which are ready to die: By things that remain and are ready to die, may
be understood, 1. some remainders of the work of God in some that were honest,
which being through carelessness and security exceedingly weakened and brought
very low, were in hazard to die out, if not prevented: this respects
especially these members who had declined from somewhat which once they had
been at. And although, no question, there were many in that Church who never
had any thing; yet it is no marvel that the Lord mould His directions with a
special reference to such as had some honesty in them. 2. These words may be
understood as peculiarly spoken to the Minister; And so the things that remain,
etc. are some little stirrings amongst the People, as the fruits of his
Ministry, which now are like to die out, because of his formal way of
carrying of himself in his duty: or, it may look to the few honest ones, which
were among them, who were not fed and nourished by him in their spiritual
conditions, and so were like to starve, even when he was flourishing in the
exercise of his gifts to the admiration of others. The direction, and
strengthen the things that remain, must be expounded with respect to both
these: and so with respect to the first, it says, they that ever had any thing
of God, and now have taken a stand, had need warmly and tenderly to nourish and
confirm that which is behind; that by the exercise of tenderness, prayer,
repentance, and other things that belong to the life of Religion, that spunk
may be kept from dying out. With respect to the second, to wit, the Minister,
it puts him to a more careful, painful, and sympathizing way of looking to
the Flock, and feeding them according to their several tempers, with what might
be solid and nourishing to them; lest the blossoms of fruits, which he had in
his Ministry, should evanish, and be blasted. And thus he is reproved for
taking pains possibly in fitting his Sermons to the tastingnesse of some
curious and vain Hearers, by the bringing forth of high notions and great
words, whereby himself might be accounted a great man; and that yet in the mean
time there was no care had to provide food, or Physic for hungry and sick
souls.

This part of the directions, is backed by two Arguments. The first is employed
in these words, that are ready to die: which is in sum, if ye that are
Christians be not diligent and serious, and ye that are Ministers be not
watchful and faithful, ye that are private Christians are in hazard to have
any beginnings that are in you extinguished: which may be understood
respectively, both of saving and common stirrings; and ye that are Ministers
may have your Ministry blasted, if these directions be not followed. This does
not imply any uncertainty of the persevering of the truly Godly; But does set
out, First, the connection which God has made betwixt liveliness and
diligence: And, Secondly, it shows how God sometimes uses to stir up secure
Believers, to wit, by giving and blessing to them some sharp warnings.

The second way by which he presses these directions, is more expressly set
down in the end of verse. 2. For I have not found thy works perfect before God:
which is, in a word, what ever men think of them as before them; yet I, having
tried them according as they are before God and in His sight, who sees further
than men, have not found them to be perfect before Him. This word in the Greek
is (...), a word that is most ordinarily used in reference to Ministers, and
sets forth integrity and sincerity in their Ministry, when they fulfill or
make full proof of their Ministry, as it is, 2 Timothy 4.5. or when they fully
preach the Gospel of Christ, as it is rendered, Romans 15.19. and in other
places. Therefore here it would seem especially to relate to the defects of the
Minister, even when he went about his Ministerial duties. And it imports, 1.
That Ministers ministerial duties ought to be perfect before God. 2. That the
Lord Jesus will especially take notice of them and their ministerial duties.
3. It imports this, that there are many Ministers who are very fair in their
outward ministerial carriage before others, and cannot be liable to any charge
before men; that yet, when Christ comes to try them, and reckon with them,
will be found exceeding defective before God. And on this occasion it is fit to
consider, 1. What is necessarily requisite, according to this form of speech,
that a Ministers works may be perfect before God. 2. What makes a Minister,
that may be abounding in external labors, yet to be liable to this charge,
that his works are not perfect before God. And this will clear a Question,
which we left imperfect in the first verse, and not so particularly answered.

To the first, that a Ministers works may be perfect before God: beside the
frequency of them, and what may also be in his other personal carriage, these
things will be found to be required by virtue of this expression, 1. That in
public ministerial duties a man be acted out of zeal to the glory of God and
affection to the souls of these he Preaches to: this was Paul's practice in his
fulfilling of his Ministry, Col. 1.25. (where the same word is) being compared
with what goes immediately before, and what follows after. And this is the
great commendation of Timothy beyond others, Philip. 2.20. that he naturally
cared for the state of the people, that is, he pursued their edification, as a
Mother will seek the safety and good of her own child. This is a qualification
of an high price before God, without which, no diligence will ^e esteemed of.
2. That a Ministers ministerial duties be thus perfect, it is requisite that in
them he extend himself according to his ability to the utmost for the peoples
edification. That is to make full proof of the Ministry, 2 Timothy 4, 5. when
nothing is left unessayed which may put a man's gifts, time, ability, etc. to
the utmost, for the Peoples good; so that his design is seriously to improve
all for that end. 3. There must not only be diligence and faithfulness in
external duties; but there must also be a sutablnesse to Gods mind, in the
end, motives, and manner of performing these duties, and also tenderness and
faithfulness in the performing of such duties as are not obvious to men, to
wit, praying for the People, simpathyzing with them in straits, grieving when
they are wounded, and the like, which we will find frequent in the practice of
Paul. Now, when a Minister contenteth himself with the performing of such
duties as are before men, and makes no conscience of these, it looks as if
he aimed rather to be approven of men than of God: and therefore his works
cannot be said to be perfect before Him. And to this belongs a Ministers
carrying of himself in Preaching, admonition, and every duty as in the sight of
God. 2. Corinthians. 2.17. For we are not as many, which corrupt the Word of God:
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. 4.
This perfection takes in an earnestness and universality in all the duties of
the Ministry, and that in reference to all times and persons: so the Minister
must reprove, threaten and carry displeasing messages, as well as instruct,
comfort, and preach that which may be more pleasing. He must do this also in
reference to great men as well as to these who are mean, as well to these whom
he loves, and who loves him, as to others: and so he is to be searching the
secret faults of Professors, to wit, their security, pride, hypocrisy, etc. as
well as the gross out-breakings of others. It is like, that this Angel was
defective in this respect, and searched not in his Doctrine so as to make
discovery of the hidden hypocrisy and corruption of hearts; and that he did
not faithfully rip up their wounds, possibly fearing to displease them: for,
oftentimes he that seeks to heal the wounds most smoothly, gains most
applause from others. Now, where there is defect in these, no ministerial
duties can ever be accounted perfect before God. When Paul is putting Timothy
to make perfect, or full proof of his Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. he thus proceeds,
verse. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine. And so he describes himself to
the same purpose, Col. 1.28, 29. Whom we preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus. Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working, which
works in me mightily.

From this now it will be easy to answer to the second, to wit, what defects
in ministerial duties may make them not to be accounted perfect before God:
for, if the former four be necessary to make such works perfect, then when
there is defect in these, or any of these, a Ministers works cannot but be
found imperfect: and therefore we shall say no more of it.

The second sort of directions that some way relate to their former carriage,
as well as to their present duty, are set down, verse. 3. In them the Lord
draws them back to consider the time of their espousals (as it were) and the
terms upon which they Contracted together; what He proposed to them, and what
they received off His hand, when the Word came amongst them; that now
themselves may see if they have been answerable to such Engagements and
Resolutions; and if there be not reason to repent of their declinings. In
general, this direction puts them to a back-search of themselves: which is
an excellent mean of recovery, either of Minister, or of People who have
declined, as was cleared from the Epistle to Ephesus, Chap. 2.5. But more
particularly, there are four words holding forth their duty. 1. Remember how
thou received: this imports, First, That there was an offer made to them of
the Gospel. Secondly, That they had in profession received the same. Thirdly,
When it is said, how thou have, etc. it imports some more than ordinary
conviction, or warmness in that their professed subjection to the proposed
Gospel. It is like, some of them were as John Baptist's hearers were, Ioh.
5.35. rejoicing in that light for a season; but afterward becoming carnal and
secure. And if there was any honesty, it was then more lively in exercise, than
it continued to be thereafter: therefore, says the Lord, consider what has
become of that now, and if the present deadness be answerable to that
tenderness; and so, upon that consideration, be provoked to study more
liveliness. The second word is, how thou have heard: this is almost the same
with the former, and looks to the terms which God proposed to them when He
took them to be a Church, and what was their purpose when they submitted
thereunto. As if the Lord had said, did I propose to you only to take on a name
without reality? or did ye engage only to be professors in show, and not to be
thoroughly sincere? See then how this condition of yours answers my proposal,
and your engagement. The third word is, and hold fast: which is not to be
understood, as if he were well pleased with their present condition, as in the
Epistles to Thyatira and Philadelphia: because here He gives them many
directions and burdens (to say so) besides this, which He does not in the other
two Epistles: But it does imply these two, 1. A necessity of holding fast the
little thing that was, left they should run to the extremity of declining ere
long. 2. It respects what they had received and heard: and so, the meaning
is, that they would grip faster to hold that than formerly they had done. Under
these directions we may gather what has been their guiltiness, and the steps
by which they have come to such an hieght in this hypocrisy and declining. The
last word is, Repent: which is a general cure for all evils, and is of
special use for the preventing, and removing of such inward evils, as,
declining from any good condition, security, presumption, and hypocrisy, as we
may see through all these Epistles. For readily it cannot be evil with the
spiritual frame of a Christian when Repentance is in exercise, and it cannot be
well when it is otherwise. But of this we shall say no more now.

The third thing in the Body of this Epistle, to wit, the way how the Lord
presses these exhortations in this verse, is by subjoyning a sharp threatening,
If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou
shall not know: this threatening is general; but it is the more comprehensive
and sharp, If we consider these two, 1. That when He says, He will come, etc.
He does not signify any particular stroke He will bring on them, whereby they
may gather, that there is no particular threatening; but it may be comprehended
under this general: and so it may be, I will come unto thee and remove thy
Candlestick, or fight against thee with the sword of my mouth, or call thee and
thy people some extraordinary way to a reckoning, and such like. The sin of
hypocrisy, especially in a Minister, is a most dreadful sin, and they who are
guilty thereof, are in a most dreadful condition: for, their doom is bl^^k,
and God may fill therein all the threatenings that are in this Book, as it is in
Deuteronomy. 29.20. and Rev. 22.18. And they themselves cannot tell how many evils
they are liable unto at Christ's coming upon them. 2. If we consider, that this
coming of Christ's, is no friendly coming to them; but as the coming of an
enemy upon them, and that in some terrible manner, suddenly and inexpectedly
surprising them. And so it presses them to the present exercise of Repentance,
because the coming of the Lord would be dreadful unto them in that condition;
and yet it was hard to know how suddenly they might be surprised by the same.

The fourth thing in the Body of the Epistle, is, the consolation laid-down in
reference to the handful that had some life: for, if they were but as two or
three on the tops of the uttermost branches, the Lord will not neglect them.
This consolation, verse. 4. has three parts. 1. The persons are described to
whom it is sent. 2. The consolation is laid down in ^ promise. 3. The reason is
given, why the Lord puts this difference betwixt them and others. The
persons are several ways described, 1. They are said to be some names: this is
according to the Scripture phrase, to show their eminency and excellency beyond
others, who by their integrity had, as it were, procured themselves a name in
Christ's account: so this phrase is understood, Act. 1.15. to wit, not only it
signifies some persons simply, but some persons that are eminent. 2. They are
even in Sardis: and this commends their honesty, that had kept somewhat
lively, even where Minister and People were dead. 3. They are a few names:
which shows, that in comparison with the multitude of this Church, there were
but few sincere Believers, at least in a lively condition, although outward
things looked exceeding fair, which also heightens their commendation. 4. In
the description it is said, thou have, relating to the Angel^ which says, that
a lifelesse Minister may have some lively persons under his charge* and yet he
is little to be thanked for it. We conceive, that this does not only respect
the title which he has to all that are members; but it seems to relate to a
peculiar interest in these few beside others; and so they might be said to be
his, as being begotten by his Ministry: in which respect, he could not be said
to have these who had no sincerity at all. 5. They are described by this, That
they have not defiled their garments: which relates not only to purity in
outward practice; (for it is like that was not so rare a thing in Sardis) but
especially it relates to their inward liveliness and freedom from these
evils, especially of security, formality, declining, hypocrisy, and such like,
that were common in the place. And thus, to keep the garments, is often taken
universally, as respecting man's inward condition, as well as that that is
outward, and particularly, chap. 16. verse. 15.

The consolation it self, is in this promise, they shall walk with me in white:
which has a twofold consolation in it, 1. That they shall walk with Christ,
and so enjoy his company and be made happy objectively by the possessing of His
presence. ^2. That in the enjoying of Christ's company, they shall be clothed
with white: which we take to hold forth the unconceivable Glory which shall be
put upon the souls, and even the bodies also of Believers, when they shall be
raised in Glory and bear the Image of the heavenly, etc. 1 Cor. 15. and shall
be conformed to Christ's glorious Body, Philip. 3.21. and shall shine as the Son
in the firmament, Matthew. 13. It Is called white, 1. because then there shall be
no spot amongst all the Congregation of the firstborn. 2. When Christ is on his
conquest, chap. 19 he appears in white: and in this place, it is to show
forth the Believers absolute victory over all difficulties and enemies. 3. When
Christ was transfigured, His garments did shine, so says he here, that the
Believer, who keeps himself pure, shall walk in Christ's livery, and, as it
were, He shall give them new clothes like unto His own; Thus shall they be
subjectively happy.

The reason subjoyned, is in these words, for they are worthy: we may take up
worthiness under several considerations, as, first, when there is supposed to
be in proper justice a condignity between the deserving of the person, and the
thing that is bestowed upon him* as when a workman is said to be worthy of his
wages, speaking as amongst men: in this respect, Scotus, and many of the
Schoolmen that follow him, deny that men can merit any thing before God:
because there is such a distance between God and creatures, that no creature
can make God his debtor, without respect to His own free engagement and
promise: and also, because there is no due proportionablnesse between the great
happiness of Eternal life, and what men can do to procure the same. This
Doctrine is much opposed by the generality of the Schoolmen, and later
Jesuits, as having these absurdities with it, 1. That it destroys all proper
merit. 2. That it says there is no condignity in good works themselves,
without respect to Gods promise, whereas they say, such and such works had been
condignly meritorious, although there had never been such a promise. 3. They
say, it is all one with the Heretics opinion, and such like: of which,
possibly, we may say a word some-otherwhere (if the Lord will) Yet, this first
acception of worthiness or merit, cannot be admitted here: because, 1. it
contrairs the end of Christ's giving this promise, which is to express the
freeness of His Grace in taking notice of such, and bestowing such an
excellent privilege on them beyond their deserving. 2. It is contrary to what
is implied in the promise: for, if they had absolute perfection for the time,
so as to merit to be thus de^^t with, Then it would suppose that they did
already walk in white, and were simply free of all blots; whereas Christ does
difference their future happy condition from what they had for the time in this
respect, that although then they wanted not their own infirmities, albeit they
were sincere, and free of the faults that others were lying under; yet wanted
they not all spots: but at that time, when this promise should be fulfilled,
these spots should be wiped away, and they should walk fully in white.
Secondly, Worth, or merit, is sometimes taken as it respects Gods gracious
acceptance of a sinner through Christ Jesus: and thus a believing sinner may
be said to be worthy, and to have heaven bestowed upon him in Gods
righteousness and faithfulness. 1. Because in Christ he is accepted as
worthy: and so they may be said to be worthy in Him, as they are just and
righteous in Him, that is, through the imputation of Christ's worth and
righteousness unto them: for, though it be said here, that they are worthy;
yet it is not said that they are worthy in themselves. 2. In this respect,
Believers may be said to be worthy; because God has freely condescended to
promise such things unto them: and therefore (to speak so) according to the
terms of the Law of Grace, they may expect and claim the performance of such
promises from the righteous Judge, who cannot in His justice but perform what
He has promised, as if there were a ty of strict justice by merit put upon
Him. And this agrees with the Apostles reasoning, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. In the third
place, often this word which is rendered worthy here, is to be understood of a
meetnesse and sutablnesse which is in such a thing, without respect to any
merit or proper justice: thus it is rendered, Mat. 3.8. Bring forth therefore
fruits meet for repentance. The word rendered meet there, is the same that is
rendered worthy here, and imports only that there ought to be a sutablnesse in
their fruits to true Repentance. This will agree well to this place, as the
scope clears; The Lord says, they kept themselves clean, when others were
defiled: therefore they shall walk with me in white, when others shall be
polluted: and the reason is subjoyned, it is suitable and meet it should be so,
that these that difference themselves in keeping clean from the sins of others,
should be by me brought to a condition where they shall have eternal and
absolute whiteness. And at the first view, it is clear, that the promise is
conceived in these terms, so as it may carry in it a sutablnesse to their
present honest condition. And the Lord often uses this expression, both in His
promises and threatenings, when He intends not to show what is due in strict
justice; but only, that there is and will be a suit, ablnesse and
poportionablnesse between men's carriage and His deal^ng with them, as we will
after find, chap. 16. verse. 15, 16. And this we rest in, as the meaning of the
place, and as most clear from the scope thereof.

The Conclusion follows: Wherein, 1. there are some encouragements given to
the overcomer, verse. 5. and then the common advertisement, verse. 6. which is in
all the other Epistles. There are three promises made to the overcomer. The
first is, the same shall be clothed in white raiment: which is, upon the
matter, that same which was promised to these few sincere Members that were in
Sardis. And is here proposed, to show, that not only these in Sardis, but all
that shall faithfully wrestle and overcome, shall be made partakers of that
excellent privilege formerly mentioned: And yet I suppose none can say that
all that shall be clothed in white, and admitted to heaven, are in strict and
proper Justice worthy of the same; yet, upon the former Popish principles, this
will follow, if so be the proper worthiness of these in Sardis, had been the
thing that procured this privilege unto them, to wit, to walk in white.

The second promise, is, And I will not blot out his name out of the book of
life. The Book of Life is frequently mentioned in this Prophecy: and
(God-willing) we may take occasion to speak somewhat of it, chap. 20. Only now
we say, there are four Books figuratively attributed to God (to mention no
more:) for, God has neither need nor use of Books; but after the manner of men
for helping us to take up His mind, He thus expresses Himself. First, There is
a Book that is more general, and comprehends His decrees: which in His
ordinary providence He executes in the World from time to time. In this
respect, all His works are said to be known to Him from the beginning, as if He
had had a particular roll of them all: and it is with respect to this, that
David ( Psalm. 139. verse. 16.) says, Thine eyes did see my substance yet being
imperfect, and in thy Book all my members were written, which in continuance
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. A second Book, is, of Gods
Omniscience: which takes in all things past, present, and to come, as if He
had kept a Diarie of every event, and had written up ev^^y word and action of
men. In reference to this, the Books are said to be opened in the day of
Judgment, Rev. 20.12. A third Book, is of Gods special care of His Church:
whereby, as it were, He has set forth Himself to have a peculiar care and
oversight of her, and what concerns her. This is mentioned, Chap. 5. verse. 1,
etc. A fourth Book, is called the Book of Life: which relates only to the
names of such as our Lord has ordained to Glory, and does import that they are
as definitely and distinctly determined and known by Him, as if they were by
name and surname particularly recorded in a Book. It is this Book, that is here
called the book of life: Because, 1. The end thereof is to ordain so many to
Life. And, 2. because there is a immutable connection betwixt being written in
this Book of Life, and obtaining eternal life: and so, being the first and
sure door that makes entrance unto life possible and feasible, and gives the
right to, and is the foundation of all that follows; therefore deservedly it
gets this name to be called the book of life.

It rests then to consider, what it is not to blot out his name out of the book
of life: It is not to be understood as if there were a scraping out, and
putting in into that Book, posterior to Gods eternal and immutable decree:
because, First, in that respect, it could not be called the Book of Life: for
so, many might die who once were in it. Secondly, It is contrary also expressly
to the end and use thereof in the day of Judgment, where ( Chap. 20.12.)
express mention is made of the opening of this Book, for this end, that
whoever were found from the beginning written therein, might be kept from the
lake that burns with fire and brimston, as is said in the 15. verse of that
Chapter. And if the connection of being written in this Book, and the obtaining
of life, were not peremptory, there could be no such reason of openning this
Book in the day of Judgment. Thirdly, What ever this be, it is something to be
performed after this life: and seeing it cannot be imagined that one can die
with his name in this Book, and afterward have it blotted out: Therefore such a
gloss cannot be put upon this place. And who would have further confirmation
of this, may have it in the Learned Gomarus his digression on this very Text.
The words then are to be understood thus, as importing more than they express,
to wit, that in the day of Judgment Christ will own the overcomer, and present
him before God, as one that was enrolled in the Book of Life, and given to Him
in the bargain of Redemption, for this very end, that He might raise him up in
the last day, and give unto him eternal life, as it is, Ioh. 6.39, 40.

That this is the meaning, will appear by considering the third promise, But I
will confess his name before my Father, and before his Angels: which does
expressly hold forth what we assert of Christ solemn, and honorable owning of
them as His and given to Him in the great Day, when all the holy Angels shall
be present. We shall say nothing of the other part of the Conclusion, which is
so often, but never needlessly repeated. Now, we may take some few Observations
from the several parts of the Epistle, besides these that are already hinted.

Observe, 1. To have a name without reality, is an exceeding great evil; yet an
evil incident both to Ministers and People. 2. These that have had once
something, may through unwatchfulnesse be brought to a very low posture, as it
were, to be ready instantly to expire. 3. Folks may have some extraordinary
motions at sometimes, and yet afterward fall from these, and forget them, as
if they had never had such purposes and resolutions. 4. There may be some
honest, where there is much deadness, even in the public Ordinances; and God
may keep some lively, even in such a place as Sardis, when the generality are
dead, and this tends exceedingly to their commendation. 5* A Church may have
a great name for many professors, and yet the number of the truly sincere may
be very few. 6. God^inesse is of great value where ever it is, if it were
amongst never so few: it is like, Religion in power was not much thought of in
Sardis; yet what advantage will these few have, beyond others that were of the
greatest name, when Christ shall come to Judgment? it will never be well
understood what advantage there is in true Holiness beyond profanity and
hypocrisy, till by Christ's second coming this be manifested.

Beside these Observations and what has been said, there are yet some few
Questions tending to the further clearing of this Epistle; as First, If an
unfound hypocritical man may be a sent Minister of Christ? Secondly, If such a
man may have gifts in exercise; or, if even a Believer may have gifts in
exercise when his grace is in no good condition? Thirdly, If such a Minister
may have fruits? Fourthly, If usually such a Minister with his gifts has many,
or rather but few fruits? And lastly, if by his deadness the Ordinances be so
polluted to others as they cannot without sin partake of the same with him? To
which, we shall answer shortly in order, by laying down some Doctrines from the
Text.

And to the first we say, that men that are unsound as to heart*honesty, may be
de facto Ministers in the Church of Christ, and, while continuing such, ought
to be so accounted: What this Angel was simply in respect of his state, we
shall not determine; yet this is certain that although he had a name to be
living, he was dead; and his works were not perfect before God, what ever they
were before men. And comparing this with the condition of the Angel of Laodicea
following, we conceive there is ground to say, that men that are for their own
case unsound, may yet be Ministers in Christ's House; and are to be esteemed
such, while they continue in that room, s^ing our Lord Jesus does so here. And
this is not to plead for profane Ministers, as if by this they themselves might
have peace in their discharge of Ministerial duties: or, as if others, whose
place gives them a hand in the admitting unto, or keeping in the Ministry,
such as are, or may be discovered legally to be so, might from this have any
defense; there will no such thing follow hence: But it is to plead for the
Ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ought not to suffer derogation in
whatsoever hands it be. Hence does the Lord ( Matthew. 23.3, etc.) recommend to
His Hearers to give due ministerial respect to the Scribes and Pharisees, even
when He is to discover their rottenness, that thereby the peoples derogating
from the Lords Word in their mouth, while they sat in Moses Chair and spoke
truth might be prevented. Our Lords calling of Judas to be an Apostle does
evince this (for He knew what simply was necessary to a Minister) who, no
question, in his Preaching, was to be accounted an Ambassador of Christ with
the rest: the reason is, because it is not Grace that intitleth one to that
Charge, but Christ his Call and Commission: and seeing it is certain that these
may be separated, a Call from Grace, as Grace from a Call: It will follow
therefore, that according to His Sovereignty He may make use of whom He will,
who as He has not chosen Holy sinlesse Angels, but sinful earthen Vessels, to
commit that treasure of the Gospel unto, that it might be known that the
excellency of the power, is not of men, but of Go^; so may He make use of
sinful men, even more sinful than others, that it may be known that the
edification of souls does not necessarily depend on the holiness of the
Instrument, as Act. 3.12. Therefore we will find, that many who have been
untender, have had hand at this work, as Matthew. 7.23. Many shall say we have
prophesi^d in thy name, etc. and Philip. 1.15. Some preach Christ out of envy,
and says Paul ( Chap. 2.21.) almost of all, they seek their own things. This
ought to make both Ministers and People to tremble, and to strive to be in at
the strait gate of Holiness, seeing no place nor station, nor shining gift can
change our nature, and exempt from the sentence of Christ's curse in the last
day: which use is made of it, Matthew. 7.22, 23.

In Answer to the second Question* We may see, that Gifts may be in exercise,
where there is little or none of inward Grace, or a great decay thereof. This
Angel has a name and is thought of, even while dead: this may be in
unregenerate men, as in the former instances; and also may be in good men
respectively. It is like, Jobs friends, for as excellently as they spoke, yet
had much defect as to the inward life. And Solomon remarketh of himself (
Ecles, 2.) that his wisdom remained with him, even when his heart was bent upon
vanity: Gifts are deceitful and deceiving both to men themselves and to others:
Grace is another thing, and although sometimes God will strike the Idol-shepherd
in his right eye, and make even his Gifts to wither, thereby to show the
necessity of nearness with Him; yet sometimes will He continue the exercise of
them, that thereby His sovereignty may appear, and that men may not lay too
much weight on a common Gift, and also that the edification of others may be
furthered.

To the third, we say, That a man whose particular condition is not approvable
before God, may not only have gifts, and be called to be a Minister; but also
he may have fruits, and some success in his Ministry: this Angel has a few
names, even in Sar^is: and, no question, Judas in his Ministry wanted not
fruit, seeing one report is made of all indifferently, Mark 6.30. And the
Preaching of Christ by the Inviers ( Philip. 1.4.) seems to have had
success: otherwise, their Preaching had been no great ground of rejoicing to
Paul. This also is to show the Lords sovereignty, who will make use of whom He
will in His Work: and although saving Grace do not always accompany common
gifts of the Spirit; yet are they given to profit withal, 1 Corinthians. 12.7. And
seeing they do not always nor often profit these to whom they are given, and
yet are not simply unprofitable when they are some way improven, They must
therefore profit others for whom they are given.

To the fourth, we say, That although such a Minister may not be altogether
always without fruit; yet often great Gifts with an unsound frame of heart
have but little fruit and few converts: he has here names, but a few names,
though he himself had a great name: and certainly in part it is imputed to his
unsoundnesse, whose works were not perfect before God; so that although men
could not censure him; yet before God he was not kindly and natively driving
the design of that peoples edification, whereof this, of having a few names, is
a consequent, as the real honesty, though with a little measure of Gifts, of
the Angel of Philadelphia, did not want its own influence upon the success of
his Min^strie: This therefore shows the danger of an unsound lifelesse
Ministri^, that often the fruits are exceeding few, where there are any at all.
Hence these Scribes and Pharisees are, in Christ's account, as to fruit and to
saving of souls, Matthew. 9. as almost none at all, although he gave not people
way at their own hand to cast at them. And considering, that turning of men
from their evil way, and standing in Gods counsel, Ier. 23. verse. 22. and
walking with God in equity, and turning many from their iniquity, Mal. 2. verse.
6. go together. It is no marvel that the^e who are negligent in the one, be
also less blessed with the other. These, we conceive, God has wisely linked
together, that the more a man have of Him, the more fruit his Commission in his
mouth should have. And although this be not peremptory in all cases, especially
in the comparative degree amongst honest men; Yet, 1. this connection is more
suitable in it self, verse. 12. that one who tenderly and singly aims at fruit,
should attain more than one who indeed intends but the feeding of himself. 2.
The one has a promise and may claim it, 1 Timothy 4.16. the other is judicially
smitten in this: for, as fruits are in part some reward of Grace to a faithful
Minister; so fruitlesnesse is a just stroke upon the other. 3. There is a
connection also in respect of means: tenderness in a Minister disposes to
faithfulness, sympathy, etc. and the want of it, unfitteth a Minister to
conceive experimentally of many things; and so he is indisposed to speak them
seasonably: and it marreth that holy boldness, which immediate eyeing of God
gives; and by it, a Minister is incapacitated to deal in secret with God for
the people and is apt to lay stumbling* blocks before them: and so, partly by
wanting what he should have, and partly by being prone to foster their
security, or rifle their wounds untenderly, or stumble them by his carriage,
he, in these and many other respects, looks as one not suited and fitted in
an ordinary, at least a kindly, way, for the begetting of many: so that
whatever in some extraordinary cases the Lord may do; yet this is most usual:
which should make people desire lively Ministers, and pray that they may be
kept so; and also should make Ministers conscionably see to their own
particular conditions, and that in reference to their Ministry, least by their
declining in their own Spiritual estate, and their neglecting thereof, they
have no less influence on the fruitlessenesse of their Ministry, than by the
direct neglecting of proper ministerial duties.

From this also we may gather, in answer to the last Question, That no
personal corruption in joint worshippers* does pollute any of the Lords
Ordinances to another; or, on that account, necessitate a separation from them:
for, if the corruption of any had such influence, then it were especially the
corruption of Ministers; and if the corruption of Ministers did so, then it
were not to be thought that the Lord would have such; even after their
discovery, to be acknowledged still to be Ministers, which yet here and in the
former instances is clear. The Word and Sacraments administered by such, if
rightly received and improven, are owned by Him as His Word and Sacraments, as
well as when administered by the most Holy, as from the considering of the
forementioned instances may appear.

There are yet two particular Questions, which possibly may be desiderated by
some, to which we shall speak a word before we leave this Epistle. The first
is, by what symptoms a Minister may discern his own deadness while things seem
to go well with him in public? or, what may give him occasion to suspect
himself to be under such a charge, as is given against this Angel here? The
second is, What may be the means of a Ministers preventing of such a condition,
or, of recovering himself therefrom when fallen into it?

To the first, we say, that even when things go well in public before others,
a Ministers works may yet be liable to this charge of not being perfect before
God: and, we conceive, upon search within, and reflection upon himself, may be
discerned by these or such like symptoms, 1. When there is a decay or
lifelesnesse in his own particular condition, that is, when there is no
exercise of Repentance in himself as a Christian, nor freshness and
tenderness in communion with God in secret prayer and other Christian duties:
if in such a case he should preach as an Angel, yet cannt that be said to be
perfect before God. 2. In such a frame, a Minister ordinarily is not kindly
affected with the discharge of ministerial duties, nor with sympathy toward
the People; but he goes lightly under the burden of these, almost indifferent
what come of the fruit, if fairly and without any palpable discovery of his
infirmity such duties be put by. 3. Upon this it follows, that if there be
acceptance of the thing amongst the people, there is but too much quietness
in the Minister, without reflecting upon his own indisposition and
unsoundnesse, and without being taken up with the desire of fruitfulness among
the people. This is suspicious-like, when a Minister so acts in ministerial
duties, as if there were no more called-for, than the throughing of what is
public before m^n. 4. S^mething of this may be gathered from the scope and
strain of his Doctrine, that is, if there be any secret aiming to commend
himself by such Doctrine, or, if of its own nature it seem to tend more to
that, than to edify and feed the souls of Hearers. 5. If his own gift and
present acceptance among the people be well satisfying to him, so as he be
under little fear of sitting up, and if he be unfrequent and cold in adresses
to God for liveliness and success: these and such like things look not well.
6. Somewhat may be perceived by Ministers inclination to converse with
unserious untender men though they be civil; and to keep up general discourses
and questions with them, rather than to converse with such as are tender, and
love to have their exercises and practical cases for the matter of their
discourse: it cannot be well when it is so. 7. It is not right with a Minister,
however it be in the exercise of his gift, when he is not walking under the
impression of sinful defects, and unsinglenesse and want of zeal as to his end
and manner of carrying on the most commendable-like duties: for as it is no
good token in a private Christian to be without the impression of his own
corruptions and sinful infirmities; so it cannot be right with a Minister when
his ministerial defects are not sensible to him: and when there is not an
actual exercise with the selfishnesse, carnalnesse, vanity, etc. that are in
him, it is too like these have too much sway with them.

Now, to the second, to wit, What a Minister ought to do in such a case for
recovering of himself? Answ. The reading of this Epistle seriously will indeed
satisfy this: which we may draw out in these directions, 1. It Is necessary
that a Minister observe his own condition, and take notice of the sinfulness
and hazard thereof: this is implied in the word remember, verse. 3. and indeed
who comes to ponder and consider rightly their own condition, are in a fair
way of recoverie. 2. There will be a putting of every thing right that
belongs to a Christian: oftentimes decaying in Christianity, brings on this
deadness in the Minister: and therefore there can be no better mean of
recoverie than once to put the soul in a right posture in this respect. 3. It
will further this much, that he begin with the serious exercise of Repentance of
what is past, and that as to the defects that cleave to him both as a Christian
and as a Minister: this makes the beginning of a recovery to be solid.
Therefore it is commanded, verse. 3. 4. There would be special care had in the
doing of ministerial duties, that not only they be done, but that they be done
in a right manner: that so every thing be done as in the sight of God, with an
eye to this, that it may be found perfect before him. This is in the word be
watchful, and employed under this Angels charge of not having his works perfect
before God. 5. There would be zeal and carfulness in the begetting and
keeping of life and liveliness among the people, as in himself: and for that
cause, a doing of every thing with respect to that end. This was the Angels
fault in his deadness, to wit, the neglecting of this, and it is commanded to
him, to strengthen what was ready to die, as a thing befitting his recovery.
This is in a condescending way to seek to feed the people with what is
profitable, though thereby a Minister should seem to some to lose of his name
and reputation. 6. There is need in all things to be denied, and to exercise
faith in Him that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars also,
without which there is no attaining to liveliness: and for this end does the
Lord so describe Himself in the Inscription of this Epistle. Much dependence on
Him, walking with Him, standing in His counsel, etc. and that in the meanest
particular steps of any ministerial duty, as not daring to undertake any
thing without Him, and so an acknowledging of Him in His grace, as to the fruit
of every thing, This is a very fountain of the life of a Minister

LECTURE II.
Verse. 7. And unto the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, write, These things
says he that is holy, he that is true, he that has the key of David, he that
opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens;

8. I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man
can shut it: for thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have
not denied my name.

9. Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan (which say they are
Jews, and are not, but do lie) behold, I will make them to come and worship
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the hour of tentation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that
dwell upon the earth.

11. Behold, I come quickly, hold that fast which thou have, that no man take
thy crown.

12. Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the
name of the city of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down out
of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name.

13. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.


THis sixth Epistle, directed to Philadelphia, has the same Division with the
rest, to wit, the Inscription, verse. 7. the Body of the Epistle, verse. 8, 9,
10, 11. and the Conclusion, verse. 13.

In the Inscription, the Lord, the directer of this Epistle, does set forth
Himself in these three, 1. He that is holy. 2. He that is true: these are two
essential Attributes of the Godhead, and show that our Lord Jesus is God. And
He takes these styles to Himself in this place, that, 1. He may show unto this
honest Church, that their honesty could not but be approven of Him, who was
holiness it self. And, 2. to strengthen their Faith in the expectation of the
performance of His promises, however they looked improbable-like, because He
who made them is true, and truth it self. The third Title, is, He that has the
key of David, he that opens, and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man
opens: This respects His Office, and holds Him forth as the great Steward
of the House of God, who is entrusted with the mannagement of what concerns
the same, and is invested with Power and Authority suitable thereunto. It
alludeth to Isa. 22.20, 21, 22, etc. where the Lord, speaking of His preferring
Eliakim unto the government of Jerusalem and Judah, does express it thus, And
the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder: So, He shall open,
and none shall shut, and He shall shut, and none shall open. Now this, as
attributed here to Christ, is not to be understood principally of His essential
and absolute Dominion as God: for, that cannot be called the key of the house
of David; but it is to be understood of His Mediatorie Kingdom, whereby He, as
Mediator, is invested with Power and Authority for ordering the affairs of the
house of God. And as it stands in this verse, it does hold forth, 1. That
Christ Jesus, as Mediator, has a peculiar oversight and Government of the
Church. 2. That in this Dominion of Christ's, is fulfilled the promise of
perpetuating the power of the house of David: therefore it is called the key of
the house of David, which is committed to Him. 3. Here is held forth the
Soveraignity and absoluteness of Christ's Dominion: therefore He shuts, and
no man opens; and opens, and no man shuts: there is no marring of any of
His orders: for, He having obtained this Name above every Name by Gods exalting
of Him thereunto, Philip. 2.9. there can be no imaginable competition with Him
in the exercise of this Power. 4. This being compared with the former two
titles, does show that He who is entrusted with the supreme Government of the
Church, is God: He, is holy and true, and therefore can do no wrong to any, nor
fail in the performance of what He promises: which is of great consolation to
His People. This, lastly, is here mentioned, to encourage and strengthen this
honest weak Angel and Church against the many difficulties which they had to
wrestle with, as we will find in the Body of the Epistle.

This Angel and Church, it is like have been before others, far from that
estimation that Sardis was in: for, they have but a little strength, and many
enemies; yet were they much more honest and commendable before God, and
fruitful under the Ordinances they had: therefore the Lord indites a most
comfortable Epistle unto them.

In the Body of the Epistle, we have these three things, 1. Their present
condition, is in several respects described. 2. Their commendation is laid
down. 3. Some excellent encouragements and directions are given them for the
time to come. These three being interwoven, we must open them as they lie.

Beside this general, I know thy works: which, though common to all the rest of
the Epistles in some respect, yet may be taken here as holding forth His
particular approbation of this Church, because there is nothing quarrelled in
her. This will not indeed prove that she was altogether free; but that, being
honest and free of gross faults, the Lord does not rigidly reckon with her.
Besides this, I say, in the 8. verse. this Churches good condition is set forth
in these four, 1. Behold I have set before thee an open door, and no man can
shut it: this is the fountain of all that is commendable in her, and from which
it does flow, to wit, Christ's conferring such a mercy upon her: and this is a
main encouragement premitted for the strengthening of the honest Angel of this
Church. For understanding of it, we must consider, 1. What is meant by an open
door. 2. What by Christ's setting of it before the Angel, so as no man can shut
it. By an open door usually is understood in the Scripture the Lords making way
for profitable preaching of the Gospel, which stands not mainly in having
access and liberty, without any external restraint, to preach the Gospel; but
especially it stands in Gods giving inward liberty to the Preacher, and in His
countenancing of the Word, and making it effectual and successful upon the
hearts of Hearers. This is called, Colos. 4.3. A door of utterance, when a
Minister is not straightened in preaching the Gospel, but, as it were, the door is
casten open to him. And, 2 Cor. 2, 12. When I came to Troas to preach Christ's
Gospel, and a door was opened unto me of the Lord: which is some special
signification of Gods sending him and removing of difficulties out of the way,
and making his Ministry succesefull there, And, 1 Cor. 16.9. it is said, a
great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries,
So, that there may be an effectual door opened, even where there is much
opposition. In sum, it imports these two or three, 1. That there is a
straitnednesse in Ministers who cannot bring forth the Gospel as it ought to be
brought forth, and will when the Lord sends forth the Spirit and enlarges a
man with boldness to speak the same: in this respect, a door of utterance is
opened unto him, as in that place, Col. 4.3. is clear. 2. That there is a
further let beside this, to wit, when the ears and hearts of Hearers are so
locked up that the Word has no entrance, but is repelled. The Lord opens
this door, when by the work of His Spirit upon hearts, as upon the heart of
Lydia, He does make the Word to be received and admitted: in which respect, (2 Thessalonians. 3.1.) Paul desires them to pray that the Word may have free course,
that is, that there be no shut doors to mar the progress of the same. Both
these are understood here, to wit, liberty for the Minister to speak, and that
with countenance and success among the People. We conceive also that this
phrase of an open door, does take in a concurring of Gods providence, for the
keeping of the Word ministered, and Ordinances in such a place in both the
respects that are mentioned, notwithstanding of the numerousnesse and
maliciousness of opposers: and this agrees well with that word, in this
verse, and no man shall shut it. And this may be a third thing imported in this
expression, though it be not of the same kind with the former two every way.

By Christ's setting open of this door before the Angel, so that none can shut
it, is holden forth, 1. Christ's supreamacie and sovereignty in giving Gifts to
men, liberty and inward freedom to improve them, and also a blessing upon them
in making of them succesefull. It is not Gifts, by which a man will be able to
Preach, if the Lord'give not a door of utterance; yea, even the great Apostle
Paul has need of this, Col. 4.3. nor is it the having of utterance that will
obtain fruits among the people, if the Lord do not open an effectual door, and
give the Word free course among them. Hence it is, that sometimes where there
is most utterance given, there may be less success than where there are fewer
Gifts: because he, whose privilege it is to set open doors, does open more
fully the door of utterance to the one, and the effectual door to the other,
and does not open both equally to all. 2. This imports the necessity and
inevitableness of success: when Christ thus opens the door, Success cannot
but follow: and no man, or devil can shut out or impede the same, when He
pleases to countenance His Ministers, and to commend the Word to the hearts of
hearers. Now, it may appear what the meaning of this part of the verse is,
which relates especially to the Angel, to wit, I have called thee to this
Ministry, and have given thee some measure of utterance, though thou have not
much ability, and especially, I have ordered matters so as the Word from thee
shall have free course and success. And, rage who will, this shall not be
obstructed. By which also we may see why the Lord took the Title to Himself,
that does immediately go before this.

The second thing in the verse, is, for thou have a little strength: by little
strength here, is not to be understood weakness in Grace; (for, that is
eminently commended) nor yet little countenance in the discharge of Ministerial
duties, But it looks to his parts and abilities, which, its like, were not
many and great in comparison of what others had, that is, it may be he was not
able to speak of, nor search into so many profound mysteries, and follow
doubtful disputations, as others were in capacity to do. This is not mentioned
here as any ground of opprobrie to him, nor yet as any ground of commendation,
being considered simply and in it self; but it is mentioned for these two
reasons, which being put together, will clear the scope. 1. It is given as a
ground of Christ's opening the door before him, and as an evidence that what
success he had, was to be attributed to His countenancing of him, because thou
thy self have but a little strength. And this shows, that as oftentimes
Christ is most tender to the weak Believers; so also to the weak Ministers,
that are yet sent by Him, and honest in the discharge of their Commission. 2.
It is mentioned here to heighten the commendation that follows, to wit, that
though thou have a little strength, yet thou have kept my Word. It is the
joining of these two together, that shows wherefore this is here taken notice
of.

The third and fourth expressions, which most expressly hold forth the
commendation, are, Thou have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name: by
keeping of the Word here, is not only understood the keeping of purity in
Doctrine; but especially these two, 1. A keeping it in practice, by being
conform thereto in their walk. 2. An avowed Preaching of the Truth by the
Minister, and his adhering to and owning of the same in his station,
notwithstanding of all the reproaches which he met with: for the scope,
relating especially to the Minister, ^his keeping of the Word must implie also
something peculiar to him, which is commonly expressed in the Old Testament by
this Word of keeping the Lords charge. The last word, thou have not denied my
Name, is to the same purpose; but does import more than is asserted, to wit,
that notwithstanding of the many trials thou have met with, yet thou not only
have not faintly denied my name; but have openly and confidently avowed and
confessed the same. And these two, being compared with a little strength which
this Angel had, do make the evidences and commendation of his honesty the more
wonderful. In the 9, and 10. verses, the Lord g^veth two special encouragements
unto them, having also some testimony of their bygone integrity included in
them. It is like this honest Church, has been under a twofold persecution, (as
we have seen in some of the former Epistles) 1. From the corrupt and
unbelieving, Jews, who, having Synagogues in many places, did prove great
persecuters and reproachers of the Name of Christ, and His Worshippers: This
the Lord does encourage them against, in the 9. verse. 2. From heathens: in
reference to which, He comfort them, verse. 10.

The Consolation, which is laid down, verse. 9. does express these three,

1. There is a description of these corrupt Jews, they are said to be of the
synagogue of Satan, who say they are Jews and are not, but do lie, that is,
they indeed call themselves Jews, and children of Abraham, and Gods Covenanted
people, etc. but they do lie, it is not so, for now they being broken off by
their unbelief, are truly of the synagogue of Satan, and followers of him, as
we expounded it, chap. 2. verse. 9.

2. There is the promise which the Lord makes to this Church, I will make them
to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee. In
sum, it is this, these corrupt Jews do now calumniate thee, as if thou were not
of my Church nor beloved by me; but, faith be, by my inward Power I will so
move and incline them, as they shall willingly come and worship before thy
feet, and know indeed that I have loved thee.

The words of the promise may be two ways understood, and we conceive that
both come well in here, 1. They may be understood of sincere conversion; and so
the meaning is, I will convert many of these blasphemers, and, as an evidence
thereof, make them come and worship before thy feet, that is, really Worship
God in the Assembly with thee, like that word, Isa. 60.14. The sons also of
them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and they that despise
thee, shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call
thee, the city of the Lord, the holy one of Israel. And in this expression, the
Prophets scope, is, to foretell the conversion of the Gentiles in the days of
the Gospel. The word in the first language, is, I will give them, etc. which
does express more significantly both the nature of this work as to the Angel;
(it is a very excellent and singular gift to him to have blasphemers made
converts) and also it shows the (...) hereof, it being a Gift of Christ's
Grace. This we conceive is to be taken as a part of the meaning: And is clear,
1. from the scope, which is to show the fruit of Christ's keeping the door open
before this Minister for his encouragement, to wit, His making the Word
powerful for the captivating of gainsayers unto the obedience of Christ. 2. The
word added, and they shall know that I have loved thee, seems to import
something of a kindly principle acting them in this.

Again, 2. The words may be understood as holding forth a fained submission of
many unto the Ordinances of Christ; who from Christ's clear owning of His Church
shall be made, being as it were astonished, to acknowledge the same, and to
say, doubtless God is among such a people of a truth, as it is, 1 Corinthians.
14.25. And this being a promise made to the Church, as a piece of her splendour
and happiness, that her enemies shall lie, or give fained obedience unto her,
Deuteronomy. 33. 29. and a thing also that does tend to the evidencing of the Lords
respect to His Church, we take it in under this promise likewise. So the
meaning will be, I will give some of these Jews as real converts unto thee, and
others of them shall be so far convinced of My respect to thee, as shall make
them counterfit in their profession, and give thee some reverence also: for, if
there were not some converts, the promise would not be so great as it is; yet,
it cannot be expected that this reality should be universal amongst these
corrupt Jews. And according to the former exposition, these words which follow,
and to know that I have loved thee, are two waye^ also to be understood, to
wit, either of such a Spiritual discerning of the saving effects of Gods love
to such a people, which begets a charitable persuasion in them of the
sincerity of such and such persons; or, it is to be understood of some common
and general conviction, flowing from some outward evidences of Gods favor,
which often is in many hypocrites.

The third thing in the verse, is, the Lords making this promise so observable,
both by doubling and repeating the same; and also by prefixing a behold at
every time thereunto: which shows, 1. That the thing is most rare which is
here promised, ^o wit, to have blasphemers made converts. 2. That it is a most
excellent favor to a Minister or Church when such a mercy is bestowed. And, 3.
that although it be difficult-like; yet in this case it is sure, seeing for the
confirmation of the says of this Church the Lord has repeated the same.

The encouragement in reference to the other persecution follows, verse. 10.
Wherein, 1. there is a common trial foretold. 2. There is a promise made to
them in reference to the same. And, 3. some ground, as it were a reason of this
promise, is premitted, verse.. 10.

The trial which is foretold, is ^everal ways set forth. 1. It is called a
ventation. It is usual in Scripture to style affliction by the name of
^entation, as I^m. 1.2. Count it all joy when ye fall in diverse ^entations; and
so also, verse. 11. The reason is, because such afflictions want never many
circumstances waiting upon them, which do indeed make them to be tentations:
and so ^ther men are tried by them, or, through their own corruption, snared
upon such occasions. 2. It is an hour of tentation: to signify both the
definitnesse and shortness thereof: which does carry an encouragement in the
bosom of it. 3. It is a trial which shall come upon all the world: By world
here, is not to be understood the Heathen world, as contradistinct from the
Church, for, that world is not the object of such trials; but is isntrumental
therein: it is then the Church spread up and down throughout the world, They
shall be tried. And usually it was so, when persecution was moved by the
Heathen Emperors, it spread through all the corners of the world, where any
part of the Church was. 4. The end thereof, is, to try them that dwell upon the
earth, that is, the Saints that live upon the earth; and so earth here, is not
contradistinguished from the Church simply; but thereby the Church militant is
contradistinguished from the Church-triumphant. For, the privilege of
Philadelphia is not, that she shall be kept from ills that are common to the
men of the world; but this, that when the Church should be under persecution
generally, the Lord should secretly and tenderly preserve her from the weight
of that trial, that others were to meet with: which is the second thing to be
considered in the verse.

The promise, in reference to this trial, which is made to Philadelphia, is in
these words, I will also keep thee from the hour of tentation, etc. It may two
ways be understood, 1. As being a promise to keep her from any prejudice by
that trial, though she might meet with the same: this is indeed truth; but
cannot be said to be a peculiar privilege to Philadelphia: for, all the Lords
people might plead and expect that, and yet some peculiar thing seems to be
holden out as to Philadelphia in this promise. Therefore, 2. we understand it
thus, when others shall be under persecution, thou shall either be altogether
free from that particular trial, which is to come; or, at least in a great
measure shall be kept from the extremities that others t^ereby shall be put
unto. And in this respect, the promise bears something peculiar to
Philadelphia: and therefore cannot be made use of by others as a ground to
expect freedom from temporal crosses, except there be the like warrant to
apply the same.

The last thing in the verse, (though it be first in order) is the ground to
which the Lord does knit this promise, Because thou have kept the word of my
patience, I also will keep thee, etc. The word of Christ's patience, is the
Gospel: called so, 1. because usually the cross follows it, and the
Professors thereof have need of patience. 2. Because it is the great
Schoolmaster that teatheth the exercise of patience: for which reasons, it is
also called the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, chap. ^. verse. 9. Their
keeping of this word of His patience, does import their owning of, and adhering
to, this Gospel with much patience under many crosses and much persecution and
so this connection does not imply any merit in them procuring this peculiar
privilege; but does express Christ's tenderness, and, to say so, His
condescending equity in His proceeding, who, seeing this Church had a little
strength, and yet had born out more steadfastly and patiently under many former
trials, than others who might be of greater abilities; Therefore, out of His
tenderness, He now promises to keep them free in a peculiar manner from a
coming storm.

The last thing in the Body of the Epistle, is the advertisement, verse. 11.
which has these three, 1. An assertion of Christ's coming, and that quickly,
Behold I come quickly: which shows, that though he seem now to be absent, and
to delay His coming; yet it will be found otherwise. It is said to be quickly,
1. Because it is not long in comparison with Eternity. 2. Because it will be
sudden to enemies. 3. It will be seasonable to friends. It will not be one hour
behind the due time: and therefore may be said to be quickly. 4. He is for the
present hasting, and, to say so, making dispatch of what is to precede His
coming; and so may be said to be coming quickly. This is here mentioned as a
ground of encouragement to the Angel to continue steadfast upon the one side,
and as a watchword to scare them from declining on the other, seeing Christ was
to come to Judgment, and that shortly. The second word, is, a direction, hold
that fast which thou have: which is in sum, ye are in a good condition now, be
diligent to retain the same, as the like expression was expounded, Chap. 2.25.
The third thing, is, a warning added to this direction, hold fast, etc. that no
man take thy Crown: in sum it is this, thou art now in a royal condition, thy
honesty is thy Crown before Me and others, and it has a promise of a Crown
after this: therefore be diligent and steadfast, lest by your declining ye be
prejudged of your Crown. It alludeth to running amongst men, where they that
sit up in the way, though having for a time run well, yet obtain not the Crown,
because some other outstrips them, and obtains the same: here the scope only,
is, to show that these who sit up in the practice of Christianity, shall as
surely be deprived of the Crown of Glory; and it is here added, to show how the
Lord adds spurs to His most faithful servants for preventing of their
falling.

The first part of the Conclusion, (for we shall say nothing of the second) is,
verse. 12. comprehending five privileges to the overcomer. The first is, I will
make him a pillar in the Temple of my God: by the Temple of my God, must be
here understood Heaven, and so, to be made a pillar, is to be fixed there in
Heaven, as a Trophee of the Victory of Jesus Christ, and as singularly and
eminently fitted for, furnished with, and fixed in the glory that is there.
For, 1. The properties that follow, will show that this can only be understood
of Heaven. 2. Thus also it can only agree with all the other promises that are
made to the overcomer, which principally relate to Heaven. 3. There is no other
thing that can be expected by every overcomer but Heaven.

The second thing, is, he shall go no more out: the access that Believers have
to Gods company and Temple here has interruptions; and the Believer is again
soon down from any mount where Christ may be transfigured before him: but
(faith the Lord) when I shall make him a pillar in the Temple of my God, and
settle him in Heaven, there shall no more be any interruption of communion,
either by Gods hiding of Himself upon the one side, or from the Believers
whoreing from Him upon the other; but he shall be by the powerful grace of God
established there, and shall go no more out. And this is added as a special
consolation to the Believer that is weary of his own gading and whoreing from
God; that there is a time coming when that shall be broken off, and he shall go
no more out.

The third step, is, and I will write upon him the name of my God: pillars that
were erected as monuments of honor, were honorable according to the name or
inscription that was written upon them: Now, there can be none more honorable
than to have the Name of God written upon them, and to be devoted to Him. We
concieve also, it implies a sharing and partaking of the glory of God in some
measure, as a poor creature is able to partake of the same.

The fourth thing, is, and the name of the city of my God, which is New
Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God. We must understand, 1.
What is meaned by this New Jerusalem, before it can be understood what it is to
bear its Name. By the New Ieru^alem and city of my God, we understand one of
two, either, 1. Heaven, which in the seat of the Church Triumphant, called here
the New Jerusalem, because it so far does exceed the splendour and beauty of
the Church, or Jerusalem, here upon earth: and it is said to come down from
Heaven, because by the preaching of the Gospel the Kingdom of God is brought
near, even to the door. Or, 2. The congregation of the firstborn that are
already perfected in Heaven, called the New Jerusalem, because though they be
of that same Church of Christ, yet are they in respect of their glorious
qualifications and perfections, as it were, a new Church. And thus it is said
to come down from Heaven, not so much to signify any local mutation, as to
show where it is for the time: and that their original, as such, is from God.
Both these turn to one, and show that by this promise is understood, that the
overcomer shall be admitted as a free Burgess and Citizen to glory amongst the
rest of the Congregation of the firstborn. And thus to have the name thereof
written upon the overcomer, is to have Him, as it were, declared a free
Burgess and Citizen of that glorious Incorporation. That it is thus to be
understood of Heaven, and not of any state of the Church upon earth, the
reasons before mentioned do evince. Beside, it is a promise that is to be
performed to every overcomer, and that after his full Victory here; and so
consequently after his death: and therefore can be understood of no other thing
but Heaven.

The last thing, is, and I will write upon him my new name: the Mediators new
name, is, the exaltation which He has received after His Resurrection and
complete Victory, as is clear, Philip. 2.9. The writting of this upon the
overcomer, is, the making of Him a joint sharer of that His Glory; and so to
sit upon one Throne with Himself, and eat and drink at one Table with Him, and
to behold His Glory, as Himself does pray, Ioh. 17.22, 23, 24. the due and
proportionable difference being always kept betwixt the head and members. Now,
put these together, and so the overcomer shall be glorious in himself: For, so,
1. He shall be a pillar. 2. He shall partake of the glory of God, and have His
Name upon him. 3. He shall partake of the glory of Heaven and the Saints that
are there already. 4. He shall partake of the Mediators Glory and bear His new
Name: and what more can be imagined? Thus the Lord shall be admired in all that
believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. in that day when every Believer shall be as a Trophee
erected to the glory of the grace of God, and for a memorial of the love that
our blessed Lord Jesus had unto, and of the Victory He obtained for elect
sinners by His redeeming of them.

It rests now that we observe somethings further from this Epistle beside what
is already hinted: wherein it is not our purpose to insist.

Observe, 1. There is difference betwixt gifts requisite to the being of a
Minister, and success by the exercise of these in the Ministry. There is here
a little strength, that respects the first; and an open door, which
respects the second: and these two are distinguished one from another. And
thus we will find throughout Paul's Epistles, that difference is made betwixt
his liberty to Preach upon the one side, and Gods opening an effectual door to
him upon the other. 2. We see that Christ is the giver of both, to wit, of
gift^ to Ministers, and of success among the People. 3. We see that he
distributeth not to all alike; but an open door is set before some, more than
before others, and when not at all before others, as by comparing this and
other Epistles together is clear.

It may be asked here, 1. What way a Minister may know if an effectual door be
opened to him amongst the People, seeing Paul sometimes afferteth the same? 2.
How: Minister, having such an opportunity, ought to carry in the improving
thereof?

To the first we say, that this cannot be discerned alanerly from a man's gift:
for, it may be shut where great gifts are, as we will see hereafter. Beside, it
is like Paul had not always this door open to him, at least it was more in one
place than another. Nor is it merely to be gathered from a man's freedom from
external crosses in a place, nor yet from the great following he may have:
for, there may be many adversaries where this effectual door is opened, 1 Cor.
16.4. and there may be no such thing, where there is great peace and applause.
Yet, we conceive by these and such like characters, this may be somewhat
discernable, 1. When a Minister gets the door of utterance upon the one side
opened to him, and there is an opening of ears among the People to welcome the
same upon the other: which is not to be understood of carnal itching after, or
being tickled with a gift; but of love to edification, and simplicity and
diligence amongst them: which shows that such a man and his gift is commended
to them; and so that they are in the greater capacity to get good of him. 2.
Where this is, it has real changes following, and much solid work: for, by it
people are not made light, and notionall, but are made humble, serious, tender,
fruitful, etc. 3. Where such a door is opened, the devil often rages, and
sets himself to oppose, traduce, or some way to blast the Ministry of such
a person more than of many others. This poor Angel has much affliction, when
the Ministers in Sardis and La^dicta are free. And so when an effectual door
is opened to Paul at Ephesu^, this is added, that there are many adversaries, 1
Cor. 16. Yet, even under such afflictions there are many trysts of providence
to be marked in the Lords way, for countenancing (...) Ministry, and many
evidences of respect to the same from such as are tender. 4. It is a good token
of an open door, when some way observably the Lord defeateth the devil and
pr^fanity in a place, and is making him fall like lightning from heaven by the
Preaching of the Word. 5. The experimental proof that is most sure, is an
actual gaining of ground upon the kingdom of the devil, and a bringing off of
prisoners unto Jesus Christ: which is the proof given here, where God promises
new converts; and is ever supposed by Paul, when he mentions this door.

Now to the second, to wit, how a Minister ought to use such an opportunity? We
say, 1. it is to be improven with all diligence in his duty, as a man that is
to reap corn that is already ripe. 2. It is to be made use of with all
humility and selfdenial, left by being tikled therewith he prejudge the Master
of His Glory, and so procure straitning to himself. 3. It would be with much
fear and watchfulness: with fear, lest he himself miscarrie; or any soul
miscarrie in the birth, because of his unskilfulnesse: with watchfulness, lest
the devil saw cares while he is sleeping; and the conception prove false
without realitie as to many hearers. This is Paul's word, 1 Corinthians. 2.3. I was
amongst you in much weakness, and in much fear and trembling, which shows
the kindly impression which he had, both of his own and the peoples
infirmities. 4. It would be improven zealously, that is, so as the Authority of
Christ may appear upon His Ordinances both to adversaries and friends. 5. It
would be made use of (to say so) solidly, by making the foundation sure, by
proposing solid food to souls, as the substantial Gospel Truths, and the
uncontroverted duties of holiness: for, there is hazard too soon to bring such
a people to the new wine of the most sublime things in Doctrine, or the most
extraordinary practices of grown Christians: and it is better that they be fed
upon milk, and what is healthful and nourishing, than that to please their
appetites, they be diverted with useless Questions. 6. There would be much
dependence upon God in such a case: for He is the Master, and has appointed a
great Steward over the house who has the keys laid upon His shoulder: and the
Minister in such a case, would know that he has no Tack or Lease of such a
condition, but is at the Masters pleasure: and therefore he would be
acknowledged in every step of the Work as it is done, or in doing. Lastly, The
great shot of all Preaching would be driven constantly, both in public and
private, to wit, the edification and salvation of the people, and the forming
of Christ in them by traveling, as it were, in birth for that effect. Obs. 4.
Sometimes there may be greater success unto mean Gifts, by Christ's
countenancing the same, than where Gifts are in themselves more eminent and
shining: the reason is, because, for the attaining of success, it is not only
necessary to have the exercise of a Gift; but also to have a door opened to
them by Christ: and these two are sometimes separated, as was formerly said.
And by so doing, the Lord would teach Ministers, to know their own
insufficiency for any such thing; and also necessitate both Ministers and
People to the acknowledgement of Him. There is a notable instance of the Power
of mean Gifts beyond greater abilities in the History of the Council of Nice,
wherein a subtle Philosopher who had long kept the Assembly jangling with
disputes, at last by a man of small parts (in respect of others who had been
disputing) was convinced by the simple propounding of the Truth of the Gospel,
which he closed thus, this is the Truth of God, Philosopher, believes thou
this? Who answered, he did. Then said the honest confessor (for so is he styled
by the Author) If so, then follow me, and be baptized: unto which the
Philosopher yielded, as if he had never learned to gainsay; expressing these
words to the hearers, and especially to some other Philosophers that were with
him, so long as I was dealt with by words, I did repel words with words, but
when power proceeded with words out of the mouth of him that spoke, I was not
able, said he, to resist that: and thereupon instantly went out to be baptized.
At first all the Doctors were affrighted that the Truth should have suffered;
and therefore hardly gave way to him to speak; yet did that simplicity prevail
by Gods blessing to the conviction and conversion of the Philosopher, when all
these Scholastic debates did not. This is recorded by Russinus in the third
Chapter of his book, which is the first added by him to Eusebius his
Ecclesiastic History. Obs. 5. That some men of mean and small Gifts or Parts,
and who are not able to do much by writing or disputing against subtle
adversaries; do yet often prove more steadfast adherers to Truth in times of
pesecution, than others who in the former respects have gone far beyond them,
and have been of greater esteem as friends to Truth, both with themselves and
others. This Angels strength was not much; but his steadfastness and patience
under affliction was great. Worthy Perkins, on the place, gives a memorable
instance of this in the time of the persecution under Queen Marie of England,
to wit, that there was an honest man of mean Parts and no great esteem, near to
Cambridge, who did seal the Truth with his blood, when all the great Scholars
and Doctors of that Universitie did miserably and shamefully make defection
from the same. Obs. 6. That oftentimes an honest Minister with mean Gifts, has
more countenance and success in his Ministry than where greater Gifts without
honesty are, as by comparing this Angel with the Angels of Sardis and Laodicea
in this same Chapter is clear. For (to say no more) he has this advantage,
that his works may be found perfect before God, wherein the others cannot but
be defective. Obs. 7. That a little measure of Gifts, being honestly and
faithfully improven, have their commendation from Jesus Christ, as if they were
of the highest measure and degree: because it is not Gifts that commends a
Minister to Christ, but faithfulness in improving the measure which he has:
and so if two talents be faithfully improven, it will be said, well done to
that servant, and he will be called faithful, even as well as he, who had five,
or even ten talents, bestowed upon him. And if this were well considered,
Ministers might be less anxious for the measure of their Gifts, and more
provoked to be serious and faithful in their improving of the same. Obs. 8.
That it is a special mercy, even to be kept from the common trials that
others meet with: there is much mercy in Gods peoples being kept free from
ills, that otherwise they might be over-mastered with: and it is not by chance
or fortune, that the lot of one Church or Person is more easy than the lot of
others; but this comes from the Lords overruling Providence, keeping them
from that hour of tentation, which in His wisdom is ordered for others; who is
therefore humbly and thankfully to be acknowledged in the same. Obs. 9. That
steadfastness in honesty and faithful adherence to Christ and His Truth, do
never of themselves involve a people in trials and afflictions; but, in Gods
good providence, do often prevent the same: therefore this honest and zealous
Church, is kept from a coming storm, which was to try all the world beside.
Obs. 10. That it is not impossible to God to make open blasphemers real
converts, and that sometimes He has actually done and does the same. Obs. 11.
That when He does this, it is one of the rarest Gifts that can be bestowed upon
a Church, and one of the greatest confirmations that an honest Minister can
meet with in his Ministry; and, in the usual dispensation of Gods Providence,
does attend a Ministers honest, zealous and faithful discharge of his duty in
simplicity. Therefore both Ministers and People would not only be animated and
encouraged to pray for the same; but also to love and follow honest simplicity
and faithfulness, as the most suitable and probable way for attaining the same.
Obs. 12. That as usually true conversion to God and sincere love to the Saints
go together, so also is it found in experience that the more bitterness has
been against the Ordinances, Saints or Servants of our Lord Jesus, There will
be, if conversion be true, the more full and manifest testimonies of respect
showed to them, even often beyond what are showed from these that have been
formerly sincere. Obs. 13. That profane men before their conversion, do not
look upon honest simple and Godly followers of God, as so beloved of Him as
indeed they are. Obs. 14. It is a good token when men are brought in
sincerity, to acknowledge, that it is neither the great men, nor the wise and
learned men of the world that are beloved of God; but only the Godly, and all
such, whatever their place or parts be. Obs. 15. The right impression of
Godliness in a Person or Church, is not to conceive such and such to be more
deserving than others; but to be more beloved of God: which is the great
fountain of all the rest.

Concerning Ministerial qualifications.
IF we will compare the Angels of these three Churches in this Chapter
together, we will find great difference: these of Sardis and Laodicea, it is
like, had many gifts, which made the first get a name from others, and the last
to esteem of himself; yet has none of them a great commendation for grace, but
the contrary; He of Sardis had a name, but was dead, and his works (what ever
they appeared to men) were not perfect before God: what he of Laodicea was,
that Epistle also will clear. And for fruit, the Angel of Sardis has little,
but a few names; and it is like he of Laodicea had less or none at all. The
Angel of Philadelphia again, is in all these three contrary: he has few parts,
but a little strength; yet has a good testimony of honesty and success.
Whence may we not only gather, 1. That there are different measures of gifts
amongst Ministers. And, 2. That some are more honest than others And, 3. That
the most honest have often the meanest gifts in appearance; and who have
greatest gifts, often are least conscionable in the improving of them. And, 4.
That a sincere honest Minister may have very mean gifts, either considered in
themselves, or as being compared with others; and yet may be more faithful in
improving of them, be more accepted of by Jesus Christ with his small measure,
and have more fruits and greater success, than others of more shining gifts
without tenderness in their walk: But we may also have occasion to enquire,
what qualifications are requisite in a Minister of the Gospel? and
particularly, if Learning be any way useful to a Minister? or, if it be not
rather hurtful, seeing weak Philadelphia is so commanded, when others are
reproved? or, if grace ought to be reckoned amongst ministerial qualifications?
There are here extrems, some giving too much to Learning, and too little to
Grace, and others doing the contrary. These are not then to be looked on as
inconsistent; but as agreeing well together: for, it is not the Angel of Sardis
his reproof, that he had a name or gifts; but that he was unanswerable to them:
nor is it Philadelphia's commendation, that he had a little strength; but that
he improved well that little which he had: otherwise, one talent may be hid and
abused as well as five. To speak a word therefore to the thing, we conceive
that these three are necessary for the complete qualifying of a Minister, or,
of one of the Ministry, to wit, 1. Gifts. 2. Learning. 3. Grace. The second
helps to manage the first; the third sanctifies both, and makes them lavell
at the right end and mark. Yet take these advertisements, 1. That there are
degrees in all these, and that we intend not to stint to any rigid measure or
degree in any of them. 2. That although they be necessary; yet not equallynor
after the same manner, the first two being necessary to the esse, or being of
ministerial qualifications; the last belonging to the beue esse, or to the
well and integrall being thereof, as will afterward appear.

By gifts, we understand a fitness given of God, whereby one is capacitated
for such a Calling: and although by improving, it may increase; yet we conceive
that it is in it self no acquired thing simply, but is like a Stock or a Talent
that is given to Trade with in such a Station: and therefore by no pains,
skill, or art, can be attained, where it is not given. Hence it is peculiarly
called a gift; and of Christ's giving, Ephesians. 4.12. 1 Cor. 12. and 14. 1 Timothy
4.14. and 2 Timothy 1.6. The Apostle comprehends it in that word (...), apt to
Teach, 1 Timothy 3. And we may take it up in these three, 1. A capacity to
discern and conceive of the things of God with some distinctnesse: if this be
not, there can be no progress to any other step; and this may be called the
gift of knowledge (as there is a word of knowledge which does suppose this
gift, 1 Cor. 12.) whereby one is able to take up the truths of the Gospel,
which every one is not: this is prayed for to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.7. not as to a
Christian simply, but as to a Minister. 2. It takes in a fitness to express
and bring forth, for the edification of others, what they have conceived
themselves: I called by the Apostle utterance, Col. 4.3,4. and he that has it,
(...). And it may be called the word of wisdom or knowledge, whereby one is
sitted profitably to speak to others: without which, no knowledge is
sufficient. 3. There is also comprehended in this gift, an energie, or
efficacy, which brings out things in another manner, and with another stamp
than the Rhetoric and eloquence of men can do. Hence the Word and Power in the
Preaching of the Gospel are distinguished, 1 Corinthians. 4.19. I will know, not
their word, but their power, (what the two great Divines Calvin, and Martyr say
on the place, is excellent to this purpose) and this, we conceive, is the main
differencing thing of ministerial gift, the former two being common to men of
all professions in some respect, but this is not. Hence many men may have much
knowledge, and be able by great eloquence to express it, and yet be far from
that power and life which a native ministerial gift has with it, as the
corrupt Teachers at Corinth, who abounded in humane eloquence, were: which (as
holy and Learned Mr. Boyd of Trochrege says) is to be tried, not ex done, or,
by the gift only; but, ex doni efficacia, or, by the efficacy of that gift in
the impression of it upon consciences. And, although this may be best known to
a spiritual ear, which can try and discern gifts, as the palate meats; yet is
the thing clear in Scripture, and often (as it is more and less) will be
acknowledged by natural Hearers; such as not a few of Christ's, and John the
Baptist's Hearers were, who yet notwithstanding discovered this power and
efficacy in their preaching, which they did not in the preaching of the Scribs
and Pharisees, Mat. 7.29. that is, when a preaching for matter and manner of
expressing exquisite, yet will less affect, and have less weight, than some
few words spoken thus in simplicity by another. This efficacy consists not
in natural servour and outcrying: there may be much of that, and little of
this, and contrarily: nor consists it in any mere exercise of art, in
disposing of the matter spoken, or choosing of taking expressions. These
things, it is true, when not affected, may have their own use; but otherwise
such affectation of words, may well draw men to admire the carrier, or love
their gift; but does not engage to esteem of Him that sends, and chiefly to
commend the matter that is spoken, to the conscience; which is the native rule
by which a true gift is discerned and squared. And we may consider it mainly in
these, 1. In its simple plainness, or plain simplicity, whereby the Truths of
God are proposed like themselves, having nothing mixed in to divert the hearer
from them; but they made as naked as can be to them, for their understanding of
them: this simplicity is often spoken of by the Paul, and is opposed to humane
eloquence, as in the Epistles to the Corinthians. 2. It consists in evidence
and demonstration, a gift whereby one is fitted convincingly to propose or
press such a thing, not so much doctrinally in drawing conclusions from
premises, as by leaving the impression of such a thing upon the conscience,
that it is bound with it: this is called the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit and Power, 1 Corinthians. 2.4. 3. There is a power and efficacy which
accompanies this, as to its effects: this makes threatenings so weighty, that
Paul will make Felix to tremble; and it makes promises sweet and persuasive,
so that Agrippa will almost be persuaded to be a Christian: this will make
(even the idiot or stranger (1 Corinthians. 14.) to say, Doubtless God is there.
And that is more than an ordinary discourse, even of such a subject, thus to
commend the Word and our selves to men's consciences in the fight of God; when
by his assistance, He makes the Gospel to triumph in every place, and to be a
sweet savor to Him in all, 2 Corinthians. 2.14. 4. This ministerial gift takes in
a seasonable way of speaking as to the time, occasion, hearers, etc. Thus it is
a gift of right dividing the Word of Truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. so as neither to
strengthen the wicked, nor to faint and make sad the righteous; but to lay
battery at the proud imaginations of natural men, for taking in of these
strong holds, and to pour oil in the wounds of exercised sinners, and that so,
as the one, may not by the Preachers fault, partake of the allowance, or be
wounded with the stroke that is designed for the other: this is indeed true
learning, to be able to condescend and make plain a word in season to the
weary, Isa. 50.4. and such a one, is a workman that needs not to be
ashamed. 5. There is in this gift a (...), or holy boldness and freedom,
whereby in an Authoritative way the Lords Word is spoken as it ought to be
spoken, such as is observed to be in the chief Pastor his Preaching, Matthew.
7.29. it is called ( Col.4.3. and 4.) a door of utterance, and a speaking as it
ought to be spoken; or, as it is, 1 Pet.4.11. as the oracles of God: so that in
less or more, this gift ought to have a stamp of the Majesty of God on it, as
His Word has in itself. And this rebuking with Authority, that none despise
this Ministry, is both often mentioned in Paul's practice, and recommended by
him to others, in the persons of Timothy and Titus: and it is like, something
of all has been in this Angel of Philadelphia. And this power is not any thing
physically and inseparably united to the man, or to his Preaching, but is in
him a fitness and dexrerity given of God, which He accompanies with a
singular impression by His Spirit ordinarily on the hearts and consciences of
hearers, thereby discovering it to be of Him.

For the second, to wit learning, what to say of it will be harder to decide,
seeing it has many several acceptions, as, 1. It may be taken for acquaintance
with Scripture, and with divine and heavenly things in it, or, for acquaintance
with humane literature, as knowledge of tongues, arts, sciences, etc. 2. We may
consider learning, either materially in it self, as it is a fitness which a
man has to reason for a Truth against an Error, to draw conclusions from
premises, to open hard places, or reconcile seeming contradicting places, and
to answer objections, etc. or we may consider it in the manner how men come by
this faculty, or acquire this fitness to understand tongues, to investigate
and search into difficulties, etc. and thereby come to be enabled to improve
the gift given, and to stir it up: which is either by an extraordinary
illumination, as the Apostles had it, and Prophets of old, without any mediate
pains or means; or by an ordinary and mediate way of reading, studying, and
learning of these by mediate helps, which may conduce for that end. Now, in
answer we say,

1. That learning considered materially, or in it self, as it implies
acquaintance with the things of God, That is simply necessary. This all the
Apostles had, to wit, ability to reason against gainsayers, to open the
mysteries of the Gospel, etc. This is required in all Ministers, 1 Timothy 3.2.
and Titus 1.9. that he be apt to teach: and it ^^ useful in reference to the
truths he has to propound; whereof somthings are hard and not easily
understood, which the unlearned and ignorant, are ready to pervert to their own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. A Minister then had need to be thus learned, lest he
speak, not knowing whereof he affirms, 1 Timothy ^.7. and (being unable to hold
fast the form of found words which himself has learned, 2 Timothy 1.13.) he be
turned aside to foolish unlearned questions, chap. 2.23. It is also needful for
his opening of Scripture, for his dealing with adversaries; and that both to
exhort and covince gainsayers, Tit. 1.9,11. whose mouths are to be stopped by
him, as, in many of the Epistles, we see Paul did; and that in a learned and
methodick way of dispute: and this did Stephen, Acts 6. and it is frequent in
that story. Yea, there is even a learning required in reference unto the
weary, unto whom words and expressions by a singular dexterity are to be
wailed, Isa. 50.4.

2. For the manner of acquiring this learning and ability, we think it not
simply necessary to ty it to the ordinary mediate ways: for, God often did
communicate it immediately; and if He had thought good, could have continued it
in His Church in that manner.

Yet, 3. Seeing the Lord now gives not this acquaintance with Divine Truths,
and ability to reason, etc. immediately; the way of studying, by reading, and
being brought up by others in the knowledge of these, is now, upon this
supposition, simply necessary also: for, if it be necessary to know the
mystery of the Gospel, and men by an immediate way do not attain it, then it
is necessary to follow the way, whereby it is attainable. That it is not now
immediately communicated, we suppose is clear in experience: men cannot now
speak with a strange tongue; yea, not read their own tongue without teaching
and learning: and can it be supposed that they shall be fit for prophecy,
which is the greater gift? Beside, the Lord has not left us His Word to ly by
us, but that we should read it, as the command is expressed, 1 Timothy.4.13, etc.
Give thyself to reading: yea, He has so veiled many parts of His Word
purposly, that the reader should be provoked to search into it, as is several
times insinuated in this same prophecy: and seeing there is a communication of
gifts, and what is made known to one, may and should (in a right manner) be
made known to others, and that by write as well as by word: what reason can
there be, that a Believer or Minister now may not, and should not improve the
knowledge that others before him had, or now at a distance from him have, in
the mystery of God, as well as by conference, he may make use of one that is
alive, and present? And what other way in there than by reading to attain that?
This cannot be denied to a private Christian, much less to a Minister: and the
many sad fruits of ignorance, error and confusion, which flow from the neglect
of study, show the necessity of this. Neither is it for naught that parents
are commanded to bring up their children in the knowledge and admonition of the
Lord, which in Timothie's education, is commended: which could not be, if this
way of acquiring knowledge were unlawful. And it is also confirmed by that
property (given by the Lord Himself) of the Scribe, who is taught unto the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 13.52. that he brings out of his treasure things new
and old: whereby it appears not only that he has a treasure or stock laid
up, but that he has in it, what is old, as having been of long time useful to
the Church, and what is new, and added thereunto by his own painfulnesse.

4. For the knowledge of humane learning, and the studying thereof, such as
tongues, sciences, history, etc. although we conceive them not essential, and
simply necessary for the being of every Minister, so as none could be a
Minister without them; yet we conceive them useful exceedingly to all, and
necessary for the Church, being used in a right subordination to the great end
of edification. For although the Lord gave gifts of many tongues; yet are the
Scriptures in two original languages only: and is it not necessary to be
acquainted with these? Yet has the Lord made use of no extraordinary gift of
tongues to translate them into several languages; but of men who by His
blessing in the way of study had acquired skill in these languages; which
says, that such a study is necessary to the Church: and indeed if that had
been unlawful, many nations of the Gentiles had never had the Word, and so
never had been Churches, had not this been: th^^ therefore which is such a mean
for the propagating of the Gospel, and so blessed of God, cannot be displeasing
to Him, who could have appointed otherwise, and not left this necessity on us,
if He had thought meet. Beside, the right using of all sciences (even these
which men by their corruption do most abuse) contribute exceedingly to advance
edification: not by furnishing new weapons (the Scripture is the only Sword;)
but by enabling men to manage the old. These are to men, like skill to one
that has strength, to teach him how to handle his arms for his safety; like
Physic to the body, to make all the members act to their several uses; and
like the pulling out of something in the ear or eye, which marreth the hearing
or seeing: So learning, is but the fitting of the natural faculties of the
soul, of reason, and even of the gift formerly mentioned, to act neatly, and to
be forthcoming accordingly, and subserviently to the orders and dictats of a
sanctified judgment: whereas otherwise a natural and habitual indisposition
does in much incapacitate men for the exercising even of that which they have.
Neither can this be thought strange, seeing men are not born skilful in any
common occupation, till it be taught them: it is no marvel therefore that they
be undextrous as to the main things. And the writings of Heathens have been
made use of for good ends by Paul, as his citing of them upon several
occasions clears, and can the reading thereof hurt us? It is a good
similitude which Basil uses ( Orat. ad adolese.) that as Dyers when they are
to die purple, do first put some common color on the cloth to make it receive
the purple the better; so, humane learning, is useful for fitting one for the
more profitable study of Divinity. Only we say, This learning would be well
regulated, so as to be made use of only for edification, men not flying to that
as if the principles of Heathen Philosophers were more sure and strong than
plain Scriptures, or as if, loathing the Scripture phrases and arguments, we
would confirm Truths from more learned mediums out of these: much less would
we reconcile their principles and the Scriptures by ascribing such a meaning to
the Scripture, as must be consistent with them, as loather to brangle them in
their Authority than the Scriptures of God; nor yet by using their phrases to
derogate from Scripture-plainnesse or simplicity, (as often the miserably blind
Schoolmen do) which is an high fault. It is abused also when a Minister
thinks himself something because of it, and despises these who are inferior
to him therein, or, when he accounts that in himself, or in others,
sufficient for qualification, or, when he uses it for ostentation or getting
of a name amongst hearers; that is a poor learning, which makes the message
less intelligible, and less useful; and that is truly a learned Pastor, who
can make Spiritual mysterious Truths most plain and palpable to the simplest
hearer, as Luther once said, that he is the ablest Preacher who pueriliter,
trivialiter, populariter, and simplicissime docet. Melc. Adam. in vit. Lutheri.
Learning serves to enable one in searching for Truth, to conceive what is
solid or insolide, and to express it plainly; whereas that, is a great abuse
of learning used by the Schoolmen (follow them in it who will) to make the
plainest Scripture, or practical thing obscure with many doubts, questions,
diverse senses, objections, and many frothie unedifying notions, which have
never profited them that have been occupied therein, and is contrary to the
true end of learning, which ought to be edification. And often the most learned
Preacher, in this sense, has the most ignorant People. He is not the most
learned and skilful Lawyer, Schoolmaster, etc. who knows most speculatively,
but he who can reduce it best to practice, as the nature of his Calling does
require; So is it truly in the learning of a Minister, he who can inform,
convince, or edify others with most dexterity, is the most learned Minister,
though, it may be, the les^e knowing man.

3. We said also, that Grace was necessary, and that he that thus carries the
Lords message now should be holy, as they were, who of old carried His vessels
we do not rigidely call for this as for the former two, so as if no man could
be a Minister without saving Grace, and unless he be truly regenerated: what
was said in the former Epistle, does guard against this; yet we may assert,
that it is necessary by necessity of precept: for, holiness is a qualification
in that same roll with ability to convince gainsayers, Tit. 1.8, 9. And also
by way of mids, it is useful and necessary in many respects, 1. For himself:
he cannot have confidence of his Calling, or of his being approven of God in
it, without this: though he may be called; yet he cannot act as called of God,
and so must be much incapacitated in that respect. 2. For the work: which is of
that nature that it requires communion with God and a standing in His counsel,
Ier. 23.18, 22. otherwise, it may be accounted a stealing of his word without
acknowledging of himself, verse. 30. And though these be necessary in any
Calling, yet the nature of this shows them to be in a singular way necessary
in it. 3. There cannot be that boldness in the message, especially where
difficulties occur, without it. 4. For application of Truths, and speaking
especially to the weary, This is necessary; that they may more natively take up
the cases of others, apply the remedy to them, and sympathize with them, by
making forthcoming the consolation to others, wherewith they have been
comforted themselves, 2 Corinthians. 1.9. which is a main way whereby God fitteth
His Ministers experimentally; and even the Head, in some respect, was thus
qualified. From this, Luther said, that these three, tentatio, meditatio and
oration, were requisite in a Minister: and they who want this holiness, are
certainly exceeding defective. Further, in respect of his having fruits, it is
most necessary, these being often blessed of the Lord with many, and others
with all their learning, but with few, as in these two Churches appears,
beside a Ministers Prayers having influence on the hearers profiting, as well
as his Preaching; and he being to Pray for them, and to account their thriving
to be an answer of his Praying, as well as the fruit of his Preaching, as in
Paul's practice is manifest: what can the unrenewed Minister do here? Can he ly
between the Porch and the Altar? can he strive without ceasing in Prayer to God
for them? and therefore must he be much incapacitated to be profitable in this
respect? Yea, for the credit of the Ministry, it is requisite that he be of
good report, even to these without, otherwise his word will not have much
weight: and what will gain such a good report without holiness? Hypocrisy
often is not much convincing, neither is it continuing, whereas holiness even
in a common servant will adorn the Gospel, much more in a Minister, who is a
city set on an hill, and cannot be hid.

Again, we say, That this qualification of holiness should be greatly
respected both in a peoples calling, or choosing of a Minister, and in a
Presbyteries ordaining of one for a People; so that if they should respect all
other qualifications, and yet never enquire for this, they are exceeding
faulty: and although holiness be not simply necessary to a Minister, as if
without it he were not to be accounted so, when lawfully admitted, as is said;
yet we conceive that neither a People, nor a Presbytery should pass over that
qualification in their choice or Admission, so as to make no enquiry for it, or
not to respect it, where, it may be, there is nothing to sway any to that
opinion of the man in well grounded charity, but somewhat more to the contrary:
for, the people are not left to call whom they will; if it were a Deacon, he is
to be a man full of the holy Ghost, Act. 6. And this place being the first
clear evidence of a peoples interest in their calling of a Minister, this rule
for their proceeding must be of force also. Again, it being such a great Trust,
as to be entrusted with the Oracles of God, and with the souls of People, can
he be thought fit to endeavor the saving of the souls of others, who yet
makes no conscience in taking heed to his own? This is the Apostles reasoning,
1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. If a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he
take care of the Church of God? which is proposed by way of Question, to show
the unanswerablnesse of that reasoning, by which He presses the observing of
the former qualifications. And certainly these two, are not without weighty
reasons put together, Act. 20.28. and 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed to thy self, and
to the Flock and Doctrine, But to show this, that who cares not for the one,
will never natively and naturally care for the other. Especially, that word,
which follows being considered, So shall thou save thy self and those that
hear thee, intimating, that carelesenesse in his own walk, may not only mar
his own salvation, but also the salvation of his Hearers, seeing these two
ordinarily are carried-on jointly, as in this Epistle: And, can people dispense
with this, to have only a form of Ordinances, not caring whether their
Ministers have fruit amongst them or not? or that the profit be to many or few?
and yet there cannot much be expected (what ever God may soveraignly do) from a
man that stands not in Gods counsel, Ier. 23.22. and therefore turns not
many from their iniquity: neither can any expect that the Lord will approve
that he should be made a steward in His house, and an under-father to His
Children, who yet upon no charitable ground can be accounted a child himself,
and what confidence can there be, that a man not esteemed gracious, shall
either Christianly carry in the outward form of Religion, or yet keep
soundness in the Faith? and will they not be accessory to these evils, who
have hazarded so much on them, who are not worthy of any such Trust?

The considering of this, as it relates to a Presbyteries duty, will confirm
it further. We say, they ought not (whoever call, or whatever ones parts be) to
proceed to admit men to the Ministry, without respect to this qualification of
holiness: my meaning is no^, that search in extraordinary ways should be made
for knowing of men's conversion, or, that infallibility should be expected in
this, or, that any particular evidences in such a measure or degree should be
pitched on, without which nothing is to be satisfying, (for there are degrees,
as was said) but because, even Scholars are naturally sinful, and gifts do not
mortify corruption, nor edify, but as they are well improven; and seeing often
by men's profanity, good gifts do much hurt in the Church; and seeing there can
be no ground to expect the right improvement of gifts by one not supposed to be
gracious, Therefore trial would be, 1. To clear that he be not profane, and
that nothing can be charged on him. And, 2. That there are some things making
him look holy-like, and giving ground, in a discerning charity, to esteem so of
him, that what ever afterward he prove, they may have peace in what they have
done. And lastly, that some fit time and way be taken purposely for trying of
this. This is clear, 1. From the many directions that are given to Ministers
concerning this one thing, in the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus, where
they are expressly limited in their proceeding to this, that he be holy, 1 Timothy
3.2, etc. and Tit. 1.8. And this holiness is not only described negatively,
that he be blameless, not given to wine, etc. verse. 6. and 7. but positively,
that he have a good name, be sober, just, holy: which shows, that it
consists not merely in negatives. 2. It is evident that it is to be tried:
because even a Deacon also is to be proved, 1 Timothy 3.10. (which also supponeth,
that a Minister is much more to be proved) and then let him use the office, if
he be found (that is, after trial) to be blameless: and so there is a proof
to be had of this qualification, as of others. 3. It appears by his excluding
of a Novice from this charge, verse. 6. (that is, one lately brought in to the
faith) as not being yet able to bear it, or as not being well known what he
might prove: and there being to us a proportionablnesse, and likeness in some
respect, betwixt the Novice then, (they being all accounted Believers) and one
that seems now to profess more seriously than the generality of others, it
says, he would be of a standing profession that should be admitted to this
Charge. And, 4. That which is, Chap. 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, etc.
does confirm this also; and that is, not only lest he be not of parts, but lest
he through untendernesse abuse his parts, and thou become guilty, as the reason
subjoyned, clears. And (to meet that objection which one might have, to wit,
It is not rashly done; for, nothing can be laid to his charge) Paul says some
men's sins are at the first obvious; but some (says he) will follow after: and
therefore will take time before they be discovered. Therefore there is need of
wariness and trial to bring them out, as Reverend Mr. Dickson expounds the
place. And can this be so to be slighted in Ministers proceeding, which Paul so
frequently presses, not only to observe when it is palpable, but to search for
it, where it is not so obvious? And if it be so requisite even for a Deacon,
what will it be for a Minister, whose Station leads him more immediately to
the things of greatest concernment? And as the Apostles appointed, so practiced
they, Act. 6. Seek ye out men full of the holy Ghost, them we will ordain,
intimating, concerning others, that they would not ordain them, So is the
qualification proposed for the Apostle, Act. 1. although Judas in Gods
sovereign wisdom had been employed; yet there is an other rule given them to
walk by, than he takes to himself; they must take one of these who had given
best proof of their integrity, verse. 23. And through all the Epistles, when
Paul is recommending Ministers, there is ever some evidence of their
sanctification given: whereby he would let us know, what weight is truly in
that qualification for commending of men for the Ministry; and what sort of
men others should recommend after him. And there are also many reasons which
may be gathered from what is said, to make Ministers very careful in this,
That holiness be well looked unto in Instruments, as they would expect an open
door to be set to them by the Lord, as he does here.

If any should say, 1. That this looks like the way of rigid trying of
Church Members, and seems to favor that conceit. Answ. 1. I am not speaking
of the manner of proceeding, but of the thing, what ever way any Judicatory or
persons in Christian prudence shall take to satisfy themselves in the
particular, That I conceive can be regulated by no certain directions: for,
that will be fit in one case, which will not be in an other, etc. 2. Although
there be a proving and trying here called-for; yet it will not hold as
necessary to all members: because there is not the like ground; nay, nor such
precepts nor practices for trial of members, as there i^ in this: and were it
so clear for members, I suppose it were hard to shift it. Yea, 3. This does
overturn that rigidity and scrupulosity concerning Church Members, it is so far
from strengthening of it: for, if there be somewhat singular required of a
Minister, and if one that is already a Churchmember be yet to be proved, if
probably he be holy ere he be a Minister (so that one may be a Churchmember
for his holiness, and yet unfit, in respect of his being defective in this
qualification, to be a Minister; yea, a Deacon) Then is there not such rigid
and accurate search to be made for positive evidences in every Churchmember:
for then, there could be no addition to it, or further length to go: But from
this, it is clear that something is required in the trial of an Intrant to the
Ministry, more than of one to be admitted into the Church: for one may be
warrantably admitted to the Church, who yet may be unfit in this respect to be
a Minister: therefore the extending of this conclusion to all the members
indifferently, is unwarrantable: for, this new trying of them, supposes the
former not to be so exact, and yet all this probation is to be of such as are
within.

If any should further object, That this lays on that which is impossible.
Answ. There is no such thing intended. But, 1. it is more than is needful to
every Churchmember. 2. It is somewhat that needs proof and trial, and is
not to be taken on trust: but the manner of trial we leave. 3. It is somewhat
that may warrant the conscience, not to determine infallibly concerning such a
persons state; but concerning a man's own act in a deliberat well grounded
concurring in his ordination; So that there be no ground for a challenge
afterward, being put to say, it was sudden, and so to charge himself as
accessory unto, and guilty of, his sins also, if afterward he miscarry: which
is intended by that precept, 1 Timothy 5.22, etc.

If it be objected further, Then there would be few Ministers entered, and many
Congregations would be desolate. That great Pattern and Patron of Learning and
Piety, Trochrege, when he moves this objection to himself (which shows that
it has been ordinary in all times so to dispute against this duty) Answers,
that it is not so much to be respected, quot, or, how many be in the Ministry,
as quales and qui, that is, who, or of what qualifications they be. Therefore
(says he) it had been the advantage of the Ministry that they had been ever
fewer, rather than that many who are in that station should have been admited
to it: for (says he) some became not only useless themselves, but do
incapacitate others, and make the Ministry despicable before all by their
carriage. And indeed it is often found so, that many Congregations had been
better still to have waited for what providence might have ordered for them,
than to have been planted as they were. Many excellent things has he to this
purpose, page 1187, etc. particularly, page 1107, etc.

We are persuaded, that whatever profane men think of holiness, that yet the
people who desire to have their souls saved, will be loath to have a blind
Guide, who, by falling into the ditch, may hazard others, or, one that may heal
their wound slightly; or at best, point out the way to them, but in little join
with them in it. And especially, that Ministers of the Gospel, who know what
esteem Christ has of souls, and what difficulty it is for themselves to walk
singly in this Ministry, even though they mind their own salvation; and what
native and natural sympathy is called-for betwixt a Minister and His Flock; and
who are well acquainted with the devices of the devil, who aims to make
havoc of souls by an ungodly, as well as by an erroneous Ministry; and also
are laying to heart and seriously minding their reckoning to Jesus Christ at
His appearing, for the souls of such Congregations, as they have had access to
provide with Ministers, whether his Sheep were committed to a friend, or an
enemy, to one that loved him, and so would feed the Lambs; or one that loved
and sought his own things, (as all men in nature do) and so would feed himself.
We are persuaded (we say) that such will tremble to be accessory to such
heinous effronting of Jesus Christ, or such cruel betraying of poor souls in
committing them to an ignorant, or unfaithful Guide, who may fall in the ditch
with them. And seeing this is of main concernment to the advancement of Christ's
Gospel, and the edification of peoples souls, to have Ministers according to
the Lords heart, and not men's, to feed the people; and a special promis^
subjoyned to His marrying of a Land, Ier. 3.14. and an evidence of His dwelling
with a people, Let all such therefore, whether People or Ministers, who have a
hand in this, be obtested in the fear of the Lord, and by the coming and
appearance of our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of His sheep, that they be
wary and circumspect in this most concerning-businesse, as they would not in
that day be guilty of the blood of many souls, that unholy Ministers cannot but
be guilty of; and as they would not be accounted partakers with them in all
their sins. And, no question, this command amongst others, is employed in that
charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.13.14.21. And it is very observable, that in these
Epistles, while he gives directions to Timothy, and Titus in the name of all
Ministers, which are to be obeyed to the end of the world, he so often
charge, more than in other Epistles, That these commands should be done
without partiality; which certainly shows, that Ministers must especially
reckon for their observing thereof. Yea, that charge, is particularly given in
reference to this duty, 1 Timothy 5.21. and 22. I charge thee, etc. Do nothing by
partiality: withal subjoyning, Lay hands suddenly on no man: which (as Calvin
observes) is upon this ground given, because men often are ready to be
partial in admissions, Therefore, says the Apostle, whatever others do, do
not thou partake of that sin with them. And though that Reverend forecited
Author Mr. Boyd, be every way most moderate; yet, page 1108. does he censure
the preposterous moderation of some good men, who are too charitable in the
matter of admission of men to the Ministry; and directly asserteth, that in
trial of Spirits for such an end, not only the Doctrine, sed and animorum
motus, consilia, conatus, are also to be proven. And if nothing satisfying
appear which may hold forth Gods call, although it were for many years, it is
to be forborne. Nec enim tam refert quot sint hoc Ministeri^ fungentes, quam qui
sint, and quant a cum cur a delecti at que probati; praestatque plurimi^
abdicatis, vel unum aliquem admitti, qui sit unu^ ex mill, etc. quam plurimis
indifferenter admissis, ex mill vix unum, qualem cupias invenire. And
thereafter, cites our Lords practice, Luke 9.57. who though most tender of the
Churches edification, and in a time when the Harvest was very great, and the
Laborers but few, yet does reject two, who seemingly offered themselves with
affection to the work, and presses one, not so seemingly forward as the other
two. In all which, and in much more to this purpose he does excellently enlarge
himself as in a thing of most grave concernment to the Churches edification.
His famous Master also, Divine Mr. Rollock, does most pathetically press this;
and particularly in his Lectures upon the Lords last Sermon and solemn Prayer,
Ioh. 17. Lect. 23. Although this be true, and will not, we hope, by any be
called in question; yet there are two things which possibly to some may need
more particularly to be spoken to; seeing it is easy to run in extrems. The
first is, What length may be attained, or is to be aimed at in this trial of a
Ministers Sanctification, by virtue of that precept, Lay hands suddenly on no
man? Secondly, How it may be made to appear, that seeing so much is attainable
in this case, that as much as is not to be sought after in the trial of
private members? We shall therefore, before we leave this, speak a word to
these.

To the first we say, 1. That by virtue of that precept, there is no
infalliblity to be expected nor pretended unto: because there is no such thing
possible: nor does the Lord in His Word give such symptoms and evidences as may
found such a judgment or decision of an other persons gracious estate: nor is
this to be enquired for, as if the validity of a persons ordination did depend
upon the same: for, ordination may be valid, where no Sanctification is, as was
formerly said; But it is such a trial and probation as is opposite to
rashness and hastiness, and may give ground of quietness unto these that go
about this work, even though the person should not be found afterward
answerable. Because the ground of their peace, is not the reality or truth of
the thing; but it is (to say so) the reality of such and such evidences, which
after trial are found indeed to be so, although possibly they be not sincere.

2. We say, That negative evidences, or negative knowledge, that is, that we
our selves know no evil of the person, and such like, will not be sufficient to
exoner us in proceeding to ordination, according to this precept: for, that may
be, where a man is not known at all. Beside that will not give ground to make
him be accounted of good report, holy, faithful, etc. which are the
qualifications required in him to whom the word of truth is to be committed.
Also the Scripture holds forth such qualifications as are positive, to be
enquired-for in this case: which were useless, if negatives were sufficient.
And certainly there is a negative holiness at least required in a private
member; yet it is clear that more is to be enquired for in an Officer; yea,
even a Deacon is not to be admitted without special qualifications, which are
not requisite in ordinary members. Amongst other words, Ambrose says on this
place, non enim sufficit si sine crimine sit, quia merita ejus debent praeire
bonorum operum ut dignus si^ ad ordinationem.

3. We say then, That something positive is attainable, and is to be enquired
for: which though it be not infallibly convincing of the persons state; yet may
be sufficient, to quiet the mind against the challenges of rash and sudden
proceeding in that matter. Which, in the general, may be drawn to these three,
1. That there be a search in the external positives that are given in the Word;
the knowledge whereof may be attained by search. 2. There may be some
observation of a man's way, and tract of carriage, from which some discovery
may be made of a man's equablnesse, singlnesse and spirituality in such duties.
3. There may be some discovery attained of a man's universality in these duties
so qualified, by considering his carriage in reference to diverse cases and
conditions and diverse persons, both such as are more tender, and others. That
these are attainable cannot be denied, at least so far as is necessary for the
scope foresaid. And certainly, that precept must be understood to require proof
and trial in this, so far as is possibly attainable (otherwise a man cannot be
thought to be sufficiently exonered in his duty) as the reason subjoyned
confirms: especially in such cases where neither the good works, nor the evil
of some men, are open before hand. And these being attainable, as is said, It
will follow then that they are to be enquired into. Judicious and Learned Mr.
Wood in his Piece against Mr. Lockier, does assert, That there are some more
eminent outward works and actings in Religion, and Piety, by which, men (so far
as is competent to men to judge) may be warrantably judged positively gracious,
page 142. and shows how this is to be attained, page 152, 153. in these
words, There is requisite some seemingnesse of Spiritual sincerity in a man's
profession, id est, that he does it from a Spiritual principle, upon Spiritual
motives, and for a Spiritual end: but a mere, sober, not mocking, serious
profession without more, is not a positive appearance of Spiritual supernatural
sincerity. Which shows, that such a thing is possible; and experience also
does confirm this.

4. We say, That in this precept it is implied, that these positive evidences
are not soon to be trusted; but that men are seriously, and diligently to
enquire in the reality of them, for the quieting of themselves rationally in
concluding that he is so and so qualified. And this we conceive is the great
scope of that precept: for the general, that a Minister should be eminently
qualified even in reference to Godliness, I suppose will not be denied by any:
The miscarriage is ordinarily in the application, and that is not purposedly to
admit an unholy man to be a Minister, but to account a man holy without ground,
and thereupon suddenly to proceed. The Apostles scope therefore is principally
to guard against this, that such thoughts of a persons fitness be not suddenly
and without trial admitted and entertained. And we suppose, that although
particular evidences be not insisted on; yet trial in the general, seriously
and with circumspectnesse gon-about, will do much to quiet the mind in
reference to its own act. And this is so understood by Chrysostom,
Theophilact, and others, as importing a command to try, and try again.

If it were more particulary enquired, What these positive evidences are, which
may be warrantably looked-for in one that is to be admitted to the Ministry?
Answ. Although by proportion what may evidence one man to be gracious unto
another (so far as is requisite for one man to judge of another) That will hold
here; and though there be some generals laid down, which include many
particulars as to be holy, full of the holy Ghost, Acts 6. such as have given
good proof of their faithfulness and constancy in Religion, Acts 1. verse. 21,
22. and such like; Yet beside these, the Scripture has pitched upon some
particular characters for the discovery of this.

First, He is to be a man that rules well his own house, 1 Timothy 3. verse. 4, 5.
which does imply a man's faithfulness and profitablnesse, as a Christian, in
whatsoever private station he has been in formerly; so it is to be looked, how
he has done the duty of a son to parents, of a student in his studies, of a
private Christian in his private walk with others, or how he has behaved
himself in families, or in other places wherein he has had more near access
to be edifying, and such like. This one character puts to take trial, 1. of
a man's zeal and sincerity in studying edification according to his place. 2.
Of his prudence in mannaging and ordering what he may meet with. And, 3. of his
Authority, how probably he may be able to keep people in a kindly subjection to
Christ's Ordinances, as the particular observing of that place will bear forth:
which speaks not only of his fitness to teach; but also to govern in the
house of God. And it would seem that though always the Church is not to be
restrained from calling one that is young, and without a family; yet by a man's
living sometime after his going through private studies, before his coming to
the Ministry, or having a family to govern, there might be much more access
confidently to discern a Called-minister in respect of this qualification: for,
as the Apostle reasons, 1 Timothy 3.5. If a man know not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take care of the Church of God?

Secondly, He is to be tried according to these marks wherewith a Christian may
be tried, such as to be vigilant, to be sober, (which looks to sobriety in
his whole carriage) not only to be blameless, but to be of good behavior,
given to hospitality, not greedy or covetous, patient, etc. 1 Timothy 3.3. Titus
1.7, 8. In which qualifications, not only is to be tried what are men's
practices; but what are their distempers, or infirmities; what are their
natural inclinations, and dispositions, and such like: and if these be froward,
except by the evidences of the opposite Graces, there be hope that they shall
be subdued, there can be no confidence to proceed. For, a Minister should be
meek, gentle, no brawler, etc.

Thirdly, He is one that must have a good report from them that are without, 1 Timothy 3.7. which imports a shining eminency in his conversation, so as to be
convincing even to wicked men: from whom seriousness and sincerity will get a
testimony, when lightness and luke-warmnesse will be abhorred even by them.

Fourthly, He is to be a lover of good men, Titus 1.8. It is a mark of a
Believer to love the Children of God; and here it is made a character whereby
one, that is to be called to the Ministry, ought to be tried: and it is such a
love to them as is demonstrable and evidenced to others, by their conversing
with them, estimation of them, and that in opposition to others, whom in that
respect they love not, though possibly their natural ties to such may be more.
This character, does first suppone a capacity in them to discern good men
beside others. And, secondly, a principle within, making them to love and
esteem of such: which, where they are in reality, are both commendable in
themselves, and cannot but be some way discernable to others; and therefore may
be the more warrantably observed and laid weight upon, and when they are
wanting, proceeding may, yea, should be at the greater stand and non-entry.

A fifth evidence is, That he be no Novice, 1 Timothy 3.6. which holds out that
he ought to be of some settled standing in the profession of Godliness; at
least, there would be ground to think him so: which cannot well be, if the man
have been but as others in his education, and possibly come by reason of the
thoughts of a Ministry to have some fairer outward carriage than others; when
yet, as to the practice of Religion, he may be but a mere Novice, and so give
no ground to found a rational charity for expecting any thriving of the work
of Grace in his heart, or of the work of the Ministry in his hands.

When these external evidences are found, Then Ministers ought to reflect upon
all to see if any thing can be gathered concerning the sincerity of their end,
spiritualnesse of their walk, and such like, as by the words of these two
eminent Divines formerly cited does appear. And because this cannot be
discerned by one act or two; or, in a month or two: therefore it is necessary
to take time, and to consider the equablnesse of such a man's way for satisfying
of themselves concerning him. And though it is not like that each Minister can
come to a well grounded knowledge in reference to the Admission of every one,
by his own particular acquaintance; yet in such a case, it is to be supplied by
the testimony of such, who being able to discern, and thoroughly satisfied
themselves upon solid grounds, dare confidently give testimony of the good
behavior and Christian carriage of such a person, according to the former
characters: and such testimony, when given, ought to have weight. Therefore we
see that in Scripture, the faithful Servants of God used to commend such, as
were of their acquaintance, to others: and such recommendations wanted never
weight. Only concerning this, we say, That seeing recommendations and
testimonies may have much influence upon the good or ill of the Church. This
would not be overly gone about; but these caveats would be observed, 1. That
when men testify positively such and such qualifications to be in any, they
would have ground of satisfaction in their own consciences that such things are
true, and consistent in their knowledge. 2. As this testimony would be on
knowledge; so the matter testified, would be weighty, and such as being true
evidenceth some good beginning, or appearance of the work of Grace. There are
many testimonies given through Paul's Epistles to several persons; but we will
still find them have these two, 1. The thing testified, is something that does
indeed commend them as Christians; as having love to God, and to the
edification of souls, and such like. 2. It Is upon knowledge; yea oftentimes
from such evidences as were discernable even to others, such as suffering for
Christ, distributing to the Saints, painfulnesse and diligence in what they
have been employed about, and such like. On the other side, there is also need
of taking heed what testimonies be received. And, 1. That the testimony be
full, bearing out these characters sufficiently in the bosom thereof:
otherwise* it can be no proof of them, whoever be the testifier, and, it may
be, it were not impertinent to do it in the Apostles words. 2. Respect is to be
had to these who give the testimony. And, 3. To the ground upon which they give
it, to wit, if it be of their own certain knowledge that they do testify such
things; or, only upon the report of others, and such like considerations.
Wherein faithful Presbyteries will employ their zeal and prudence for the
satisfying of themselves; and so there is the less need to insist particularly
in them.

Now, as to the second, if any should ask, what reason there can be more to
enquire thus in reference to Ministers, than in reference to members? and if
the one will not follow upon the grounds that are laid down for inferring the
other? We answer, It is enough to say that this enquiry in reference to
Ministers is commanded, and the other not. Neither will any objector, I
suppose, be able to give such precepts for the trial of Church Members, as
have been laid down for this trial in reference to Ministers. It is observable
which that great vindicater of this truth, concerning the admission of
Church Members without such exact trial, does answer to this objection; I mean
Learned Mr. Wood, in his Examination and Confutation of Mr. Lockyers
Little-stone, page 80.81. Mr. Lockyer had made the same objection, which he
answers thus, All that Mr. Lockyer here brings in concerning admitting
persons into Offices in the Church, is idly and impertinently alleged to the
point in hand: we acknowledge that none ought to be put in such Offices, but
such as give evidences of all manner of Godly conversation; we have an express
and full rule for this, 1 Timothy 3. And hands ought not to be laid upon any man,
without a foregoing trial and proof of these things. But where will ye show us
in all the Scripture from the one end to the other such a rule requiring such
qualifications in persons, and such a trial of them before, and in relation to
their admission into the fellowship of the visible Church; and to be under
Pastoral care and the Ministry of the Word? If he could show us this, either
in precept or approved practice, we should soon yield and be at an end of this
controversy; But this he cannot, nor ever will be able to show; and therefore
the reasoning from the care and accuracy to be used in trying persons, who are
already in the Church, in relation to admitting them to places of Office, unto
admission of persons into the Society of the visible Church, is unreasonable.
Thus far he convincingly to the point in hand. It is observable also, that
these amongst the Ancients, who have said and done most against the Novatians
and Donatists, have been yet most pressing and peremptory in this, to wit, that
none with any blemish should minister in the holy things, as in the writings of
Cyprian and Augustine is clear. This is enough to remove any such Objection:
Yet for further satisfaction, we say, That there want not palpable reasons for
this difference, as,

1. When a member is admitted, he is received to be trained up in Christ's House
or School; and therefore if he profess himself docile, and subject himself to
Ordinances, it cannot be expected that he will be, or can be accurate before he
have learned: for, it is within the Church that properly Christianity is
taught. It is not so in the admitting of one to be a Minister: for, he is to be
entered to be a Teacher, Therefore more must be required of him: and he is
supposed to have been a Scholar in Christ's School, and under His Ordinances
for some considerable time; and therefore more may justly be expected and
sought-for from him.

2. When a Professor seriously desires entry to the Church or Baptism, he does
it by pleading a title or right thereto according to Christ's warrant: wherein a
Church judicatorie is obliged in justice to decide, and that legally according
to his title and right: and if he be found to have such a right, they cannot
upon any consideration justly refuse him: But in trying of a man for the
Ministry, there is no such title and right which can be pleaded: For, 1. This
is no man's particular privilege, which he, as a Saint, or Professor, may claim
by virtue of the Covenant, or Christ's institution, as he may do the Sacraments;
for, many have right to these that have none to this. 2. A particular person
may be kept from the Ministry and not be wronged, even although he be
honest; because in admitting thereto, Church Officers are to walk according to
the general ground of the edification of the Church: and therefore when it is
not for the edification of the Body, a man may be forborne (to speak so) and not
admitted to such and such a particular charge, at least, without the wronging
of any just title of his: which cannot be in Baptism, if the man be qualified
accordingly as is called-for in such a case. For in deciding anent the
admission of a particular member, the Question runs, If he have what gives
title to Membership; But in deciding concerning a man's admission to a
particular Ministry, beside any qualifications of his as a Churchmember, it
is to be considered, if it be expedient for, and edifying to, the Church, that
such a man be admitted to be a guide. And therefore there is more of Christian
prudence and deliberation required in the deciding of this, than in the other,
where mere right has place.

Lastly, This difference may be observed, That in deciding the first, to wit,
the man's right, Church officers must decide according to what judicially is
made out; for, a person that gives in his title, looking like a serious
Professor, he cannot be refused, although men have only a negative knowledge of
his sincerity: yet this cannot be admitted in a Minister, where want of
clearness, and positive satisfaction is enough to keep a man from positive
deciding for the admission of a Minister. All which may be thus illustrated:
suppose some in an Incorporation or City, should claim to be Burgesses thereof
by virtue of their sufficient title and right thereto; in this case the Judges
were to decide strictly according to Law, as they found these titles to be made
out, or not: and it were injustice to refuse them that privilege, if they were
found to have right to the same: but, if an Incorporation or City were to
choose out of all the Burgesses, some to Govern, to be Thesaurer, or the like;
the case would be quite different: for, so men were not here to decide what
were any man's particular right, but what were good and expedient for the whole
Body; and so many might be past without any prejudice to them; which could not
be in the first. In this last election also, men walk not so much by what is
judicially made out of the fitness of any person, but as they are satisfied
anent their qualifications and fitness, by their knowledge of them, and
acquaintance with them in the private course of their carriage: Both which will
well agree to the case of the admission of Ministers, as it differs from the
admission of Members.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 14. And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, write, These
things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
creation of God,

15. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou were
cold or hot.

16. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew
thee out of my mouth.

17. Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing: and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be
rich; and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou
may see.

19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be Zealous therefore and repent.

20. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.

22. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.


THis is the last of the seven Epistles, and is directed to the Angel of the
Church of the Laodiceans. It contains the discovery of an exceeding desperate
condition, and a most sharp threatening for the same: yet, which is wonderful,
it has a most excellent advice and counsel unto this lukewarm Church.

The Division is common with that of the rest of the Epistles. The Inscription
is, verse. 14. The Body of the Epistle, is from that unto the 21. The Conclusion
is, verse. 21, 22.

In the Inscription, verse. 14. the Lord takes these two Titles to Himself, 1.
Thus says the Amen, which is expounded by the next words, the faithful and
true witness, that is, He who being Truth it self and cannot lie, as He cannot
be mistaken in taking up the condition of any, although never so secret; it is
he that directs this Epistle. Amen, being an Hebrew word, is frequently used
even in the New Testament, as a sign, or evidence of the confirmation of
somewhat that has been spoken; or as a testimony of the sincerity of the
speaker in wishing seriously something which he has been praying for:
therefore often it is used in the close of Prayer; and is here applied to
Christ, to show that in Him there is not Yea and Nay, but Yea and Amen, as the
word is 2 Cor. 1.19, 20. The second Title, is, the beginning of the Creation of
God: the word rendered beginning here, is not to be taken passively, as if it
were to be understood thus, the first thing that was created: for, the Greek
word will not admit that; but it is to be taken actively, that is, thus says
He who gave a being and beginning to all things that were created: in which
respect, it is said, Ioh. 1.3. All things that were made, were made by Him. He
takes the first style in this place, because He was to discover a hidden
hypocrisy, and to bear sharp testimony against this Church: therefore at the
entry He removes all prejudice that might be against His Testimony. He takes
the second Title, to be a ground of Faith to them, for expecting a recovery
from their deadness upon the terms offered by Him, seeing He is omnipotent, and
can give a being to things that have none.

In the Body of the Epistle, we have these four, 1. Their case is proposed, and
aggravated, verse. 15. 2. They are threatened, verse. 16. and the reason thereof
is given, verse. 17. 3. The cure is proposed, and commended by way of counsel,
verse. 18. And lastly, The improving thereof, and the practice of some other
things needful to their case, are pressed, verse. 19, 20.

Their case is in short, Thou art neither cold nor hot, but, as it is, verse.
16. Thou art lukewarm. By cold here, is understood the want of all form and
profession; and so, a being in their natural and heathenish condition without
any change: This is clear from the scope. By hot, is understood not only to
have profession, but to have power, warmness and life therewith, and so to
have the change through. The condition of this Church, was neither altogether
without a profession, nor yet having power with a profession; But having
renounced gross Idolatry and profanity, and having been kept free from
corruptions in Doctrine, she satisfied her self in that formal profession,
without singleness and zeal in the performance of these duties which she went
about: therefore they are called lukewarm, as if some way the cold had been
put off them; and yet not being thoroughly warm and hot, they continued to be
lukewarm, which, making water most loathsome to the stomach, it is here
alluded unto, to show how loathsome this indifferency in the practice of
Religion was to our Lord Jesus. That this is their very condition, is clear
from the scope, and from the amplification following, where it appears they
had some form, and therefore thought well of themselves; and yet were indeed
miserable and wretched under the same. Also, the Lords provoking them to be
zealous, verse. 19. shows, that their fault did consist mainly in what was
opposite to this. And so their condition will be like Isreal's in the days of
Elias, 1 King. 18.21. as halting between two opinions, that is, neither
altogether forsaking Religion, nor yet seriously following the same; or, ^r as
it is said of Ephraim, Hos. 7.8 he was as a cake unturned, that is, having the
one side somewhat hot and baken, but the other cold and raw. Only this is the
difference, that indifferency of theirs was in respect of Doctrine, this, is
mainly in respect of practice.

The Lord aggregeth the hatefulness of this condition in the words following,
I would thou were cold or hot, that is, although y^ think your selves much
better than others, because of your formal profession; yet such hypocrisy, is
more hateful to me than the want of the form of Religion altogether. So this, I
would thou were hot or cold, is not to be understood of Christ's will, as
prescribing to them a duty: for so, it cannot be thought that he commands
them to be cold; nor does it implie any will or desire to be in Him of such
things simply; (for it cannot be thought that He is so indifferent concerning
these extrems) but it is to be understood as His expressing of His loathing of
their condition, after the manner of men: and does hold out this, that He does
esteem such a hypocritical profession to be indeed more dishonorable to Him,
than if profession had never been taken on. That this is the meaning thereof,
appears by these considerations. 1. That Christ here is following a
similitude usual among men, to show the abominablnesse of the thing in it self,
and it is not rigidly to be pressed in every part of the similitude in
reference to Him beyond the scope. 2. Because he puts cold and hot in the
same balance together: so that whatever difference otherwise be in His
estimation of being hot, beyond that of being cold; yet in this place they are
made equal, and nothing is asserted concerning the one, but is also asserted
concerning the other: which does clearly show, that the Lords expression is to
be understood after the manner of men, (as was said) that is, as men use to
express their hating of any thing, by this, I wish it were, or had been any
otherway: that same is the Lords intent here. I cannot therefore but somewhat
wonder, that a Learned man ( Ioannes Dallaeus in his Apology, etc.) does draw
this place of the Lords wishing that Laodicea were hot, to confirm that
assertion of the Lords having a will and desire of the salvation of all men,
besides His signifying of what is acceptable to Him as considered in it self,
by His Word.

If it be asked how hypocrisy or luke-warmnesse may be said to be more
dishonorable to the Name of God, than the want of a profession altogether? It
may be answered in these three respects, 1. Where no profession is at all, the
Name of Christ is not so concerned, as where it is: and therefore by any
miscarriage of such, it is not so reflected upon, and made obnoxious to
reproach, as it is in respect of these who have some way given up their names
to Religion. It is on this account that in Ezekiel. 20.39. the Lord does discharge
the people of Israel to pollute His holy Name with their gifts, and bids
them, go serve ye every one his Idols, etc. which is not to give them allowance
to run to Idolatry; but it is to show them, that if they would not wholly
cleave to Him, His Name would be less polluted and dishonored by their direct
betaking of themselves to Idolatry, than it was by mixing His Worship, and the
worship of Idols together. 2. The nature of the sin it self, has also some
aggravations in it, which makes it exceedingly loathsome to Jesus Christ, and
dishonorable to Him beyond the condition of such as have no profession at all:
for, such a person indeed is really cold, and without any Religion, as others
are; And has these two things beside, 1. He is a counterfitter of Religion,
and that before God: therefore, Act. 5.3, etc. such are said to tempt God, and
lie to the holy Ghost; because they presumptuously intrude themselves in a
profession, as if they were something, being yet indeed nothing; and so
tempts the Majesty of God singularly to take notice of them, and discover
them, or otherwise some way to ly under the imputation either of no
discerning, or of approving such unsoundnesse, as if it were Religion.
Secondly, Ordinarily such, though they be poor, yet are they proud,
presumptuous and haughty, in respect of their form; for, they say they are rich
and increased with goods, etc. verse. 17. which no person without all form can
be so readily tempted unto: Now the Lord abhors this empty pride above any
thing. A third respect in which hypocrisy is hateful beyond the want of all
form, is, that it makes such a persons conviction, conversion and salvation
more difficult than if they had had no profession at all: for if so, it might
have been more easy to have convinced them of their emptiness, and to have
brought them to Christ, than in the case of their formality and pride. And thus
not only is the case of hypocrisy more dangerous to themselves, but it is more
dishonorable to God, because it some way frustrateth the end of His Ordinances
amongst such. And therefore the Lord usually does prefer the Publicanes and
Harlots in this respect, to the Scribes and Pharisees: because such were more
easily convinced, and brought to some fruitfulness under the Ordinances, than
Scribes and Pharisees were, who rejected the counsel of God against themselves.
Thus ( Matthew. 21.31, 32.) Publicanes and Harlots are said to go unto the
Kingdom of Heaven before the Scribes and Pharisees, because they believed
John's Preaching, which the other did not.

The second thing in the Body of the Epistle, is, the Lords threatening of them
for this ill, by an expression suitable to the ill, verse. 16. So then, because
thou art lukewarm, neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth:
which is in sum this, seeing then thou art in a lukewarm temper, which usually
men's stomachs can more hardly keep than what is cold, or what is hot, but must
spew out the same as a thing loathsome unto them; so will I in some singular
and extraordinary manner evidence my loathing of this thy lukewarm
hypocritical temper. And this expression, to spew out, etc. seems to import
these three, 1. That it shall be such a judgment as will be an evidence of the
Lords loathing of them, and giving up with them without respect to their form.
2. It implies a making of them loathsome before others, as vomit uses to be:
and so it is the Lords taking-by the vail of their hypocrisy, and making them
to fall from that respect and estimation amongst others, which possibly they
hunted-after in this their external profession. 3. It may imply the Lords
giving them up to break out into gross external ills, whereby they might be
emptied of that vain ground of boasting which they had in their former
formality. And this being a common plague that follows proud hypocrisy, and a
thing that discovers the rottenness and loathsomeness of such, it may well
be understood here, seeing the scope is to threaten them with making them appear
to be loathsome, although they did endeavor by all means to cover the same.

The reason of this severity, is added, verse. 17. and it is in sum this, I will
take such course as may discover thy loathsomeness, because thou art not only
miserable and poor, but art conceity and proud, as if all were well, and
knows not thy own rottenness and unsoundnesse, therefore (says he) I will
thus discover it.

In this verse. we may consider, 1. What was indeed the case of this Church. 2.
What they themselves did esteem, and give it out to be. 3. With what confidence
and upon what ground they did this. And lastly, the connection betwixt this and
the former threatening.

Their true state, is set forth in five words, in the close of the verse: The
first is, Thou art wretched: which is a comprehensive word, and does ordinarily
set forth the bodily defects and personal unsoundnesse and loathsomeness of one
in respect of grievous diseases, and such like: this here is to be applied to
their spiritual condition, which in these respects is no less wretched,
disjointed, loathsome, etc. than the bodily condition of any can be. The second
word, is, miserable: which looks to a concurrence of external things beside
the former wretchedness, as want of means of supply, want of fitness to do
for themselves, and want of any solid way of provision made for them by
others, and such like: Thus ( Ezekiel. 16.) the wretched child, is described, not
only as loathsome, with the navil not cut, without washing with water to be
suppled, etc. but none eye did pity it, to do any of these unto it, etc. so
here, thou art miserable, that is, not only wretched in thy self; but in a
disconsolate condition in respect of what thou may expect from others in this
case. The third word, is, poor, that is, thou thinks thou have many good works
and much grace; but it is quite contrary; really thou have nothing. The fourth
is, thou art blind: that is an aggravation to all, that though thou be in this
miserable condition, thou art senseless and ignorant thereof, and neither
knows thy danger, nor how to rid thy self out of the same. The fifth word,
is, and naked, that is, without any thing to hide or cover this miserablnesse
and filthiness before the justice of God. It is not desperate when folks are
poor and miserable in themselves, if they have on Christ's righteousness to
cover the same: but, faith the Lord to this Church, thou art in thy self
miserable, and also without this cover, so that thou art lying as casten forth
in the open fields, and obnoxious to the justice of God: This holds forth a
very sad and a very dangerous condition. Yet, in the second place, we will find
their thoughts of it to be far otherwise: which the Lord sets down in three
words, 1. Thou say I am rich, that is, abounding in grace and good works,
and having a righteousness sufficient enough. 2. I am increased with goods:
which is still to be understood of their esteem of their own spiritual
furnitour, which they think sufficient, not only to make them rich, but also to
make them abound: and this, to be increased with goods, does imply, both their
esteeming of themselves to have much, and also to be upon the growing hand:
which is a most dangerous condition, when a hypocrite does not only falsely
esteem himself to have grace when he has none, but does flatter himself as if
he were thriving and growing in the same. The third word; is, and have need of
nothing: this is indeed a comprehensive commendation of a condition, if there
were ground for it: but where this enters in a person abounding in
corruption, it is the very height of self-delusion and presumptuous hypocrisy,
to wit, that a person should think himself free of hazard, well stored with
graces, and a great length therein, etc. but especially (as in this place) that
he should think himself fully clear, and sure of his peace with God, and
interest in the Covenant; so that in these respects there is need of nothing.
This we conceive is here intended, and does indeed look very like the language
of stout self-confident ignorant hypocrites.

It may be wondered how and with what confidence they could entertain such
thoughts. This is the third thing proposed, to be cleared in the words, and may
be gathered from two expressions, 1. Thou say I am rich, etc. which words do
not so much express the language of their mouths, as the inward language and
confidence of the heart, and do import, not only their thinking of such a thing
to be true, but their persuasion thereof, and confidence therein, even to a
kind of audacity and impudency, so as nothing can put them from it, and is like
these words, Ier. 2.23. How can thou say I am not polluted, etc. and verse.
35. yet thou say, because I am innocent, etc. which places hold forth the
impudency of formal hypocrites that will stick to their own justification,
even contrary to the clearest applications of the Word of God against them: and
therefore, Luke 13.26, etc. some are brought-in pleading, as it were, with
Christ in the day of Judgment their own Justification, and, though their will
be no such pleading in that day, yet it shows that many hypocrites may live
and die, without being brangled in this their vain confidence, until Christ's
final sentence do it, which is the scope of that place. The second word, is,
and knows not that thou art wretched, etc. Some might think how could such
poor persons boast so of their riches? this word shows that they were not
gross dissemblers speaking what they thought not; but that really they knew no
better, and so they are (to say so) native, subtle hypocrites, as subtle
hypocrisy is distinct from gross dissembling. Which does show, 1. That
hypocrites may really be blind and ignorant of their own unsoundnesse, and
indeed think it otherwise than it is. 2. That this their ignorance does not
excuse them and extenuate their guilt; but on the contrary, it is both a sin in
it self, and an aggravation of other sins to them; and for that end, it is made
use of here.

The last thing in the verse. is, the connection of this with the former
threatening in the word, because; and is to this purpose, the reason of my so
loathing thee, is not because simply thou art poor, miserable, and naked, etc.
but because thou being such, art conceity of thy counterfeit profession, and
unhumble under, and ignorant of, thy spiritual ills: therefore, I will spew
thee out of my mouth, etc. otherwise poverty and grace can agree well; but
blind, proud, reigning hypocrisy, and grace, can never be consisting together
in one person.

From which words, these observations are clear, 1. That many may be in a very
miserable spiritual condition under some seeming form and profession. 2. That
yet such who are poor and rotten, and withal, have some profession, are
oftentimes exceeding vain, proud and carnally confident in respect of the same.
It is a wonder that a person, or Church, in such a condition, should yet esteem
it self so as this does: but this presumption and vain confidence, is not the
least part of the subtilty of the sin of hypocrisy, and of the deceit of
natural hearts. 3. It appears here, that many may absolve themselves with
great confidence, and as having many seeming good grounds for their doing so,
who yet may not be absolved by the Lord. 4. There is no condition more
dangerous to a person, and loathsome to Christ, than to be poor and proud, or
corrupt and rotten, and yet withal to be conceity and confident. 5. This
universal confidence and satisfaction with ones own condition, is oftentimes
(if not ever) a companion or fruit of the most desperate hypocrisy: because
sincerity being imperfect as to its degrees, and so ever walking within fight
of many wants, is still laboring under the sense thereof; and so in a
dissatisfaction with its own condition in one respect or other. 6. We may see
also, that it is a main part of a Ministers duty to rip up the secret and
hidden hypocrisy of hearts, and to beat down the proud presumption of secure
hypocrites, as well as to reprove the gross out-breakings of profane persons.
7. In application, Ministers would commend the Word to consciences, and
therefore would seek to convince the Hearers of their heart-language, who
oftentimes think more proudly and grossly of themselves and of their own
condition, and even of Religion it self, than they dare outwardly profess.

The third thing in the Body of the Epistle, is, the cure which the Lord
proposes for such a case, verse. 18. There is a wonderful depth of iniquity
and hypocrisy in their case; but here there is a far more wonderful depth and
mystery of free grace and infinite love in the proposed cure. It is proprosed
by way of offer under the expressions that belong to bargaining. And indeed
here is an excellent market or fair, wherein we may consider these five.

First, There is the wares proposed, which indeed are the cure of the former
case; and they are contained in three words, 1. It is gold tried in the fire.
2. White raiment. 3. Eye Salve. All which are very suitable to their wretched,
poor and blind condition: under which expressions is understood, Christ Jesus
Himself, and His benefits, who only can work the effects ascribed to these upon
sinners, and make such a change upon their Spiritual condition: for He it is,
that is made to us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. And considering the strain of the Gospel where these
properties are only attributed to Christ, together with the scope of this
place, there can be no doubt of this.

Secondly, We may consider here the parties that are bargainers: upon the one
side, the offerer is the Prince of the Kings of the earth, the beginning of the
Creation of God, our blessed Lord Jesus, who makes offer of Himself to
sinners, and says, Behold Me, Behold Me, unto these who were not called by His
Name; on the other side, these to whom the offer is made, or who are to be the
buyers, they are wretched, poor, miserable etc. This looks
disproportionable-like at first; yet it suteth well with the bargain of Grace,
where the Lords Merchant is, every man that has no money, Isa. 55.1. providing
he be thoroughly sensible of the same.

Thirdly, We have the commendation of these wares, especially in reference to
the parties that they are proposed to; As, 1. the excellency of the things
themselves, the god is tried, the raiment is white, etc. There is nothing in
our Lord Jesus but is exceeding excellent. 2. The wares are exceeding useful
and profitabe, it is gold that makes rich. The person that has Christ,
wants not Righteousness to pay his debt; and there is no other thing to make
a person rich. 3. This raiment covers nakedness: sin is not taken notice of
where Christ is put on by Faith: For, His blood cleanses from all sin, whereas
there are many naked, loathsome souls under gorgious robes. 4. The wares are
most suitable to the party to whom they are proposed; they are poor, Christ
makes rich; they are naked, He covers; they are blind, He enlighteneth them,
and opens their eyes; there are no such suitable wares for a sinner as Christ,
and whatever account self-righteous men have of Him, yet they who think
themselves sinners, should by all means endeavor to purchase Him. 5. Wares are
commended in this, they are necessary especially to such a party: there is no
other way to be rich, but by having Christ; no otherway to be covered, or
clothed before God, but by His righteousness; or, to see, or be in capacity
to walk rightly in Spiritual things, except He prove the leader.

The fourth thing in this market or bargain, will yet commend this more; and it
is this, to wit, the terms upon which these wares are proposed, employed in
these words, buy of Me: which is not to be understood, as if there were some
equivalent price required, or to be given for Christ: for, that is contrary to
the scope of this place. And, considering the excellency of these wares, and
the poverty of these that are called to be the Merchants, what can be expected
of them in recompense for such an excellent bargain? The terms then must be
Grace, as the same market is proclaimed, Isai. 55.1, 2, 3. He, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and
eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price, etc. And
verse. 3. the wares to be bought are the same, to wit, the sure mercies of
David, that is, Christ Jesus, (as being compared with Act. 13.34. is clear)
whom the Lord promises there to give, because there is no other way possible
for the attaining of Him. This is expressed under the similitude of buying, to
show, that as there is in covenanting with God two parties to be considered (as
in all bargaining) and some excellent wares which the one must have from the
other; so there must be a mutual consent and engaging for the clofing of this
bargain, as there uses to be in bargains amongst men, though the difference be
still in this, that here all the terms are of Grace. But, God willing, we shall
consider the nature of this bargain peculiarly by it self.

The fifth thing in this bargain is the manner of Christ's proposing the same, I
counsel (...), etc. which is not so proposed, as if it were left, indifferent
to them to hearken or not. But it is thus expressed, for these reasons, 1. That
thereby he may bear out his affection, who, as a friend, condescendeth to give
them counsel in things that are of most concernment for their own good. 2. This
also shows the necessity and advantage of following this advice, because they
are counseled to it by Him that is the Counselor, Isa. 9.6. and the Fathers
substantial Wisdom. It must therefore be folly to reject His advice. 3. It is
thus expressed, to gain their consent the more willingly to the same: therefore
in the Gospel He does beseech and entreat, etc. that thereby hearts may be
induced to submit cheerfully to Him.

This verse contains a sum of the Gospel, and is a treasure of many
Gospel Truths, as, 1. That there is no condition so desperate, but there is a
fullness and efficacy in our Lord Jesus to cure the same: He is gold, white
raiment, eye salve, etc. and (the meaning of these expressions being obvious)
we conceive there is no need to insist upon them. 2. This Doctrine is clear,
That upon condition of believing and fleeing to Christ, the most loathsome,
lukewarm, desperate hypocrite may have mercy: otherways such a counsel had
not been given to Laodicea. 3. As there is a fullness in Christ; so there is a
freeness in Grace to make that fullness forthcoming to sinners that will
follow Christ's advice: and there is no sinner that hears this Gospel, but may
think himself sufficiently warranted to close this bargain with Christ, if
heartily he submit to the terms thereof. But of these no more for the time.

The fourth thing in the Body of the Epistle, is, our Lords pressing of this
His counsel: which is done two ways, verse. 19, 20. as many as I love, I
rebuke and chasten, (says he) be zealous therefore and repent. The first part
of the verse has the Argument in it, The second part, is, a conclusion drawn
from it. The Argument is, whom I love, I rebuke and chasten, that is, it is not
my way to reprove with words or chasten with rods these whom I carry no respect
unto; but I use this way to them whom I love, as I love my visible Church,
which is confirmed from Prove. 3.12. and therefore seeing I take this way with
you, and do not give up with you, my counsel ought to be the better received:
where it would be observed, that it is still the same persons whom at first He
charge. The conclusion drawn from this, has two parts: The first is, be
zealous, that is, mind to exercise Religion more seriously, in opposition to
their former formality and luke-warmnesse; and that in the performing of the
duties thereof, zeal to the glory of God, may be lively and predominant. This
we conceive does not press new duties; but a more spiritual end, motive,
manner and edge in the doing of them: for, many duties may be done without zeal
to God, though where this is not, they are never acceptable. The second part of
the direction, is, and repent: which calls them kindly to be affected with
their hypocritical condition: And these two are inferred by the word,
Therefore, from the former ground that expresses Gods love to them.

The second way he presses it, verse. 20. is, by a most instant and importunate
pursuing of His offer, with a protestation of His being there, and of His
making the same. This is done four ways, First, by showing His work and
posture, I stand at the door and knock. Hearts naturally are as Castles shut
and guarded by the devil against Christ: when H^ comes with His Ordinances, He
does thereby, as it were, lay a siege at them, and by His Word knock at the
doors thereof to gain their consent; and the more pungently He presses by His
Ordinances, He is said to knock the more: and in this respect, Song. 5.2. His
voice is said to knock at the Believers door in their sleepy condition. Here
these two things are imported, 1. Christ's continuing to deal with His Church,
and to wait upon her in His Ordinances, notwithstanding of her many former
refusals. Thus, He is said to stand at the door: whereby is holden forth their
ingratitude to Him, in keeping of Him out, and His patience that still waits
on. 2. In this, by the other word, is imported His growing more instant in His
dealing with them: therefore He is said to knock. And indeed if the former
sharp threatening and charge, and the sweet and free offer be considered, it may
well be said that now His knocks are doubled.

The second way He presses in this verse, is, by making His offer particular,
as it were, bringing it to every man's door, if any man hear my voice, and open
the door, etc. Wherein, 1. He expresses what He would have. 2. From whom. What
He would have, is in two expressions, the one is, if any man hear my voice,
that is, its harkening to His voice which He requires, as Psalm. 95.7. for the
want of which He complains, Psalm. 81.13. And in these expressions often the
terms of the Covenant of Grace are expressed, as, Isai. 55.2, 3. and is, upon
the matter, that same with buying formerly mentioned, as in that place of
Isaiah is clear. And it sets forth Faiths consenting to hear and hearken to,
and accept of Gods offer of Grace in the Covenant; as, refusing to hear,
holds forth men's rejecting of the same. The other word, is, and open the
door: it is the same thing for substance with the former. Thus also Faiths
closing with the Covenant of Grace, is often expressed, as, Psalm. 81.10. Act.
16.14. because by Faith, the heart that was formerly shut against Christ, is
made open to Him, and He has way made for Him to enter into the same, as is
clear from, Song. 5.2. Psalm. 24.7.9. and Act. 16.14. where the Lords opening
the heart of Lydia, is expressly expounded to be her giving heed to these
things, which Paul spoke, that is, her receiving of the same by Faith. This
then is the duty called-for, and the terms upon which the offer is made, to
wit, Faiths yielding to receive and admit Christ, for the end for which He is
proposed. Secondly, The person called to this, is expressed thus, if any man,
etc. which puts it so to every hearer, as if it went round to every
particular person, if thou, and thou, or thou, etc. and this manner of
expression does obviate any objection which might rise, such as, what if the
most part reject? be it so, says He, if any man open, it shall be well with
him: or, if it should be objected, I am a sinner, miserable, a hypocrite of
long standing that has often rejected the Gospel, etc. This, if any man will
open, etc. answers all these at once: because where the Lord says any man,
without exception, who is he that can limit the same, where a person of
whatsoever condition or qualification is found, that will accept of the offer
according to the terms proposed? and so this any, is a particular application
of the former advice; yet, such a particular application, as reaches every one
of whatsoever condition they be.

The third way how it is pressed here, is, by subjoyning a most comfortable
promise unto any man so understood, as it is said, to wit, if any man will
open, I will come in to him; that shows an union which shall be betwixt
Christ and him: I will sup with him; this shows a friendly familiar way of
communion that Christ shall entertain with him, as it is, Song. 5.1. I am come
into my Garden, I have eaten my honey with my honey comb, I have gathered my
myrhe, etc. Christ is a most heartsome guest where He is entertained. It is
added, and he shall sup with me: this is the fruit and effect of the former
two; and expresses the sweet satisfaction that the sinner who opens to
Christ shall have by union and commuinon with Him, as in that same place of the
Song. 5.1. when He comes to feed Himself upon His own spices, His own myrhe,
and His own wine, and what He brings with Him, then has He a large allowance
to His friends, as in the next words, eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink
abundantly, O beloved. O so satisfying a life as it is to have Christ dwelling
in the heart, and thus to be feasted with the comforts of His presence which
are better than life* and what more can there be requisite to press the making
of Christ welcome by sinners, than such a promise, or rather, three promises
put in one?

The fourth thing that presses this offer in this verse, is, the behold, which
is deservedly premitted to all. And in this place (beside the usual weight it
has in other cases) it is Christ, making this offer of His observable to them,
so that afterward they shall not get it shifted, but this shall be as an
Instrument taken upon His making the offer, to stand in futuram rei memoriam:
and so is like that, be it known unto you, men, and brethren, etc. whereby Paul
closes His Sermon, Act. 13.38. and thus, as it were, he drives the nail to
the head before he leave it, testifying that if this good bargain come not to a
close, the blame shall be upon their side. And so we may see how weightily the
Lord Preaches in these Epistles to the Churches.

The conclusion of the Epistle follows, in the last two verses, having two
parts, as all the rest have. The first is a promise made to the overcomer, with
an excellent qualification of the same, verse. 21. The promise, is, To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit upon my Throne: it is in substance the same
with many promises formerly mentioned, to wit, a promise to make him partaker
of Christ's Glory: it is not only to bring him to Glory, but to make him a
sharer of that Glory which Christ the Head possesses; that so he may reign
with him and partake of the fruits of His Dominion and Conquest. The
qualification or amplification of this promise, is, even as I overcame, and am
set down upon my fathers throne: which does import these three, 1. The
greatness of this glory, which they are to partake of: Christ is set upon the
Fathers Throne, and they are to be admitted to Christ's Throne, and so
consequently to partake both of the Glory of the Father, and of the Son
according to their capacity. 2. It is set forth in the surnesse thereof: it is
sure to the overcomer, even as that exaltation is sure to Christ. 3. It sets
forth the method of it: so that as Christ did first suffer and overcome, and
did then come to Glory; so these that are to be set down upon His Throne must
come in the same method, by wrestling, and overcoming to obtain the same.

The other thing of the conclusion, is the common advertisement, now, the
seventh time repeated, verse. 22. Yet is it never idly done: Which shows, 1.
what all men's duty is, to wit, it is their part that live in any place at any
time, to receive the Word of God with as great reverence, as others who lived
in some other place, and at some other time: therefore this advertisement is
given equally to all the Churches, and to all Hearers. It is men's duty to
receive with reverence every word of God, of whatsoever kind it be: therefore
it is subjoyned to all the several messages. 2. It shows men's sinful
stubbornness that are not easily brought to give obedience to this principal
duty.

It is meet now that we take notice of some difficulties that may arise from
the words. And here it may be enquired, what is to be thought of this Church?
or, what judgment may be given of the same? Answ. Although it is hard to
determine peremptorily concerning the state; yet it appears that the
condition of this Church, is the very worst of any that has been written to:
For, 1. there is nothing in her commendable, (at least commended) as was in
Ephesus, Pergamos, and other Churches. 2. There is no person excepted from the
charge of luke-warmnesse and hypocrisy, as was done in the Epistle to Sardis,
verse. 4. But the strain of the Epistle runeth to charge them, and to charge
them all with a most grievous charge. And seeing our Lord does take this title
to Himself in this very Epistle, to be the faithful and true witness, it is
not like that He would have altogether past over their honesty, or such as were
sincere amongst them, without commending the same, if there had been any such
to be commended. For, our Lord kept that way in all the former Epistles; and
had there been any sincere persons in this Church, it had been no less to
their commendation, and to the commendation of His Grace, to have commended the
same: yet we think that the Lord is in trysting-terms with them, and therefore
might possibly have some to call effectually from amongst them, which makes
Him thus, out of love to continue and knock: yet we cannot see any ground to
conclude that there was any sincerity, or sincere person amongst them for the
time. Upon which, several Questions may arise, as,

1. It may be asked, If there can be any particular Church, without some
sincere persons in the same, seeing it is compared to a floor where both Wheat
and Chaff are? Ans. If we consider the visible Church as Catholic and
Universal; so, indeed she can neither be without hypocrites, nor without true
Converts, as may be gathered from these similitudes whereby she is holden forth
in Scripture: but if we consider the particular Societies or Congregations that
meet together at Ordinances for Worship, we suppose that it cannot be so
peremptorily determined in reference to each of these, as if there had never
been a particular Church without hypocrites on the one hand, or sincere persons
on the other: for, there is no such promise that can be extended to every
particular Congregation; but these promises must be applied to the Catholic
Church: in which only, faith cannot fail. Again, these properties and
descriptions of the visible Church, do not agree to every particular
Congregation, but to the Church-universal, which is called the Kingdom of
Heaven, and likened to such and such similitudes. Beside, if we consider
experience, it will be hard to say that never any company of hypocrites did
combine together of themselves, or by providence were casten to meet at the
same Ordinances in way of a particular Congregation. There can be little said
of this Church of Laodicea to vindicate her from this. On the other side, it
were hard to say that never any, though the most choice number, should meet
together in a Church Way, and be without hypocrites: This indeed I grant is
much more difficult, and cannot but be much more rare than the other; (which I
suppose is but too frequent) yet considering what may be said for these hundred
and twenty who did meet and continue together, Act. 1.15. we suppose it is hard
simply to deny the same. From which, it will follow that the visible Church
must be principally considered in the New Testament as Catholic, seeing these
many properties and descriptions can only be applicable to it as such, and are
not so to be applied to particular Congregations.

2. It may be enquired, that seeing this Church is holden forth as hypocritical,
what may be the characters of a hypocrite, as they are here drawn by the Lord?
Answ. There are two sorts of hypocrites: one is more gross, and do indeed know
that they are but dissembling: these are not properly hypocrites, but
dissemblers. A second sort, is, more subtle, that is, when not only they make
others to esteem of them, as if they were sincere; but when they come indeed to
have such an estimation of themselves. These are properly hypocrites, and such
as are described here, verse. 17. Now, from this Epistle, such a description may
be gathered, 1. A subtle hypocrite, is one that has some large profession,
and fruitfulness as to many external duties: in this respect, he is not cold,
as wanting all form; but it may be he abounds in that. 2. Though he has much
form; yet has he no power nor reality at all: otherwise he could not be
denominat a hypocrite, though he might be said to have much hypocrisy in him:
and in this respect, the hypocrite is not hot, even as he is not cold. 3. He is
one that notwithstanding of this his want of sincerity, is yet still
insensible of his poverty, wretchedness and misery, etc. Thus, verse. 17. he
knows not that he is poor, miserable, blind, etc. and this is a main piece of
the subtilty of hypocrisy, whereby not only others, but even the person
himself is deceived, in respect of his own state and condition. 4. As he is
insensible of his poverty, so is he highly puffed up with the estimation of
what he appears to himself to have: and thus his security, is perfect peace;
his presumption, is strong faith and confidence; his praying, and common
liberty in the same, are most lively parts of communion with God in His
account: and thus he says, he is rich, verse. 17. and really thinks so. 5. He
is a man that does continue and grow in this self-opinion: for, being
unacquainted with through convictions, and with any apprehension of declining,
or falling from the good which he had, he does apprehend himself to be upon the
growing hand, and so to him still, his faith, grace, and state of friendship
with God, etc. do become the more unquestionable to him, and he supposes
himself to be, in all these respects, upon the thriving hand: therefore it is
said, that he thinks himself to be increased with goods, etc. 6. He is one
that is exceedingly well content and satisfied with his own condition; and so,
in his own estimation, there is none more honest and sincere, none that loves
God more singly, or is more beloved of Him; and, in a word, none with whom he
would exchange his condition. This is a man that has need of nothing in his
own account; but is as if all were well already. 7. Under all this he is a man
that has never been at the market of free Grace, nor has bought, or put on
the white raiment, etc. therefore still all the wares are his own; his
righteousness is of his own spinning; his peace stands on his own bottom;
and Christ has never been fled unto, or accepted of for righteousness by him:
therefore is there still need of making offer of, and pressing, the market of
Grace unto and upon him. 8. Notwithstanding of this, he is as confident as if
all were well: and he is in an incapacity (except the Lord do it in an
extraordinary way) to be convinced either that he wants sincerity in the
strain of his walk, or that he has not received Christ or made use of His
righteousness: and though he may take with many particular challenges; yet he
is guarded, as it were, against these two. Therefore it is said, there must be
eye salve bestowed upon him, to discover his nakedness to him. And this is
even the height of all, when self-conceitednesse and vain confidence so
possess the heart, as to make all convictions to be rejected, and to keep the
foul sleeping securely without suspecting its own naughtiness.

3. If it be asked, how a person that is so unsound comes to have such
thoughts of himself, or such confidence of his own condition? We may Answer,
Upon these confiderations, 1. Men naturally are lovers of themselves, and
admirers of what is in themselves. Hence it is, that men are so easily induced
to overvalue their own natural and moral parts, and, upon the same account,
these things that look more Spiritual-like. 2. Men naturally cannot discern the
things of God, for they are Spiritually discerned: it is no wonder therefore
that they take that which glittereth to be gold, especially this being added to
the former consideration. 3. He has all the concurrence the devil can give him
to cause him entertain such thoughts: and therefore often such a man is kept
from gross tentations, and foul out-breakings, which many sincere persons are
tortoured with: by which the devil aims to keep all in quiet, as the scope of
the parable runs, Matthew. 12.29. If we consider his practice, it needs not
seem strange that he be thus deluded: for, he does not search himself; he does
not make hypocrisy his burden, or use these means whereby the sincere-hearted
are helped to a discovery of their own naughtiness: and therefore, what
wonder is it that such be strangers to this? 5. When they go on smothering
convictions, neglecting duties, and such like, there is something that comes
judicially from God to give them up to that delusion, so as to trust the
language of their own hearts concerning their own state, beyond the most clear
convincing reproofs that may come from the Word of the Lord: and this is to be
found, ( Isa. 44.20.) in a very irrational like thing, as the worshipping of
stocks and stones; yet such a person, being turned aside by a deceived heart,
cannot deliver his own soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand? 6.
There are some concurring things which may also have influence upon this, as
suppose men be so esteemed of by others who are esteemed gracious, especially
if upon some fits of convictions, or common exercises, they have been
inconsideratly cryed-up by Ministers, as exercised Christians, when as yet the
exercise has not taken root, not has it been adverted possibly, how it came
to a close: by such and such like means, often may a Novice, or one who is not
a Christian thoroughly, come to be puffed up and fall in the condemnation of the
devil, by this or some other way. And, no question, these foolish Virgins were
not a little confirmed in their vain confidence and presumption, from this,
that they had the company and countenance of the wise Virgins, which, it may
be, many others had not, Mat. 25.

4. If it be asked, If a hypocrite can discern his own rottenness and
hypocrisy, or fear and suspect the same? Answ. 1. A hypocrite may come a great
length as to this, at some particular times and occasions, especially when some
sudden fears seem to surprise, or when some particular challenge and the fear
of wrath is born in upon him; yet in so far as he has these, and entertaineth
them, he cannot be called a hypocrite; but in so far as he bears down and
passes over the same. For, there is a real ground of suspicion and fear within
him, etc. and therefore to be affected therewith, is not properly hypocrisy,
except the same be hypocritically used, that is, that it be kept from making
discernable to him the rottenness of his state, but on the contrary, he
becomes the more vain because of such flashes, and seeming exercises, when yet
they have never been suffered to come the length of any real sincerity. 2. We
suppose, that the continuance of such suspicions, challenges and fears, is
inconsistent with the state of hypocrisy, of which we are speaking, because
security and presumption (to say so) are essentials to such a hypocrite: and we
conceive that the continuance of such challenges, fears, etc. in any degree,
cannot be consistent with such an absolute security and confidence, as was
formerly spoken to. Yet no such fear or exercise, etc. will be a proof of
sincerity, except they be rightly improven for the discovering of a persons
self-inability, and for the putting of them to the market of free Grace, by
which only such fears can be rightly removed. 3. Where these fits of fears and
suspicion are in hypocrites, they proceed rather from some apprehension or
sense of wrath (as in these who dispare concerning their Salvation) then from
any seen or felt grossness of the corruption that is in themselves; or from
any dissatisfaction with their own faith, or sincerity upon the distinct
discovery of their own rottenness and hypocrisy in it self: and therefore
such fears follow not upon their searching of themselves, nor result from the
discovery of their own naughtiness, nor are willingly entertained by them:
but, on the contrary, it is some apprehension of wrath that wakeneth them; and
what apprehensions they have of their unsoundnesse, are but impressed upon this
occasion; whereas the Believer, first, sees and feels the body of death
within him, and then has the apprehensions of wrath flowing from that. 4. In
their doubtings and suspicions, they are most sensibly touched with respect to
the end and event, that is, they doubt whether they may attain heaven, or miss
it: and possibly because of their unbelief, they may draw such sentences
sometime against themselves; yet are they not usually brought to sentence
themselves in respect of their own state, and to judge themselves as lost and
graceless: for, eye salve, to discover our nakedness, is a gift of Christ's
giving, and goes along in one bargain with gold, white raiment, etc.
Therefore it cannot be thought that any hypocrite can have this kindly
discovery of their own nakedness, and natural loathsomeness in respect of the
root thereof, though they may have many particular fruits discovered to them.
5. If a hypocrite come under any fit of terror or conviction thus to sentence
himself: yet, even then, it is not simple dissatisfaction with his own
sinfulness, which makes him do the same; but some apprehended terror of God
upon him: and therefore when that is removed, his sentence past upon himself is
retreated. And so in such a case, a hypocrit's sentencing of himself, is but
his expressing what he apprehends to be Gods sentence upon him, or, it is his
foretelling of what he thinks coming: and this supponeth still Gods sentence to
be past in his apprehension, which makes them not so much pass their own
sentence upon the account of their own deservings, as to express with regrate
what he has passed already: which by no means they would do, if they could
eschew it: whereas a sincere person does arraign and judge himself, from the
sense of his own guilt, accounting it just that God should do so also, although
they do not look upon his deed as the ground of theirs, (as in the former case)
but on their own guiltiness without respect thereto.

5. It may be asked, how a Minister may discern a lukewarm temper among the
people over whom he has charge? Answ. Although peremptory decision of such a
persons state, who has a form of Religion, be a thing that Ministers, nor
others, are not to take on them; Yet (considering that such a case is often
most frequent, and that it is of most weighty concernment for a Minister to
discern the same; also, that where it is common, it is ordinarily one way or
other so far discernable as is fit, to a searching discerning eye) We may
offer from these words such characters thereof, as may help a Minister in
applying of himself suitably, at least, to their present frame. 1. Such a
lukewarm temper has much more light than life, and much more delight in
speculative knowledge, and in such preachings as bring some new thing to that,
than they have in what really feeds the soul, and tends to search the
conscience or awaken any spiritual exercise therein. 2. Such a people have
ordinarily a heal and unbroken condition; without fears, exercises, or doubts;
and so accordingly there will be little of such subjects the matter of
discourse betwixt them and the Minister: yea, if such a thing be moved, either
they will suffer it to die out, as a thing which they are not acquainted with,
or delighted in; or, so entertain it with some such general expressions as
rather show their desire not to be thought ignorant, than any way to express
their sense of the same. 3. Much of their discourse of Religion will readily be
to their own commendation, even when they seem with the pharisee, ( Luke 18.)
to thank God they are not as other men: and so still there is some expression
of their satisfaction with their own condition that is discernable in the whole
strain of their discourse and way, what ever acknowledgements may be
intermixed. 4. It is discernable by pride, self-esteem, vain confidence, etc.
that do accompany such, which for a continuance of time together can hardly be
hid to a searching Minister: for, this does not only kyth negatively in their
want of spiritual exercises, and such like; but it will even often kyth
positively, by their censuring of others when they fall; by their asserting
their own sincerity, and the clearness and confidence that they have of their
own good condition, and by their looking upon all things which may touch at
their sore, as not belonging to them, and as if they were above and without the
reach of all such grounds of doubting. 5. Such love rather to have the esteem
and familiar acquaintance of their Minister, than to have profit by his
Ministry: hence they will be short in no civil courtesy; will be desirous of
having the Minister frequently with them, and that he may love them, and
readily complain if he humor them not in that; yet he may be many nights in
their company and find it hard to edify much; or discover any great
greediness in them to take the Word off his hand. We see the Pharisees invited
Christ to their houses, thinking it a part of their esteem, and name, to be
familiar with such a person; yet it is not recorded of any of them that they
intended their own edification, or made use of such opportunities for that end,
as Marie did, Luke 10.42. 6. Men in such a frame, as they are professed
enemines to profanitie; so are they secret whisperers against true tenderness,
and tender persons; they wonder what spiritual exercises are; and why folks
will not believe, and so quiet all their doubts; they are ready to count
diligence and seriousness beyond their own pitch, to be but fancy and
conceits, as we see in some Pharisees, condemning poor women that were mourning
at Christ's feet; and upon occasions they cannot well hide the same, especially,
when any faults break out in such, as once seemed to be more tender, then they
bless themselves in their own form of Religion, and insult upon these; whereas
these that are truly spiritual, are commanded to restore (and will readily
endeavor it such as fall with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. 7. Somewhat
is discernable by a peoples conversing with others: for, such readily love to
converse with these that do admire them, and make no doubt of their piety and
sincerity: and so Ministers and People both, that speak most smoothly to them,
without riping up any thing of their wounds, are most beloved by them, and
spoken of with the greatest commendations, even in their absence. 8. Something
also may be gathered from this, if the Congregation be esteemed to be generally
religious, and if their manner of carriage under it be still the same, and has
been so for a long time together, without any observable change, and such like.
When these things concur, it may justly be suspected if such a work be real
that is so universal and easily constant. By these and such like, an observing
and discerning Minister may, at least, come so far in the knowledge of such a
case, as may warrant him to apply himself to deal with them suitably to the
same.

6. If it should be asked, How it is that a Minister ought to deal with people
in such a frame? This will be indeed more difficult to answer, and will be the
matter of many serious thoughts to a faithful Minister, lest he run, and labor
in vain among such a people. For there is no people with greater difficulty
gained by the Gospel; and there is not ordinarily any case that does destroy so
many souls in the visible Church, as this does: and therefore there is not more
zeal and prudence required in reference to any sort of persons, than in
reference to such. For helping to answer this, we may offer these things from
the way which our Lord uses in this Epistle, 1. A Minister that has to do
with such a people, would endeavor to have a ministerial esteem amongst them,
that is, that, upon the one side, he may have a testimony in their consciences,
that he loves them, and wishes the good of their souls, as a faithful
Minister should do: otherwise, if there should be any other jar, all his
reproofs and threatenings will be accounted to flow from that, and so be
rejected. Again, on the other side, when (I say) this respect ought to be
ministerial, it is to seclude a carnal, trivial respect and affection, that
does proceed from too great familiarity with such persons, than which there is
nothing more dangerous both to Ministers and People: for, where it is, he is
accounted a companion, and, plainness from him, has no weight with it: for
they cannot think that he would converse with them so familiarly, if he had
indeed such thoughts of their condition, as faithfulness will put a Minister
to express in such a case: and, as such persons usually seek to gain such
affection and familiarity from their Minister, as a special mean to keep him in
esteeming so of them, as they do of themselves; So Ministers would beware of
giving them such a stumbling; but to endeavor such an esteem amongst them, as
is, for the works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. 2. A Minister in such a case would not
hold upon general Doctrines, nor the reproving of gross scandals only; but he
would set himself in application to insist upon hypocrisy and luke-warmnesse,
and so to describe it, to show the rifenesse of it, to set forth the
loathsomeness and the hazard that comes to souls by it, and that in a
searching, grave and weighty manner, that he may be seen to be affected
therewith himself, as the Lord does in this place. 3. This would be done
pungently and purposly, as if a Minister were building forts to besiege a City,
or taking a strong hold by the Gospel: and therefore one battery would be made
to follow upon the back of another, if so be such stout pillars of presumption
may be battered down: and for that end, the Word would be sharpened and edged,
that it may prove a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, and lay
open, not only what is the man's practice without, but what is the
heart-language within; what are his thoughts of himself; what are the grounds
upon which he builds them; what are the answers whereby he shifteth
challenges; what are the deceits wherewith he beguileth himself in all these,
and such like: which is the Lords practice here, thou say, etc. 4. A
Minister would threaten such indefinitly, as here, and, when he has described
them with their characters and symptoms, thunder out the Lords wrath and curse
even against hypocrisy, luke-warmnesse, self-conceitednesse, want of humility,
such as have not fled to Christ, are not born again, and such like; that they
may know such spiritual ills are loathsome to God. 5. It is fit in such a case
to rid marches between Nature and Grace accuratly and distinctly; and to give
such symptoms of the one, and marks of the other, as may clearly from Scripture
^et bounds between hypocrisy and sincerity; between duties done in the right
manner, and such as are but in show; so as consciences may be bound with it,
that these things are the Truths of God. 6. There would be ^^ll a plain
opening-up of the way of Justification through Faith in Christ, which is the
sure ground of all peace: and there would be a clearing of the terms of the
Covenant of Grace, and of the Doctrine of Regeneration; and withal, a most
serious pressing of them to make the right choice, and to accept of the best
bargain. Lastly, This application would be carried-on with more than ordinary
ve^emencie in the manner, weightinesse in the expression, convincingnesse in
the Arguments and Motives, etc. beside secret wrestling with God for them:
therefore the Lord here obtesteth, and protests in the pressing of this: this
also would not be done for some little space of time; but would be continued,
and insisted in: therefore the Lord knocks, and He stands and knocks:
which gives a pattern of what Ministers ought to do in such a case. And indeed
there is no greater need of any thing, than by weighty powerful Preaching, and
convincing Application, to beat and knock at hearts with the Word, as with a
hammer: because, there is no condition more rife, and more dangerous in the
Church of God, than the same of which we have spoken.

Concerning the identity of Angel, Bishop, and Presbyter.
IT may possibly seem strange to some, that in the Exposition of all these
Epistles, we have still applied what is spoken to, or of, the Angels, as being
spoken to, or of, ordinary Ministers: whereas to some, it appears, that these
Angels were some singular and eminent persons, having Jurisdiction and
Authority over other Ministers, such as usually is given to Bishops and
Prelates as contradistinct from the other: and that therefore this Exposition
and Application, which all along, does confound Bishops and Ministers, as if
there were no distinction amongst them, is not to be admitted.

To say something to this now, upon the close of all the Epistles: We do indeed
acknowledge that this Exposition does confound the same, and will admit of no
distinction amongst them, as amongst Officers of the Church of a higher and
lower place. And although we hinted somewhat of the reasons of this, Chap. 1.
verse. 20. Yet we shall attest any serious Reader (who will ponder and weigh the
series of these Epistles, and the application of them) if he can judge it
possible to expound, and apply these Epistles in any useful and practical
manner, and not be necessitate to understand what is spoken of, or to these
Angels, as being spoken of, and to, the Ministers of these Churches. And,
having now gone through the same, we profess our selves to be more confirmed
in the Exposition of this title Angel, which was formerly given. And if it were
not so, we truly would not know how to expound these Epistles, or to apply the
same to one, such as this Bishop, contradistinguished from Ministers or
Presbyters, is supposed to be. And although we purpose not to disgresse in
this; yet that it be not looked upon as any unreasonable thing thus to confound
Bishops and Ministers, and to take them for one and the same Officer, we shall
propose these four considerations,

The first is, That we are sure this is agreeable to Scripture: and if in
Scripture they be thus confounded, it must certainly be safest to speak with
it. Now that the Scripture does so, may appear from these Scriptures, which
even many of the Ancients have made use of for this end. The first is, Act. 20.
where ( verse. 17.) Paul does call the Elders of Ephesus; and when he has
continued for a time to speak unto them ( verse. 28.) he does give them this
style of Bishops (for what is translated Overseers, is in the Original, (...))
In which place they are most evidently spoken of as one, both in respect of
name, and in respect of Office.

The second place, is, Philip. 1.1. where Paul directs his Epistle, beside
the Saints, to the Bishops and Deacons, without mentioning of any Minister or
Presbyter. The reason why they are called Bishops, in the plural number, is,
not because there were plurality of Lord-Bishops, as distinct from Ministers in
one City; but it is, because by Bishops, is understood the plurality of
Ministers that were therein. And Chrysostom upon the words observes, That in
the Scripture, distinction is not made betwixt these titles; but the same that
is a Minister, is also a Bishop.

The third place, is, Tit. 1. by comparing, verse. 5. with verse. 7. where in the
one, these words are, for this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should
ordain Elders (or Ministers) in every City. and in the 7. verse. after he has
given some directions concerning their qualification, he does subjoyn this as a
reason enforcing the observation of the same, for a Bishop must be blameless,
etc. and if both were not one, there could be no force in his so reasoning. The
word also rendered Bishop, is that same which was in the former places.

The fourth place is, 1 Pet. 5.1.2. where Peter, exhorting the Ministers, or
preaching Elders, to watch carefully over the Flock and to feed the same,
expresses the nature of their Office to consist in this, in having, or taking,
the oversight of the flock: which, in the Original, is the same word, that must
be applied to Bishops, and might be rendered thus, feed the flock that is among
you, overseeing the same as Bishops, not by constraint but willingly: for the
word is, (...). And there were no reason for him to require Ministers to play
the Bishops (to speak so) by watching so over the Flocks as belong to them, if
Bishops and Ministers in the language of the Holy Ghost were not one and the
same. Neither will that exception which Bellarmin has ( de Clericis, lib. 1.
cap. 15.) and sundry other Papists with him, to wit, that at that time these
titles were not distinguished in the Church, but used in common, as they prove
out of many of the Ancients But, on the contrary, this does confirm our
assertion: For, 1. If they were not distinguished then, who can afterward
distinguish them? 2. Can there be so universal and frequent mentioning of them
as one, except they be really and wholly so? 3. It appears by these
Scriptures, where not only the titles are confounded as belonging to the same
Officers, but the offices themselves are confounded, both in respect of the
qualifications of the persons, and in respect of ordaining and installing of
them in these offices, and also in respect of the duties that are required of
both. It is worth the observing which the Jesuit Lorinus has to this purpose,
Act. 20.17. who, after the rejecting of many answers, is brought to acquiesce
in this as truth, that these names were common in the Apostles days, who did
use the title of Bishop, and Presbyter indifferently: and that therefore these
who are Presbyters in the one verse, are styled Bishops in the other: he does
also afterward subjoyn this similitude to illustrate the same; As (says he) in
the Primitive time the title Papa, or Pope, was indifferently given to all
eminent Bishops; but afterward was restricted to the Bishop of Rome, for
distinguishing him from others; so (says he) the title Bishop, which was at
first common to all Ministers, was at last appropriated to some few; who, for
distinguishing them from others, were thus styled, for setting forth their
Authority and Jurisdiction above them. This indeed seems to be the truth, and
shows clearly that Bishops and Popes (in the sense that some do plead for)
have the same original, and are grown up by the same means, to be distinguished
from others as being above them, to wit, by men's pride and humane constitutions.

I know that even by some of the Fathers these two places, to wit, Ephesians. 4.11,
12. and, 1 Timothy 3.2. with 8. are adduced for the same end: because, in the
first place, the Apostle reckons out both extraordinary and ordinary
Preaching-officers, without making any mention of Bishops: which could not be,
if they were not the same with Pastors that are named, as Ambrose on the place
asserteth. And although it seems that in somethings he mis-representeth the
Primitive order of the Church; yet is he forced to add, ideo non per omnia
convenient scripta Apostoli ordinationi quae nunc in Ecclesia est: quia haec
inter ipsa primordia scripta sunt. And though that last reason has no weight
in it to infer any change upon the Church now, in respect of its
Office-bearers, from what it was then in the Apostles days, and ordained to be
by them; yet this is clear, that he grants a clear difference between the
state of the Church in these days, wherein this distinction of Bishops from
Pastors was come to some height, from what it was in the time of the Apostles,
which certainly must be the most pure times of the Church. In the other place,
to wit, 1 Timothy 3.1, etc. The Apostle proposes certain rules for the trying and
ordaining of one to be a Bishop, and after, in verse. 8. he does immediately
pass to the office of a Deacon, without mentioning of a Presbyter or Minister:
which shows, that in speaking of Bishops, he did understand Presbyters, and
did acknowledge no distinct Teaching-officer between them and Deacons. And
indeed the rules and qualifications are the same which he makes common to
Bishops and Presbyters, Titus 1. Chrysostom moves the same Question on the
words, verse. 8. Homilia 11. to wit, Why does Paul pass immediately from Bishops
to Deacons, ommitting Presbyters? because (says he) between a Bishop and a
Presbyter there is almost no difference: for, the care of the Church is
committed to Presbyters: and what he spoke of Bishops, does agree to
Presbyters. Only he subjoyneth, in the matter of Ordination, does the Bishop
differ from the Minister? And this difference is not to be understood to be
such as was in the Apostles days: for, the former Scriptures will confute
that. Therefore even this same Father with others, do assert that then
Presbyters did ordain Bishops, as in the instance of Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. they
assayed to make out; But it is a difference that was brought in afterward in
the Church, and was in exercise for that time, though without any warrant from
the Word. And if these Scriptural grounds hold, as by what is said, they
necessarily and clearly must, it mattereth the less what may be said from
other grounds. And so we leave this first consideration.

Our second consideration, is, That this confounding both of the titles and
offices of Bishop and Presbyter, will be found agreeable to the most pure
Primitive times. It is true, within some few ages, difference was made between
Bishops and Presbyters in the Church; yet was never that distinction counted by
them to be jure divino, or by the Law of God; but as a thing belonging to order
in the Church, and brought in by custom: which was, that he who was of
greatest age and respect, and did preside in the meetings, was particularly
called Bishop, which afterward was established by some Councels. If we might
take the testimony of some Papists here, they will confirm this; Michael Medina
(as he is cited by Bellarmin, lib. 1. de Clericis, cap. 15.) does affirm, that
not only Ierom was of that mind with Aerius; (whose opinion was, that the
Bishop and the Presbyter were equal and the same) but also, that Ambrosius,
Augustinus, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostomus, Theoderetus, Oecumenius, and
Theophilactus were of that same mind. Atque ita (inquit Medina) isti viri,
alioqui sanctissimi, and Sanctarum Scripturarum consultissimi: quorum tamen
sententiam prius in Aerio, deinde in Waldensibus, postremo in Ioanne Wicclifo,
damnavit Eclesia, etc. Note here, that this has been always accounted the
common judgment of the Waldenses and of Wicklife, with his followers, whose
judgment certainly is of great weight, seeing they were eminent witnesses
against the Beast, whereof more may be spoken, Chap. 11. and he does at large
make out the Agreement of these Fathers with Aerius in this point, to wit, that
by Divine right there is no difference between Bishop and Presbyter. This
testimony will be more clear, if we consider many of these testimonies
themselves, as they are set down by Sixtus Senensis, Bibliothecae sancta, lib.
6. annotatione, 319, and 324. where he has the words of many of these Authors,
as agreeing with Ierom, whose testimony is most largely set down, and beside
what was already cited from Ambrose, these words are added out of his Comments
on 1 Timothy cap. 4. Episcopi and Presbyteri una est ordinatio: (uterque enim
Sacerdos est) sed Episcopus primus est, ut omnis Episcopus Presbyter sit, non
tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus. Ille enim Episcop^s est, qui inter Presbyteros
primus est. which is not to show any superiority of degree, but an orderly
precedencie which he that was the chief Presbyter had amongst others. He is
also cited upon Philip. 1.1. where he bringeth-in, Acts 20.17. and 28. to
confirm this, that Presbyters and Bishops were the same.

Beside these, we may add two more particular testimonies, The first is of
Ierom, first, in his Epistle to Euagrius, where at large he asserteth and
proves this Truth: and when he proponeth the Question, Would ye have
Authority? he goes through these Scriptures, Philip. 1. Acts 20. Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 1 Pet. 5. and from these places does confirm, not only the titles to be
common; but that the Presbyters were by office Bishops: and for that cause he
cites the Greek word, to wit, (...), which in that place of Peter is applied to
Presbyters, to show the identitie of the one office with the other: Yea, he
adds many other places, as the 2. and 3. Epistles of John, and 1 Timothy 3.
where (says he) de ordinatione Episcopi and Diaconi dicitur; de Presbiteris,
omnino reticetur: quia in Episcopo and Presbyter continetur. If it be asked,
How this distinction did enter? He answers in that Epistle, quod autem postea,
etc. that is, that when afterward one came to be elected and preferred to the
rest, it was done for the remedy of Schism. And it is observable, that this
remedy is said by him to be after John's writing of his Epistles, during which
time, there was no such difference. And he illustrateth it thus, as if the
Deacons should peculiarly choose one from among themselves, whom they knew to
be industrious and give him the title of Archdeacon, for helping them in the
mannaging of what belongs to their office orderly: thus ^e. Which clearly
shows what kind of precedence this is which he attributes to the Bishop,
even such as he would allow to a Deacon, that for some special end is advanced
to some peculiar care by others. Again, he does purposly handle this same thing
in his Commentars on Titus 1. where without any prejudice by the heat of
dispute, having compared verse. 5. with verse. 7. he adds, idem est ergo
Presbyter qui Episcopus: and antequam diaboli instinctu studi^ in religione
fierent, and diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae,
omnium Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesia gubernabantur. Postquam vero unusquisque
eos quos baptizavera^ suos putabat esse, non Christi, in toto orb decretum
est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur cateris; ad qu^m omnis
Ecclesiae cura pertineret; and Schismatum semina tollerentur. And lest this
assertion of his should be thought to be without warrant, he adds putat
aliquis, etc. does any think that this is not the mind of the Scripture, but
our own? to wit, that a Bishop and Presbyter are one and the same, and that the
one word, to wit, Bishop, denotes the office; and the other, to wit,
Presbyter, the age? for then they used to be well stricken in years; and
Presbyter signifies Elder. And he does subjoyn, in this place, the Scriptures
formerly mentioned for confirming the same: which he does not only cite; but
solidly reasons the Conclusion from them, and having cited Acts 20. he has
these words, observe here diligently, how calling the Presbyters of one City,
to wit, Ephesus, he does afterward style them Bishops. And also makes use of
that, Heb. 13.17. where submission and subjection is required to all that watch
over souls, and, says he, ibi aequaliter inter plures Ecclesiae cura
dividitur. And lest it should be thought that he esteemed this difference,
which afterward followed between Bishop and Presbyter, to be of Divine
institution (though in part he did then acknowledge some difference, de facto)
he does close with this, sicuti ergo Presbyteri sciunt se ex Ecclesiae
consuetudine ei qui sib^ prepositus fuerit, esse subjectos: ita Episcopi
noverint se magis consuetudine, quam dispositionis dominicae veritate,
Presbyteris esse majores, that is, as Presbyters know themselves to be by the
custom of the Church, subject to him that is set over them; so Bishops would
know that they are above Presbyters, rather by custom, than by any verity of
Divine disposition or appointment: and when he comes again to the Text, he
uses this transition, videamus igitur qualis Presbyter, five Episcopus,
ordinandus sit.

From which testimonies, these things are clear, 1. That there was no
difference betwixt the names and offices of Bishops and Presbyters in the days
of the Apostles, 2 That the difference was not begun by any Apostolic
constitution; but upon Church-custome, the decrees of Counsels, and such other
grounds. 3. That although he acknowledges some difference for the time, as
that Bishops were to ordain, from which Presbyters were restricted; yet that is
clearly asserted by him not to flow from any Divine constitution, (for there
can be none imagined after the Apostles days) but from some humane or Church
constitution, as by the former warning both to Bishops and Presbyters wherewith
he closes, is clear.

This testimony is so clear that it does put many of the Popish adversaries to
a stand. Alfonsus Castrensis (as he is cited by Bellarmin, and Sixtus Senensis,
in the places formerly mentioned) does not stand to averr, that in this Ierom
did err. And Bellarmin when he has given one answer, to wit, that Ierom
intended the change betwixt Bishops and Presbyters to have begun upon the
occasion of the first Schism at Corinth, because of his alluding to these
words, I am of Paul, I am of Ap^llo, etc. and finding him afterward to maintain
the same Doctrine from the Epistles of Paul to the Philippians, and Titus, and
also from the Epistles of Peter and John, which were written long after the
said Schism; to weaken his testimony, he says, observandum est sanctum
Hieronim^m in illa sua se^tentia non adeo constantem vid^ri, etc. whereas he is
most constant, seeing by mentioning these words, he does not pitch on that
particular Schism at Corinth; but, in allusion thereto, does express the
Schisms that followed thereafter. And we suppose there can be no ^^f^inging of
these so direct and express testimonies: yet we may observe what estimation
these men have really of the most eminent Fathers (whom they so much otherwise
cry up) when they differ from them.

This testimony upon Titus, is the more observable, because, as both Sixtus
Seuensis has it, and Bellarmin does acknowledge, Sedulius, Scotus, and
Anselmus Cantuariensis Episcopus do expound these words of Paul to Titus in the
same very words that are used by Ierom. And so the former testimony is not to
be accounted the testimony of one, but the testimony of three, beside others,
who in other words incline to Ierom's mind.

The second testimony is of that famous Father Augustine, who in his 19.
Epistle (which is the last of his Epistles direct to Ierom, and is also in that
order among Ierom's Epistles) when he is pressing Ierom. who was but a
Presbyter to use freedom with him who was ^ a Bishop, and to correct him
wherein he was wrong, he does urge it thus, q^a^qu^m enim secundum honorum
v^cabula, quae j^m Ecclesia usu^ ob^^nuit, Episcopa^us Presbyter^ ^^jor sit.

In which words it is indeed asserted, that a Bishop was more than a Presbyter,
at that time, yet the rise of that is shown to be from the use or custom which
had now obtained in the Church. Neither can that exception of Bellarmin and
some others be of force, to wit, that Augustine does compare, not the use of
the Christian Church in that time with what was formerly, but the use of these
words in the Christian Church with what was before Christ: and so the use of
the Church, and Divine institution, according to this meaning, will be one:
This (I say) does most grossly contradict that Fathers intent: for, 1. His
scope is to show that though he was called a Bishop, and Ierom but a Presbyter,
that yet indeed there was no difference, but only such as use and custom had
brought in into the Church, whereas if we expound custom or use otherwise,
Augustine would seem rather to assert and aggrege the distance that was between
him and Ierom, than any way to diminish the same. When yet his scope is clear
to lessen that distance of superiority that seemed to be between him and him
because of these titles. 2. The very expression will bear the same, quae jam
Ecclesiae usus obtinuit, etc. which necessarily imports, that sometimes such
difference was not in custom in the Church: and where will it be found in
Augustine that he compares any custom of the Church after Christ with what
was before, as different customs of different times of the same Church? for to
him, and almost all the Fathers, usus, or consuetudo Ecclesiae, is ever taken,
when given, as a ground of any practice, as contradistinguished from Divine
institution, as in the last cited words of Ierom is clear. Also, it may have
its own weight, that he is now writing to Ierom whose judgment in these things
was not unknown to him: he must therefore be supposed to use the same, as it
was understood by him.

Also in that book, which is entitled, Liber quaestionum Veteris and Novi
Testamenti among August. his Works, Quaest. 101. when he has proven from 1 Timothy 3. the Bishop and Presbyter to be one, quid est enim Episcopus nisi primus
Presbyter? and after he marketh, that although the Bishops used to style
Presbyters, Compresbyteri; yet, says he, they never say to the Deacons
Condiaconi. And whoever be the Author, it shows that in the Primitive times
this title Bishop, was rather given as a note of respect to some eminent
Ministers, than as that which did constitute a different Office or Officer
especially jur^ divino. And that there was another kind of identity between
Ministers and Bishops then any of them and Deacons, though Ministers virtually
comprehend that office also.

It is like it may be objected, that all antiquity did condemn Aerius, whose
opinion is said to be this, that he took away all distinction betwixt Bishop
and Presbyter? Answ. It is the judgment of Learned Rivetus in his Catholicus
orthodoxus, in his reply to the same charge given by Ballius, tractatu secundo
Quaest. 22. That Aerius was condemned by them, not simply as maintaining any
thing contrary to truth, in this, but as imprudently in practice brangling the
order then established amongst them, to the hazard of their union. And there
are two clear proofs of this, 1. Because where the same tenants were
maintained, as in Ierom, and others; yet where these persons continued in the
unity of the Church, they were never branded with any name of Heresy for the
same. 2. Because even Augustine, who reckons up this Heresy of Aerius, does
yet acknowledge this difference to be by no Divine constitution, as we have
formerly seen. And who will consider the rolls of Heresies, set down by these
Fathers, will find that oftentimes such are reckoned among Heretics, who much
rather ought to be accounted Schismatics. It is observable also, that even
adversaries grant that none of these Fathers do condemn him for denying that
distinction to be jure divino, (for which see Estius, lib. 4. page 35.) but for
denying it simply, And so now we leave our second consideration.

The third consideration, is, that there is some footsteps of this identity of
Bishop and Presbyter in the most corrupt Writtings of the most impure
Schoolmen: which may appear in these three, 1. In that, generally, Episcopacy
is holden to be no distinct order from Presbytery; and that Presbytery, or
Priesthood (as they speak) is the highest order in all their Hierarchy. And
this is current as the doctrine of Lombardus the Master of Sentences, Hugo,
Aquinas, Thomas Waldensis, and generally of all the Thomists at least. And
though they seem to make Bishops to be of a more eminent degree; yet by Estius,
and some others alleged by him, this is not thought sufficient to distinguish
one office from another. And indeed considering their Doctrine in all the other
branches, or orders of their Hierarchy, it will well follow, that these two,
being the same order, cannot be admitted to be distinct Officers, seeing in no
other order such a distinction is admitted.

2. We may gather it from their acknowledging of this to have been a truth in
the Primitive times. Thus Lombardus, the great Master of Sentences, lib. 4.
distinct. 24. when he gives the reason why only two orders, to wit,
Presbyteratus, and Diaconatus, are mentioned by way of excellency in the
Canons, and are called, Ordines Sacri: he subjoyneth this as the reason, quia
hos so^os primitiva Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his solis pr^ceptum
Apostoli habemus; and does for this end cite, 1 Timothy 3. and Act. 6. Again, that
great School-man Cajetan, on Titus 1.5. and 7. has these words, ubi adverte
eundem gradum, idemque officium, significari a Paulo nomine Presbyteri, and
nomine Episcopi^ Nam praemisit, idcirco reliqui te in Creta ut constituas
Presbyteros: and modo probando regulam, dicit, oportet enim Episcopum, etc. By
which words, the identity of these two offices is most clearly asserted, and
confirmed: and this also will be found to be the mind of many more.

If it be asked, how then these more eminent degrees of Bishop, Archbishop,
Patriarch, etc. did enter into the Church; and, how these differences have
arisen? Answ. The same Lombardus in that same place, de quadripartito ordine
Episcoporum, does ommit his former alleging of the custom of the Old
Testament, and other things which he abused, and out of Isidorus lays it down
thus, borum autem discretio a Gentilibus intro-ducta videtur; qui suos
flamines, alios simpliciter flamines, alios archi-flamines, alios
pr^to-flamines apellabant. Sacerdotes enim Gentilium, flamines dicebantur, etc.
Which is in sum, this difference seems to be brought in from the Gentiles who
used so to style their Priests, as to call some Priests simply, others
Arch-priests, others again first-Priests, etc. and considering that the root of
the Roman Hierarchy, to wit, Papacy, and the ordering thereof, did arise from
the superstitious Christians their imitating of the heathenish Pontifex maximus
(whereof we may see somewhat, cap. 13. lect. 4.) it is no wonder that these
inferior pillars be of the same kind. And if there were any show from the Word
for such differences, it would seem that this great Master had not gone to the
Gentiles to be beholden to them for the same. Also Estius when he is to prove
the superiority of Bishops, he has these words, quod autem jure divino sint
Episcopi Presbyteris superiores, et si non ita clarum est e sacris literis,
aliunde tamen abunde probari potest, etc. in lib. 4. senten. distinct. 24. and
so he cites Popes constitutions, Canons of Councils, etc.

In the third place, this will appear from the considering of the answers that
generally are given by them to these places of Scripture alleged, whereby it
is concluded that a Bishop and Presbyter are the same; which are generally one
of these two, 1. Some say, that though the office in the Primitive times was
distinct; yet the titles of Presbyter and Bishop, were common. But we have
found already this to be a miserable shift: because, 1. This identity of the
names so circumstantiated, proves the identity of the offices as was said; 2.
Because these places do not only apply the titles indifferently; but do
indifferently apply the duties, qualifications, and every other thing that
belongs to such officers, and offices; and there is nothing spoken of the one
in Scripture, but it is also spoken of the other, neither any thing required as
a qualification in, or duty from the one, but is also done in reference to the
other, and that expressly. A second answer, is that of Scotus, and some others
who follow him, in lib. 4. sententiarum, distinct. 24. quaestione unica; where
he endeavors thus to remove that Objection, because (says he) at first
Believers were few, and so few Ministers were needful, and it was not necessary
that there should be Officers instituted in every degree; but (says he) when
the Believers did multiply, then it was necessary. Where there is a double
fault, 1. That contrary to the Scripture it is asserted that then the Church
was not numerous, when as yet very soon the Apostles were necessitated to
choose Deacons for their help. 2. That it supponeth, that when the Church is
less numerous, there may not only be fewer Officers, but that she may want
some wholly of such and such a degree. Add, that it supponeth de facto, that
the Church in the Apostles days was not so completely constitute in respect of
the kind of Officers as afterward: which is altogether inconsistent with that
perfect platform of the Church in the Primitive Apostolic times. And when
such answers are made by the learnedest of that party to such Arguments, what
is it, but indeed the granting, upon the matter, that there was no such
distinction, or distinct offices of Bishop and Presbyter in the Primitive times
in use and practice in the Church?

Our fourth and last consideration, is, That this confounding of Angel and
Minister in this place, is necessary from the consideration of the scope and
other circumstances of the Text, whatever might be said from other places. For,
1. we cannot see how otherwise these Epistles can be profitably expounded and
applied with relation to the state of these particular Churches, except this
be, as was hinted at the entry of this Question. 2. It is certain that our
Lords purpose, is, to point out the condition of the ordinary Ministers of the
Churches as well as of the people, or of any supposed particular Bishop. And if
this be the Lords scope, then they must be comprehended under this Title Angel,
to whom the Epistles are directed: and if so, then what is spoken of the Angel,
must be applied to them indifferently, seeing the Lord makes no difference:
therefore, either we must altogether leave out Ministers from being considered
in these Epistles, or we must thus apply to them what is spoken to, and of, the
Angels. 3. What is spoken here to, or of the Angels, will agree to what in
other Scriptures is spoken to, and of, ordinary Ministers (...) to Preach the
Word, to convince gainsayers, to censure the unruly, to fulfill their
Ministry, to have an open door, and such like. All which we will find applied
to ordinary Ministers in other Scriptures; and therefore cannot but be so here
also. 4. Seeing in no other Scripture there is express distinction made between
Bishop and Presbyter; and seeing it is usual to John to speak of Presbyter or
Elder, as of the highest office that was to be in ordinary in the Church; (for
which cause, he calls himself an Elder) and seeing also he does never mention
p^^heminence in one Officer above another, but in the person of Diotrephes (and
that with indignation) as may be seen in his second and third Epistles. And
lastly, Seeing he never mentions Bishop, or any other Teaching-officer but
Presbyter in his Doctrine and Writings. Is it probable that under this
figurative style, in a Prophetical book any other Officer than a Presbyter,
especially such as should have pre-eminence over his brethren, should be
understood, and upon this place alone be grounded, it being ever most safe in
such obscure figurative places to expound the same by what is more clear? And
it would seem strange that the institution of Presbyters; yea, and of Deacons
with their qualifications, etc. should be so clear and express in the Word,
and that yet this Superior Officer should be so darkly pointed at, and there
be no qualifications, directions or rules given concerning him, but what are to
be borrowed from the inferior Pastor. 5. It would also, upon this suppofition,
be difficult to find out who these particular Bishops could be: For, 1. some
make Timothy to be dead, and John now to be Bishop of Ephesus: and can John
himself, write to himself, being at that time not in Ephesus? 2. If we take
Timothy to be the Angel mentioned, will it be charitable to account him to
have fillen so from his first love? yea, supposing it to be Onesimus, it will
be hard to construct so of him: And so we might go through the rest. Beside,
there is in all these Epistles a special sibnesse and sympathy between the
condition of the Angel and Church: therefore what is directed to the Angel at
the entry, is applied to the Churches in the close of every Epistle: yea, these
Angels are supposed to have much immediate influence upon the conditions good or
ill of these Churches. Now, it may be conceived how the Churches and their
particular Ministers may come to be of the same temper; but it cannot be
conceived how it can be so ordinarily between a Diocesian Bishop and many
Congregations under him: for, experience has proven that oftentimes there may
be a cold dead Bishop, and yet where the Ministers are lively, the people may
be in good condition: but usually when Ministers are lifelesse, although the
Bishop were lively, yet are the people for the generality of them but in a dead
condition. Lastly, If what is spoken to Angels here, be to be appropriated to
one Bishop, then it behoved to be said, that it were only the Bishop that had
the door opened to him in Preaching, as in Philadelphia; that he only were
commended for his labor and patience, as in Ephesus; that he only did convert
souls, and in that peculiar sense, were said to have few unspotted persons
under him, as in the Epistle to Sardis, etc. And if these things cannot be
astricted to Bishops, so understood, but must agree to all Ministers in such
cases, Then must the title Angel be so applied in these Epistles.

We know these things are more fully and accurately made out by many others, to
whom we refer the Reader: and in particular, to that accurate Piece of the
Ministers of the Province of London, called Ius Divinum Ministerii Evangelici,
and to the Books that are frequently mentioned therein: for, it is not our
purpose to insist in this: only we conceive that from these considerations
there is ground sufficient for our exposition and application of these
Epistles. It is not unworthy the marking also, that Augustine, expounding that
word, in the 104. Psalm (which is to him the 103.) He makes his Angels
Ministers, etc. he does understand by Angels, Praedicatores Evangelii, or
Preachers of the Gospel, without any further distinction or title; which
certainly must be done with respect to this place. I shall only add a word of
that zealous, and pious writer, Learned Mr. Boyd, who having clearly made out
this by many Scriptures and Citations of Fathers both against Papists and
others, who (says he) in this were papixantes, does close with a saying of
famous Whitaker against Sanders, who having cited Ierom's reason for the
bringing in of Bishops for the preventing of Schism, Hoc Veri-verbium
gravissime subjungit (says he) sed ipso morbo deterius pene remedium fuit: Nam
ut primo unus Presbyter reliquis praelatus est, and factus Episcopus; ita
postea unus Episcopus, reliquis est praelatus. Sic ista consuetudo Papam cum
sua Monarchia peperit, and paulatim in Ecclesiam invexit. And then does subjoyn
of himself, Nec ego sane video, si semel hoc remedium, ut ad schismata vel
tollenda vel praecavenda necessarium, admittamus and amplectamur, cur aut
quomodo gradus sistendus sit, donec ad unum summum Patriarcham sive Pontificem
Occumenicum, qui solus toti praesit Hierarchiae Ecclesiasticae, tandem
deveniamus, atque hoc Italus velit, and magno mercetur Abaddon ille Romanus,
qui cum suis asseclis, eodem hoc utuntur argumento, ad Monarchiam suam in
Ecclesia firmandam.

The same Learned Author also, coming to consider this place of the Revelation,
after other answers, does assert, that under this title Angel, a plurality of
Ministers, may be understood, (as we formerly did expound the place) whom
Christ writes to in the singular number, 1. That He might show that there was
an unity amongst the Ministers, as well as amongst the members: and so He
keeps the number of them, proportionably to the number of the Churches. And,
2. Because, by naming them so, the Lord would have them minded that some way
they did constitute but one, and are, in respect of their oversight, so to
concur in caring for the one Flock, as being each of them Ministers thereof, in
whole; and in particular, written unto by Jesus Christ, for that end. And so
this naming of Angel, in the singular number, will rather remove all supposed
difference amongst them, than establish the same: because so what is written to
one, is written to every Angel, or Minister, in these Churches: which is the
thing that at first we asserted.

An Author of late (to wit, Doctor Hamond) among many other strange things
which he has, does take an unheard of way to evite the former Arguments: and
because he cannot deny but the Scripture does take Bishops and Presbyters for
one and the same, he does therefore, first, acknowledge this to be truth: But,
2. asserteth that both are to be understood of Diocesian Bishops, and not of
Presbyters, as they are understood now. And therefore, 3. does deny that in the
Apostles times there was any middle sort of Presbyters, as he calls them,
betwixt Diocesian Bishops and Deacons. 4. That many mentioned in the Scripture,
and these seven Angels in particular, were Metropolitan Bishops, having power
over Diocesian Bishops. All which he asserteth with a great deal of confidence,
and does illustrate the then Government of the Church from the fourth Chapter
of this Book: which, to him holds forth, 1. The Metropolitan of Jerusalem, as
signified by the person that sits upon the Throne. 2. Four and twenty
Diocesian Bishops sitting on Thrones by him, which (says he) no doubt was
exactly the number of the inferior Bishops of Judea, although the same cannot
be made out by History. These are represented by the four and twenty Elders. 3.
Seven spirits, signify the seven Deacons which were in that Church: thus
(says he) was the estate of the Church in John's time, and no other Officer was
as yet instituted.

Although these be vanities beyond any thing which he condemns in Mr.
Brightman himself, and exceedingly unsuitable to the scope of the Spirit; and
though there can be little expectation to convince any who so unwarrantably
asserteth their own imagination as a certain truth, without any warrant from
the Word, or any History; yet we must say somewhat, seeing the stresse lies
here, whether there were any Presbyters in the days of the Apostles, in the
notion that we now take Presbyters? or, whether all preaching Officers were
then only Bishops with Jurisdiction, as he does understand them? For if there
were Presbyters in this notion as we speak; and if, according to his own
principles, Bishops and Presbyters were one and the same, Then it will follow
that at that time they were both preaching Presbyters or Elders. For, in
pleading that there were such Presbyters, we purpose not to plead for any
middle order, as he calls it; but, according as himself saith^ the asserting
of a Lord-bishop to have been instituted in these days, does necessarily deny
the office of Preaching*presbyters to have then been in the Church of Christ:
so, upon the contrary, it will follow, that if it be made out that there was
such an Officer as this Presbyter in the Church of Christ, Then this of
Bishops, as distinct from it, must also fall. Now, to make out that there was
such Presbyters in the Church of Christ in the Apostles days, who yet were not
Bishops in his sense, we propose these considerations.

First, Consider the general harmony of all the Ancients, of all the
Schoolmen, generally all that ever wrote since Reformation: for, I suppose,
never any questioned but that there were Preaching-presbyters in the Church as
we take them: and cannot Episcopacy be established except all these foundations
be overturned; without which yet there will not be much to say for it?

Secondly, Consider the principles of that party: for, generally, they do
account the Apostles to have been in the degree of Bishops, and the Disciples
to have been in the place of ordinary Pastors; also that Bishops Jurisdiction
over Ministers, is instituted and established in Timothy and Titus, their
ordaining, admonishing, reproving, etc. of ordinary Ministers. And if there
were none such in the Apostles days, they cannot be said to have had power
over such: and so either these Arguments must stand, and this Authors assertion
must fall; or, if it stand, they must fall: by which there is a loss to that
party however.

Thirdly, It may be considered how that Authors ground can be reconciled with
Scripture, wherein the office and actual being of such an Officer as a
Presbyter, as we take it, is sufficiently clear: for which, see, First, these
Scriptures that do most fully hold forth the distinct offices of the Church
under the New Testament, as, Ephesians. 1.4.11, 12. besides Apostles and
Evangelists, he gave some to be Pastors and Teachers. Now, by Pastors and
Teachers, must be understood Ministers, as we take them; because they are such
as were by feeding and teaching to edify Christ's Body to the end of the world:
which cannot be restricted to Bishops as understood by him; otherwise the
Pastor shall not have access to edify Christ's Church for any time to come.
And if Pastors be here understood, then they must be understood as then in
being, as the other Officers that are mentioned, and to have had their
beginning immediately after Christ's Ascension. The second pla^e is, 1 Cor.
12.28, 29. where the Apostle speaks of the Lords instituting Teachers in His
Church, as distinct from other Officers. And what can these Teachers be but
such as we account ordinary Ministers, their title bearing out their office
especially to be in Teaching? A third place, is, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. where he that
teaches, and he that exhorts, are spoken of, and are required to wait upon
their Offices; and certainly cannot but be understood of ordinary Pastors,
whose special duty consists in these. And considering the Doctors paraphrase
upon these verses, we conceive that either there he expounds them of such as
taught for the time, which does confirm what we said; or, does make it a
direction to such as afterward might be called to that Office; whereby he would
insinuate that there was none such in being for the time: this is expressly
contrary to the letter of the Text, which speaks of exhorting and teaching,
as present duties of some Officer, as well as ruling and showing mercy, etc.
are spoken of.

The second ground from Scripture, is, such places as hold sorth the Apostles
to have placed Presbyters in every Church, as Act. 14.23. Now, it must either
be said that there was no Church in the New Testament, but Diocesian Churches;
or, we must say that the ordaining Elders in every Church, must be understood
of ordinary Presbyters or Pastors: for, it is clear in Scripture that there
were many Churches, which were not in very considerable Cities as that in
Cenchrea, Romans 16.1. which yet cannot be said to want Officers, as also these
of Judea and Galatia: and can it be said that there was no Church in any
Village or part of the Country? Beside, many Churches are mentioned to be in
Corinth 1 Cor. 14.34. and certainly all had Teachers, and yet it cannot be
thought that they were all Diocesian Bishops; they must therefore be understood
of ordinary Pastors.

The third sort of Scriptures, are these that speak of many Elders in one City,
as in Ephesus, Act. 20.17, 28. and Philipp^, Philip. 1.1. in Jerusalem, in
Corinth, etc. where it is clear, that beside the extraordinary Officers that
were there, there were also many ordinary Teachers and Presbyters.

I know that Author will repel this easily, by asserting that all these were
Metropolitan Churches, and that these other Presbyters were inferior Bishops,
and that these Epistles, are not to be understood to be directed to these
particular Towns, which are mentioned only, but to all the Country, whereof
these were Metropolitan Cities and Churches. But to this we oppose, 1. How can
that be made to appear from any ground in Scripture, where neither the word
Metropolitan, nor the thing is hard of? 2. This makes two sorts of Prelatical
Bishops, when yet, whatever be understood by Bishops, in the Word it is clear
they are but of one degree: and therefore the same rules for ordination, for
qualifications, trial and ever other thing, are indifferently given for all. 3.
This contrareth the very letter of the Text, to say that when he writes to
Philippi, or Thessalonica, he writes to all Macedonia, etc. For the Apostle in
his Inscriptions puts great difference between his writeing to a particular
Church or City, and his writing to several Churches in a Country, as by his
directions to Corinth, Philippi, Coloss, etc. in the one case, and his
directions not to any Church in a particular Town, but to the Churches in
Galatia and to all the Hebrews, in the other case, is clear: which is done, to
show that the one respects a particular Town and the Christians in it, and
the other the Christians in a whole Country. And certainly, if we will mark
how he distinguishes Thessalonica from Macedonia and Achaia, 1 These. 1.7. and
how ( Coloss. 4.16.) he commands to read that Epistle in the Church of the
Laodiceans, which yet was not far from this Town, it will appear that he
understood the particular Churches which were named. Yet it is clear that there
were more Bishops in Philippi, and more Ministers in Thessalonica, as, 1 Epist.
chap. 5. verse. 12. Now to put his gloss upon the words, in that place (says
he) Thessalonica was a Metropolis, and all the Christian Churches and Bishops
in Macedonia were written unto, when Thessalonica was written unto; How then
shall verse. 7, and 8. of the first Chapter be paraphrased, so that ye were
examples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia? This would be the
meaning, ye Christians of Macedonia, are examples to all the Christians of
Macedonia: which were absurd. Yea, himself does paraphrase it thus, and this in
so eminent a manner, that your example had an happy influence, raised an
emulation in all the Christians of the other Cities in Macedonia, etc. whereby
it appears that the Church of the Thessalonians, is to be understood of the
Christians of that particular City, and that as distinct from other particular
Cities in Macedonia. Lastly, There are diverse Ministers of Coloss: for, Colos.
4.12. Epaphras is mentioned as one of their number, who certainly was a
Preacher: and again, verse. 17. Archippus is spoken of. And if there were not
plurality of Ministers in one place, What can be understood by these that are
spoken of, Philip. 4.15, etc. who Preach Christ, some sincerely, and some out
of envy? These, it seems, were all in Rome; and yet it will be hard to say
that they were all Bishops in the sense pleaded-for.

A fourth sort of Scriptures, are these that give Directions and Rules for the
calling, and trying of the qualifications of Bishops and Presbyters, etc. Now,
if these same Directions warrant to call and ordain Ministers in all
aftertimes, and if the same Rules that are given in the Epistles to Timothy
and Titus, ought now to be observed, and the same qualifications to be
enquired*for in ordinary*Ministers, etc. by virtue of these Rules; Then it will
follow that Presbyters in these places are to be understood of ordinary
Ministers: But the former is true, except we will deny that any Directions are
given at all for trying and ordaining Ministers in the Scripture. Beside, the
Apostles scope in laying down these Rules, is, to direct Officers how to walk
in the admission of all others unto the end of the world.

A fourth consideration which we propose, is, that this denial of
Preaching-presbyters, is contrary to reason, and is founded upon false
suppositions. For, it supponeth, 1. the number of Christians to have been few.
2. That an office may be afterward instituted in the Church, which was not
instituted in the Apostles days. Now, let it be considered in reason, 1. If
the Christians who were so numerous in many places, as in Jerusalem, Ephesus,
Corinth, Antioch, etc. can be supposed to have been fed sufficiently by one
Bishop? it being clear that there were many thousands, as has been abundantly
made out by that rich Piece, Learned Mr. Rutherfurd his Dueright of Presbytery,
and that acute Piece Iu^divinum regiminis Ecclesiastici; where also the
plurality of Officers is abundantly evinced: wherefore there needs no more of
this. Only we may observe from Acts 13.1. that in Antioch, beside extraordinary
Officers, there was a plurality of ordinary Teachers, which by no means can be
understood of Bishops. 2. It may be considered what the case of these Churches
would have been, when one Pastor was absent from them, as oftentimes it was by
being sent in messages to the Apostles and otherwise: can it be said that
these Churches were without Preaching-officers and Ordinances of the Word and
Sacraments all that time? yet that must be said, except we say there were other
Preaching-officers laboring amongst them. 3. Is it agreeable to reason, to
think that all Churches were of one measure so as to be served with one man?
or, that where some few number of Christians were converted and did combine
amongst themselves, they behoved either to be a Diocesian Church, which is
impossible, or to be none at all, which is contrary to the way of the Gospel?
4. I ask, If the case of the Christian Church was more perfect with Presbyters
than without them? If it be more perfect with them, then it must be said the
Primitive Apostolic Church was not in the most perfect form, which will be
against reason. If it be more perfect without them, then they were unreasonably
brought and kept into the Church: both which are absurd.

A fifth consideration, is, That the denying of Presbyters and Ministers in
this ordinary notion to have been instituted in the Apostles days, does go
near to strike at the very root of Christianity and overturn the course of the
Gospel: for, experience teaches us, that the great work of conversion in the
Church has been, and is, carried on by such Presbyters ^ and this assertion
does at once remove the same: For, 1. it denies them to have been instituted
in the Apostles days as a mean for converting of souls; and what more can be
said to overturn them? 2. Seeing he denies this institution to have been when
John wrote this Revelation ( chap. 4. Annotation.) what warrant can be
afterward given for their instituting? yea, it cannot be shown from History or
Writings of the Ancients, when or how they were first instituted; and therefore
in sum they come to be a humane institution; and so, such an excellent mean of
edification is overturned.

A sixth consideration, is, That this assertion seems to destroy itself, and
to imply a contradiction: for, if there was but one Preaching-bishop in every
one of these Churches to Preach and administer the Sacraments in the same, then
either he was equal to the same, the Congregarions not being numerous, and so
he discharged ministerial duties without having jurisdiction over any other
Preaching-presbyter (of which there were none according to this opinion) or
over any other particular Church, and if so, he is the very person whom we call
an ordinary Pastor, or Apostolic Bishop, of one particular Congregation: and
in this sense, we grant there was no other Pastor, or Presbyter: and being so
understood, this Prelatical or Diocesian-bishop having power over many
particular Congregations, must fall to the ground: or, it must be said, that
this Bishop had a charge beyond what is possible to one man to deal with, or,
had Christians and Officers in diverse places and Churches subject to him,
which will also be contrary to the assertions of the same Author. Now, if it
implicateth not, to say that he was a Diocesian Bishop, and yet had rule but
over one Congregation; and to say that he had power and jurisdiction over other
Preaching-officers, and so was not a Preaching-officer of the lowest degree;
and that yet there was no other inferior Preaching-officer: which necessarily
implies that that Bishop was of the lowest degree. If (I say) these things
implicate not, we cannot tell what does: for, the one thing says, he has none
under him; the other says, he is not one of the lowest.

Neither will any have this to say, that there was an inferior order to be
instituted after the Apostles days, over which these Bishops were to govern.
For, 1. It must be made out that there is an appointment in the Word for
instituting of such an Officer, which was not then in the Church. 2. It will
yet follow, that during the time of the Apostles, this Bishop did discharge the
office of Presbyter, and so was the lowest Preaching-officer in the Church, and
that therefore the contradiction would have been still obvious in that time,
and they had been liable unto this same argument. 3. If they had then any
jurisdiction over Presbyters, it behoved to be a non-ens, while they had no
being, and that for many years: which looks not like Christ's way in giving
talents to men. And indeed when all is considered, seeing these Bishops did
nothing but what we allow ordinary Ministers to do, and had the same
qualifications appointed for them, and the same place in the Church, to wit, to
be next before to Deacons, and have only charge of particular Congregations,
and such like. It will be most safe to conclude them to have been Bishops and
Presbyters in the sense that formerly we laid down. And so we leave any further
consideration of this Author.

Concerning the way of Covenanting with God, and of a sinners obtaining
Justification before Him.
THis last Epistle, directed to the Church of Laodicea, does contain a short
sum of the Gospel, and Gods way of engaging sinners to Him. It will therefore be
meet to take some more particular consideration thereof: For, here, 1. we have
man described in his sinful condition, ^s miserable, naked, poor; and withal,
blind and ignorant of the same. 2. We have the remedy proposed, to wit, gold,
and white raiment, etc. that is, Christ and His righteousness, which is the
great promise of the Covenant of Grace, as the mids leading to the enjoying of
God. 3. There is the condition on which this is offered, that is, believing,
expressed under the terms of buying, opening to Him, hearing His voice, etc. 4.
There are motives whereby the acceptance of this offer upon such terms is
pressed, and that both from the necessity thereof, and hazard if it be
slighted, and from the many advantages that do accompany the accepting thereof.
5. We have the duties that are called-for upon this acceptance, to wit, ^^al
and repentance, which are comprehensive of all.

This does hold forth Gods way of Covenanting with a sinful person, whereby the
guilt of his sin, and the curse following thereupon, are removed: Which we may
conceive in this order, 1. Man is supposed not only to be sinful, but also
obnoxious to the curse of God, and, in his appearance before Gods Justice, to
have that sentence standing against him. 2. There being no remedy possible
upon man's side, as a satisfaction to that Justice, there is an external
righteousness provided, to wit, the satisfaction of the Mediator, which being
imputed to the sinner, is in law to be accepted as satisfactory for him by
virtue of the Covenant of Grace; and by virtue thereof, he is to be absolved,
and discharged as if he himself had satisfied: this is the meritorious cause of
our Justification. 3. This satisfaction of the Mediator, is not imputed to all,
nor to any, but upon the terms agreed upon, to wit, that it be received, and
rested upon, Therefore the Gospel is Preached; and this righteousness is not
only revealed therein, but offered thereby to all who shall by Faith receive
the same: in which respect, the Gospel, ^s it is contained in the Word, and the
Preaching thereof, is ^o^^ only called the external instrumental cause of our
Justification. 4. When by the Power of Gods Spirit, the sinner is brought to
receive this offer, and to rest upon this righteousness, as the only ground of
his peace, and his whole defense against the Law before the Justice of God,
then, according to the offer, he becomes interested in this righteousness,
and Christ becomes his righteousness, who is, by this receiving of Him, put
on by the Believer; and by this, he may plead absolution from the challenges of
the Law before Gods Justice, as a debtor may plead absolution from his debt
upon his instructing the Cautioner to have paid it. And in this respect, Faith
is called the condition of the Covenant: because it is upon this condition that
Justification is offered to us therein; and upon this condition, God becomes
our God, and Christ our Righteousness: and it is also called the instrumental
cause of our Justification; because it acts by receiving Christ, as He is
^olden forth in the Word: and if that be justly called the external
instrumental cause, which does offer him for our righteousness, Then may Faith
well be called the internal instrumental cause; because it does receive Him for
that same end, and because by this receiving, He becomes our righteousness,
upon which our Justification is grounded. Hence, 5. upon this receiving of
Christ, and presenting of His righteousness for our defense before Gods
Justice, that righteousness and satisfaction is imputed to us, and accounted
for ours; and upon this, our sins are pardoned, and we absolved before God: and
this is that wherein formally our Justification consists: and this is the end
why this counsel is proposed, that by receiving of this offered righteosnesse,
this may be attained. This way of restoring of sinners by Grace, is often set
forth by way of mutual bargain as in Covenanting, Treating by Ambassadors,
Marrying, B^ying, and such like. All which, do import a mutual dosing of a
bargain upon mutual terms: and thus it is expressed, to show, not wherein
formally our Justification does consist; but to show the way and terms by which
we may come at it, and upon which we close with God: and in this respect, Faith
is called the condition of the Covenant of Grace; because it supplieth that
place, and has in it that which ordinarily a condition has, that is proposed
in making of a mutual bargain: sometimes also, it is set forth under legal
expressions, as to lybell an accusation against, to charge and arraign a sinner
before Justice, and then to absolve him from that charge in opposition to
condemnation: and thus, sin is called debt; and to punish for it, is to exact
or require satisfaction: and Christ in that respect, is called the Cautioner or
Surety; and His suffering, satisfying, the pardoning of the sinner, is called
justifying, or absolving, in opposition to condemning; and the deriving of this
from Christ, is called imputation, or to repute the sinner righteous upon
Christ's satisfying for him; or, it is the reckoning of Christ's satisfaction on
the account of the sinner. All which expressions, are borrowed from the way of
legal and judicial procedour before men. The first way shows how we become
friends with God, to wit, by Covenanting with Him in Christ Jesus. The second
shows a prime benefit which does slow from that friendship, to wit, our
Justification. These two are not to be conceived different things, or
successive in time, (much less to be separated;) but as they be different
ways of holding forth the same thing, whereof the one does especially relate
to the means, the other to the end, and that so, as Grace and Justice may be
seen to go along in this great business, and that a sinner may be helped to
conceive of the same the more distinctly when he has it molded in the terms
and forms used among men, and that under diverse considerations; that so he may
the more satisfyingly comprehend this mystery of free Justification. Concerning
which, in the general, we say,

1. That the immediate meritorious cause of our Justification, is Christ's
Righteousness, we take for granted: for, it is the gold here that makes rich,
without which the dyvour could not pay his debt; it is the raiment which
covers our nakednenesse: and therefore the righteousness of the Saints, must
be a put on, communicated, external and imputed righteousness: so that,
supposing a man to be pursued before the bar of Gods Justice, there is no
defense can be proposed but Christ's satisfaction, which only will be a relevant
exception in that Court; which in Paul's example is clear, Philip. 3.9. as, if
it were asked, Paul, what will thou fly to in that day? Only to be found in
Him, (says he) not having my own righteousness, which is by the works of the
Law, but that which is by Faith in Christ. Thus, Christ is our Righteousness,
and we are righteous in Him, as He was made sin for us: for, that opposition (2 Corinthians. 5.21.) does evince this; but our sins were imputed to Him, and so were
the immediate ground, upon which He was found liable to Justice: in that same
manner therefore, His Righteousness must be the immediate cause of our being
absolved, seeing His Righteousness must be transferred to us, as our sins were
to Him, as is said.

2. That this Righteousness of the Mediator, is immediately imputed to us, has
also been accounted a truth amongst the Orthodox hitherto, that is, that as a
cautioners paying of the debt, being instructed in a Court, is sufficient for
absolving of the debtor from the creditors pursuit; because, in the Law, the
cautioners paying in the debtors name, is reckoned as if the debtor had paid
it; and so it is imputed to him and accepted for him: so it is here. And this
way of imputing Christ's Righteousness immediately, does serve exceedingly, 1.
to humble the sinner, when that whereby he is justified, is not in himself;
this being certain that we are more proud of what is supposed to be in us, than
of what is imputed to us; even as a dyvour has less to boast of, when the
cautioners payment is immediately imputed to him for his absolution, than if by
his industry he had procured something to pay for himself, although the stock
had been freely bestowed on him by the cautioner. 2. It serves to commend
Christ, and to bound all boasting and glorying in Him, who is our Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. for this very end*
That ^e who glories, might glory in the Lord. 3. This riddeth marches between
the righteousness of the two Covenants, that the one is inherent and
consists in Works, that is, as the Apostle speaks, ( Tit. 3.5.) the
righteousness, or somewhat which we our selves have done; the other, is
without us, and comes by imputation: and so is not only distinguished from our
own righteousness; but opposed to it, Philip. 3.9. And although this truth be
misrepresented by many; yet we judge it to be impregnable; and that in the
great Day the decision will be found favorable thereto, when only happy shall
they be that shall be thus found in Christ. Thus therefore, we are to conceive
the terms of the Gospel, as if a debaushed dyvour, were ready to be apprehended
having nothing to pay, suppose one should offer to undertake for him and pay
the debt, so as he might be liberated, upon condition that he should
acknowledge his benefactor, and plead ever his defense against the pursuit upon
the cautioners payment, and the discharge procured by Him: in this respect, the
cautioners payment, is the meritorious cause whereby such a man is absolved, to
wit, because that payment is reckoned for him, or imputed to him; yet his
pleading that defense, or producing of that discharge, immediately, may be said
instrumentally to procure it, because it is not the cautioners payment simply
that is sustained, as a relevant defense in judgment, till that be instructed,
and except the defense be founded thereon, for, so the Law provideth: so, it is
not Christ's satisfying simply, but His satisfaction, pleaded by Faith, and
^^ed unto, that justifies; for so the Law of Faith has enacted; yet the
producing of such a discharge, meriteth nothing, but gives a legal ground of
right to the cause that does merit, and so to what is merited. And the Lord
has appointed this to be the condition of Justification, to wit, the pleading
of Christ's satisfaction before the bar immediately: for, 1. that stops all
mouths; and none can produce that satisfaction, but they must necessarily
acknowledge emptiness in themselves, Justice and Grace in God, and love and
fullness in the Mediator. 2. The pleading of this, shows a complete, perfect,
equal, evangelick, righteousness in all, whereas if it were any thing in us
that were accounted so, then it would not be equal (if perfect) which cannot be
said of that which is our righteousness; or, that one man has better ground
to be justified upon, and a better righteousness than another.

3. That Faith is necessary for Justification, so that none can expect to be
justified but Believers, has been also hitherto almost amongst all
uncontroverted, till that of late Antinomians have opposed it; But the
Scripture is very express, 1. in limiting all the promises of pardon to a
Believer, 2. in cursing all that believe not, and declaring them to be under
the curse, 3. in placing Faith correlatively taken, in the room that Works had
in the first Covenant, which must be in reference to Justification it self, and
not the sense thereof only, 4. in asserting that we believe that we may be
justified, Gal. 2.16, etc. So that there needs not much speaking to this,
beside, that many things spoken of Repentance, may be applied here. And if it
be found, that Faith is either the condition of the Covenant of Grace, or the
instrumental cause of Justification, This will necessarily follow, that there
is no Justification without it. I know there are some Divines that use
different expressions here; yet seeing they also oppose Antinomians, we will not
now stick on that.

There is more difficulty in conceiving of the manner how faith concurreth:
that there is some eminency in it, is acknowledged both by Papists, who account
it a radical grace, having influence on all other graces, and so having
special influence on that which they call Justification; and also by some
others, who, making works with it to be conditions of the new Covenant, do yet
acknowledge a special aptitude in it, for applying of Christ's righteousness;
and that therefore it is the principal condition, and other things, less
principal. In this ^ndeed these of the last opinion, seem to differ from us, 1.
That they place Faith, Repentance, and Works in one and the same kind of
causality in reference to Justification. 2. That this causality, is but to
account them all causes sine quibus non. 3. That all instrumentality is denied
to Faith. 4. That Faith is not alone the condition from any respect to its
immediate acting on its object Christ, but as other graces are. 5. That Christ
is not our immediate Evangelick righteousness, but Faith properly taken, and
that as comprehending all other duties and graces under it; and so it is both
properly taken, and improperly. 6. That therefore we may* be said to be
justified by works as by Faith, Faith being taken largely for all. Although
where the thing is clear, and Christ is rested on in Justification, and His
satisfaction acknowledged (as is in this case) there needs be no great debate
for words and terms of condition, imputation, instrument, etc. yet these being
still used among Divines, we conceive there is no just reason to cast them, the
use of them having now of a long time made them to pass in this matter,
without mistake or strict binding of them to the acceptions wherein they are
^sed in other matters: much less is there reason to cry down the matter
expressed by them: And it cannot but be sad, that such new controversies should
be moved. We are perswa^ed, that the reflecting on many worthy men, the
obscuring of the trodden path by new Questions and Objections, the confounding
of Readers by proposing, as it were, of a different strain of the Covenant,
from what formerly has been preached, the giving of an open door to men to
propose new draughts in all things, and that not in expressions only, but also,
(as is alleged) in fundamental material things, etc. shall be more
prejudicial to edification, nor the bringing forth of this shall be useful:
for, if by this all the former Doctrine of Justification be enervated, where
are we till now? if it stand so as the followers thereof may attain Heaven:
what is the use of this so full a new mould, with so much professed danger in,
and dissatisfaction with, the former? will it not be welcome to Papists, to
have Protestants speaking in their terms, and homologating them in condemning
the former language of the most eminent Reformers? and though unlearned, or
unread Divines be the Epithers of the opposers of this Doctrine, yet possibly
experience may show that such may most readily be the embracers of it. I say
again, when the Church is overwhelmed with controversies already, it is not fit
to contend for words, seeing there is some agreement in the nature of Faith, and
in the necessity of works; and we are sure where both these are, there can be
no hazard: yet, if under this new model, an other matter be comprehended, than
formerly has been intended by other expressions in the writtings of others, it
cannot be so easily approven, lest we should condemn the generation of Gods
People who have gone before us: laying by therefore prejudice and contention
for words, we shall a little (so far as our scope permits) enquire in the
truth of Faiths peculiar concurring for the application of Christ's
Righteousness in the Covenant of Grace, and what may be said of works. In
reference to which, we would premit,

1. That this way of Covenanting, is borrowed from the practice of man with
man, to set forth somewhat of a spiritual nature betwixt God and man: for which
end, the similitudes of Covenanting, Marrying, Treating, Accusing, Justifying,
etc. are borrowed, as has been said.

2. That though all mutual Covenants have their conditions; yet are they to be
distinguished, because sometimes the Covenant is such, as entering into it
intitleth to the benefits comprehended in it, as in a Marriage-covenant, entry
thereunto intitleth the Wife unto the Husband, and all that is his: sometimes
again, the relation must not only be entered, but all the terms thereof
actually performed, before there be a right to the thing promised; thus is the
covenant betwixt a Master and a Servant: for though the Servant be the Masters
Servant at the first instant of the agreement, yet has he not a right to the
covenanted hire, till he has performed the service and accomplished his Term:
in the first of these Covenants, that which enters one in that relation, is
the condition, not so in the second.

3. Hence we may distinguish the condition of a Covenant: sometimes it is taken
materially (to say so) and more largely, to wit, for all the duties that are
required of one in that relation, and so a Wifes dutifulness to her Husband
after Marriage, and an adopted Sons dutifulness to his Father after adoption,
etc. may be called conditions of the Marriage-covenant, and of adoption:
sometimes again* a condition is taken more strictly, and, to say so, formally,
that is, for such a thing as makes up the relation, and entitles one to, and
instates him in, the privileges Covenanted: So, formal consenting in
Marriage, is the condition; and a Sons actual accepting of the offered
adoption, and engaging himself to be dutiful, do enstate him in the privilege
of a Son, although he has not yet actually performed all that he is engaged
unto: and in this respect, the actual performing of some duties, is rather the
duty of one in such a relation, than the condition required to the up-making of
it.

4. There is a difference betwixt these privileges and benefits of a Covenant
that flow from it as such, and to all in such a relation: thus all wifes, as
such, have interest in their Husbands, all adopted Children in their Parents,
what ever years they be of, etc. and these benefits and privileges of a
Covenant, which are but conditionally promised, even to these within such
relations, and require more than being in Covenant* as although a Wife cannot
but have interest in her Husband, as she is a Wife; yet can she not plead the
Dowry covenanted, except she continue a faithful Wife; for, if she fail in the
essentials of the covenant, she may be di^orced: or, an adopted Son, cannot
plead actual possession of the inheritance, though ^e be a Son, till the term
come that is appointed by the Father, or he perform something called-for in the
right of adoption, which is insinuated also, Gal. 4.1, 2, etc.

Now to apply this we may some-way see in wh^^ sense works may* be called the
condition of the Covenant of Grace, and in what sense Faith only.

1. If we take the condition largely and materially for what is called-for from
one in Covenant; so works may be called the condition of the Covenant, even as
a Wife, or So^, their performing of conjugall and filial duties to the Husband
or Parent, may be called conditions of Marriage, and adoption: yet if we
consider the condition of the Covenant of Grace strictly and formally, as that
which does actually interest one in, or entitle him unto, Christ's
Righteousness, and makes him a Son, that is Faith properly taken, as it does
unite with Christ, Ioh. 1.12. because it is impossible to conceive one to
believe in Christ, but he must be conceived to have title to him, as a Wife
has to her Husband, or a Son has to his Father. And so he cannot be conceived
to be a Believer, but he must be justified: because to have interest in Christ
and His Righteousness, cannot be separated from Justification.

2. We say, if we look to such privileges of the Covenant of Grace as
presuppose something beside being in Covenant to anteced, as for example,
entering into life, admission unto Glory, and the like; in that respect, works,
and holiness may be called the condition of Salvation, because that is not
actually attained without these; even as a Wifes dutifulness may be called the
condition of her obtaining her Dowry, yet neither is this properly a condition
of Marriage, nor the other, of Covenanting with God: but if we look to the
privileges which follow the Covenant immediately and do agree to a Covenanter
as such, as, to be justified, adopted, etc. in that respect, not works, but
Faith is to be called the condition of the Covenant and of Justification:
because, by Faith they are enstated into that Covenant, and so in these
privileges that agree to a Covenanter as such.

Hence, 3. We may see, that when we speak of the Covenant of Grace and its
condition, it is not to be compared with every covenant amongst men
indifferently, as suppose, to that agreement that is betwixt a Master and a
Servant, and a Husbandman and his Labourer for his hire, which presupposes
working, (and so the performing thereof must go before ere the Servant or
Labourer can plead any thing upon their agreement) but it is like a
Marriage-covenant or free adoption, which does indeed infer duties to follow
in the respects foresaid, and does imply an engagement to perform them, but
does not-presuppose the actual performance thereof, before any right can be
pleaded by such relations, but only consenting and engaging to the same. Hence
in Scripture, the Covenant of works is compared to that Covenant which is
betwixt Masters and Servants, and the Husbandman and his hired Laborers, etc.
and the reward is called debt, or hire, not because of any merit or condignity
in the works; (which cannot be pleaded, even in Adams* case) but because the
performance of the duties of holiness and obedience, was necessarily
presupposed to the having right to the great privileges contained in that
Covenant: for, though Adam was in Covenant with God at first; yet could he not
claim life by virtue thereof, till he had continued in the obedience of the
Commands, and actually performed the same, as Servants must do before they can
plead for their hire. Again, the Covenant of Grace is compared to free
adoption, or a man's entitleing of a stranger to his inheritance upon condition
of his receiving that, and to Marriage betwixt Man and Wife (which is frequent
in Scripture;) not because the Covenant of Grace requires not holiness and
works, but because it does not require them actually to pr^^ede a persons title
to all the privileges covenanted, and does freely entitle him to the same,
upon his entry therein, as a Wife is entitled to what is the Husbands, upon her
Marriage with him, although afterward she be to perform the duties of that
relation, rather as duties called-for by it, than as conditions of it. Hence we
may call the Covenant of works, a servile-covenant, and the Covenant of Grace,
a filial or conjugall Covenant: and therefore, although holy duties be required
in both; yet there is difference, and the one is of works, and the other of
Grace. Neither is it the difference, that works in the one were merito^ious,
and in the other not: for there is proper merit in neither, nor is the
difference to be placed in this, that the one requires works perfectly holy as
the condition thereof, and the other Evangelick works not perfectly holy:
because so, there were not the same law for ordering of holy duties to us which
they had, no^ that same absolute pattern of holiness for our copy, to wit, Gods
holiness, calling us to be holy, as He is holy; nor were defects, in reference
to our perfect holiness, sinful under the Covenant of Grace, if perfection
were not required therein: all which are false, besides that so it were s^ill
of works: But the difference lies in this, that our working is not to be the
ground of our right to the inheritance, nor actually to precede our right as in
the Covenant of Works it was necessary; but, believing and consenting only.

This difference betwixt the Covenant of Works and of Grace, may be conceived
thus: Suppose a debtor being sued for his own debt, should either plead no
debt, or that he had paid it, or would pay it; this is the Covenant of Works:
Again, that of Grace, is, as a debtor acknowledging debt, but being unable to
pay, pleads only the cautioners payment, and expects to be absolved upon
that account; and not as if by a cautioners interveening, he had all the debt
forgiven him to so much, or had a new bargain given him for a penny yearly, or a
pepper-corn in the place of a thousand talents; and, in a word, so much down, or
that for gold, ure of gold should be accepted: For so, 1. some would have their
penny more weighty than others, and thereby be more justified than others, or at
least have a better ground to be justified upon. 2. It would be still the same
kind of condition, and so the same Covenant in kind ( m^jus and min^s (...)
variant speciem:) for, paying of one bushel, for an hundred chalders, still
says it is victual-rent, although it be of Grace, that it is so little: and
indeed so, the first Covenant might be called of Grace, because the good
promised were so far beyond the rent required: and so it were but as a man that
did at first require a talent, for that which were worth much more, and should
afterward alter and require only a shekel. 3. It cannot be so; for, the sinners
charge, is not that he wants his penny or pepper-corn, but that he has broken
the Law; his righteousness therefore must be such as does meet that charge,
as, Romans 8.34. and so it must be such a righteousness as must stand before
Justice, and be equipollent, at least, to his own fulfilling the Law, or his
having satisfied the penalty thereof. 4. When the Apostle opposes the
righteousness of the Law and Gospel, he opposes not as it were a thousand
talents to a penny, or one sort of works to an other, but the righteousness of
Christ, or, to be found in Him* to all kind of works whatsoever, Phil. 3.9. 2
Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3. etc. and to have the righteousness of Faith, and the
righteousness of Christ, and the righteousness by Faith, are ever one and the
same, and are still opposed to Works.

From this also it does appear, that Covenanting does in order of nature
precede Justification: because, by Covenanting and being in Covenant, we come
to have a right thereto, as to a promise of the Covenant, as the accepting of
an offered pardon, does go before ou^ having actual ri^ht to the following
privileges, or a woman's consent before her actual claim to the Husbands
goods, though the one is not supposed to be without the other; even as the
breach of Covenant, does precede our being liable to condemnation by the Law.
Hence also we may someway gather, that there may be some formal different
consideration of the condition of Justification, from the condition of the
Covenant: for, Justification being a legal judicial act, it must presuppose
such a condition as may be a ground in Justice to absolve a sinner; and
therefore in this, Christ's satisfaction, as presented and pleaded, must be the
only ground; for, it is with respect to that only, by which a sinner can be
justified; and this is, to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. Covenanting again,
being a mutual deed, wherein the Lord condescendeth to make a free offer, and
to admit in Covenant upon condition of receiving, the condition here must be
that which enti^eth to that thing offered, and enters the person within the
bond of the Covenant, which must be Faith. Hence these two acts of Faith,
whereby it is defined, may be thus conceived, 1. It receives Christ, and so it
enters into, and closes with, the Covenant, and gets instantly a title to
what is contained therein. 2. It res^eth on him; which must be judicially
understood, as o^^ rests on a relevant defense, and therefore pleads it, as
it is said, Romans 2. that the Jews rested on the Law, which was to expect
Justification by it, and so to rest on the righteousness thereof; in which
sense we now rest by Faith on Christ's Righteousness: this supposes one to be
in Him, and in the Covenant, and it looks, as such, to Justification; and in
respect of its manner of acting immediately on Christ our Righteousness, it
may well be called the isntrumental cause of our Justification. Thus, suppose
a sinner to be lying under Gods curse, and suppose the Mediator to have
satisfied, and a Proclamation to be made that whatsoever sinner liable to the
curse for sin, will accept of Christ's Righteousness, and rest thereon, he
shall be justified. 1. A sinner is induced to receive that offer, which is done
by consenting, and submiting to that way of obtaining righteousness; this is
the closing with the Covenant* and thus Faith is the condition thereof. Then,
2. Suppose him to look to the charge that stands against him for his former
sins in Gods threatened curse* and to satisfy this he giveth-in Christ's
satisfaction; which being offered to him for this end that he, upon the
receiving thereof, may be justified; he, by Faith resting on Gods faithful
Word, through Christ, repelleth all these charges, by presenting that as his
defense, and by the letter of the Law of Faith, which says, He that believes
shall not come into cond^mnation, but has passed from death to life, he is
absolved: and this is Justification, even as he was formerly condemned by the
Law of Works. Here the only meritorious cause of the absolution, and the
righteousness upon which the sentence passes, is, the Cautioners payment; yet
so as it is Judicially pleaded: in which respect, we say that Faith is
isntrumental. And though this pleading of it be necessary, and the Law
absolveth not but when the ground i^ instructed; yet this pleading or
instructing, is not the persons righteousness properly, or the ground of his
absolution; but that which is pleaded and instructed, to wit, the Cautioners
payment: which being according to Law instructed, is the ground of absolving
the debtor from the charge: this is plain even in the dealing of humane Courts.
And the tennor of the way of Justification, being holden forth in the Word with
respect to a judicial procedour in humane Courts, as is said, it can no other
way be more satisfyingly cleared.

To insist a little more then, there is a twofold peculiarity attributed to
Faith, beside what is given to works and any other Grace. 1. That it is the
condition of the Covenant, properly. 2. That it has an isntrumental causality
peculiar to it, in our Justification. By the first, is meaned that believing in
Christ, and receiving of Him, is that which enstates one into the Covenant, and
gives him right to what is promised, and does in our having right to Gods
promises, supply that room, which conditions do in men's mutual bargains;
wherein when one promises somewhat on such a condition, the performance of
that condition does turn the conditional promise into an absolute right to him
that has performed it: and so a condition is that, upon which the title to the
great promise, to wit, Gods being our God, does depend. And Faith, gets this
name in respect of the place God has put it into in His Covenant; and so it
flows from His extrinsick ordination. By the second, to wit, that it is
called an isntrumental cause, the intrinsic manner of its acting is
respected: for, though it be from the Spirit with other Graces, and they be not
separated; yet has it a peculiar aptitude to look to Christ, receive Him,
apprehend and ^at Him, take hold of, and rest on, Him, etc. which no other
grace has. For, it is in the new Creature and Inner-man someway proportionably
as it is in the Outter-man: for, though there be many members of one body, yet
all act not in the same manner; the hand acts one way, and the ear another,
etc. So it is in the Inner-man, there are many Graces (which are members
thereof) yet have they their peculiar way of acting, whereof these mentioned
are attributed to Faith: for which, often it is called the eye, the hand, and
the door of the renewed soul; because by it, Christ is apprehended, received,
and admitted thereunto.

We conceive this instrumentality is justly attributed to Faith, because, seeing
there must be an application of the righteousness of Christ, and seeing Faith
does concur, or is made use of as a mids for receiving of Him, which is the way
by which His Righteousness is applied, why may it not be called isntrumental
in our Justification, as it is instrumental in receiving of and resting on His
Righteousness, by which, and for which we are justified? And thus, Faith is
not our receiving, but the mean by which we receive, as the eye is not our
seeing, nor the hand our gripping of any thing; but the organs, or means,
whereby we see and grip. Neither does this give any thing to Faith, that
derogateth from Christ: for, it leaves the praise and virtue to Him; but does
infer only an exercising of Faith, for attaining of that benefit, to wit,
Justification, Justification it self being an apotelesma (to say so) or effect,
both of Christ's purchase, Gods Grace, and our believing, and does flow from
them all respectively, and does presuppose the same. The dispute about active
and passive instruments, is needless here, seeing the meaning is clear, that
for attaining of Justification by Christ's Righteousness, Faith does peculiarly
concur in the apprehending thereof, and resting thereon, otherwise than other
Graces can be said to do. And this cannot be denied, if we consider,

1. That to be justified by Christ, and by Faith, or by the righteousness of
Christ, and the righteousness of Faith, are still one in Scripture, even then
when that concurrence which is allowed to Faith is denied to all other things;
which says, that Faith concurreth peculiarly, and that so as Christ is rested
on by it when it justifies; or, that it justifies by obtaining Justification
through Him. 2. If this be truth, that the righteousness of Christ is the
thing immediately presented before Gods Justice, upon which we are absolved, as
is said; and also if it cannot be denied that Faith has a peculiar aptitude,
to act on Christ's Righteousness, and present the same, Then it must be
granted, first, that Faith must have a peculiar way of concurring to the
attaining of Justification. And, secondly, that this may well be called an
instrumental causality in reference to that end: otherwise there is no use nor
exercise of this its peculiar aptitude, which is still acknowledged. And if it
please better to say, that Faith justifies, or concurreth in Justification, in
respect of its peculiar aptitude to act on Christ, and to receive Him, than to
say, it concurreth instrumentally, we shall not contend, providing it be the
same, upon the matter, with the ordinary doctrine concerning this
instrumentality of Faith: which we may illustrate and confirm by these
considerations and similitudes, 1. It is granted that the Word is the external
instrument of Justification; and that must be, because it does offer the same
upon condition of believing; or, holds forth a righteousness by which we may
be justified: So Faith must be the internal instrument, because it receives
the same that is offered by the Word; and receiving, is no less necessary to
Justification, than offering: and seeing that receiving and offering relate so
to each other, and both to the end, there is reason to attribute the same kind
of causality to the one, that is given to the other, respectively.

2. We are said to be justified by Faith in Christ, as the people were healed
by looking to the brazen serpent, which was to typifie this, Ioh. 3. verse. 14.
Now they, by the virtue of the serpent, (considering it typically and with
respect to the appointment) did receive health, yet so as that health was
attained by looking thereto; in which respect, their eye or look, might be
called instrumental in their health, although it was not looking simply, but to
that Object with respect to the Lords appointment: even so it is here; its
Christ's virtue whereby we are justified, yet so as by Faith it is apprehended,
and according to Gods appointment looked unto: and, thus, as Matthew. 7. the eye
is called the light of the body, because it is the organ by and through which
light is brought or letten-in to it; so Faith may be called our righteousness,
as it is the mean by which Christ's Righteousness without us is apprehended,
brought in, as it were, and admitted of, to be ours.

3. Justification is still held forth in judicial expressions, as is said: Now,
as an accused party, their producing of a Law for them or a discharge, may be
said to be isntrumental in their own absolution, although it be only the
virtue of the discharge given-in that does procure the same; so may Faith be
said instrumentally to justify us, as it presents for us Christ's
satisfaction before the justice of God. And so it is here as in humane Courts:
for, although some Advocates, it may be, plead better, and some worse; yet
suppose that they all produce the same discharges, and the same Laws in favors
of their Clients, they might all be called instrumental in their absolution;
and the ground of their absolvitours would be equal; whereas, if their act of
pleading, without respect to what is pleaded, were considered, it would not be
so; even so here, though some men's faith be more strong, and others more weak,
yet all apprehending the same satisfaction of Christ, there is equal sharing in
Justification: which could not be, if Faith did not concur instrumentally in
the use-making of Christ's Righteousness, even as of the only immediate
Evangelick-righteousnesse, as it respects our Justification: because, if
Faith be considered in it self, and not as with the object, apprehended by it,
it is not equal even in those that are justified.

4. See it in miraculous Faith: as it concurreth for attaining of a particular
benefit; so does saving Faith for attaining of Justification: for, that there
is an equal influence of both upon their respective effects, cannot be denied.
Now, that miraculous Faith might be said someway to concur instrumentally for
health, is clear: for, it is said that some had Faith to be healed, to receive
virtue from Christ, etc. which others had not, and accordingly the effects, are
attributed both to their Faith and to Christ's Power; therefore, it may be so
here, to wit, Justification may flow from Faith as the instrumental cause, and
from Christ's Righteousness as the meritorious.

5. In the ordinary similitude of Marriage or solemn Covenanting, it may be
seen: for, actual consenting, or the hand that writes the name, may be said
to be instrumental in the closing of the bargain, or in attaining the
privileges that follow thereon, and the hand has an other influence than the
foot or eye, although these also be necessary, yet it is not consenting or
subscribing simply, but such and such in reference to such Objects and
Covenants: even as it is not the tongue its speaking truths, and the reaching
forth of discharges simply that are instrumental in men's courts for attaining
absolution; but it is the speaking of such pertinent truths, or producing of
such suitable discharges that comes under that name: and this is all we intend,
when we say that Faith concurreth instrumentally, even to hold out the
immediate cause of our Justification, to be Christ apprehended by Faith* so
that Faith and Christ are both necessary, but differently, and so also that the
efficacy of all the concurrence of Faith may be from Christ the Object, from
which it is not to be separated when it is said to justify.

The other thing peculiarly attributed to Faith, is, that it is the condition
of the Covenant of Grace, properly: which can be said of no other grace or
work. This is to be understood as is above expressed, to wit, that Faith is
that which on our side is called-for, for constituting of us Covenanters, and
giving us right to the great comprehensive promise thereof, that God may be our
God: and upon the performing of which, that which God has promised in it, may
be expected, as is before said.

That Faith is thus the condition peculiarly, and not Works, nor any other
grace, (beside what is said afterward upon Repentance) may thus appear, 1.
Because Faith only has that peculiar aptitude of receiving Gods offer and
returning of our engagement; and so, for making the bargain mutually to be
closed: and Faith cannot be conceived to be exercised; but the bargain must be
conceived to be closed, and that person to be in Covenant: therefore, the
exercising thereof, must be peculiarly the condition. 2. If Faith be that which
peculiarly riddeth marches, between the Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of
Works and curse; and a Believer so ipso be freed from the curse, because he is
a Believer and does rest on Christ, Then Faith must be peculiarly the condition
of the Covenant of Grace; But the former cannot be denied, and is clear, Ioh. 3
18, 36. 3. If Works concur in the same causality with Faith, Then it must
either be Works before one be in Covenant, or Works thereafter; But it can be
neither: not before one be in Covenant, because such Works cannot be accepted:
nor secondly after, because then they could not be the condition upon which we
are admitted: for so, we would be accepted before the condition be performed.
If it be said, that the same reasoning will seclude Faith, because if Faith be
the condition, Then it must either be Faith before we be in Covenant, or after,
etc. Answ. It follows not: because its Faith neither before nor after our
entry, but that which enters us, that is the condition: and it cannot be
conceived before nor after, being an instantaneous act, as solemn consenting in
Marriage is not before nor after, as it constituteth Marriage, but instantly.
Here, still observe, that when we speak of a condition, we speak of that
condition whereby one is admitted within the Covenant, and not of any thing
that may be implied to be performed by one admitted already to Covenant:
because that must be the condition of the Covenant properly that intitleth one
to the privileges covenanted; But what enters one into this Covenant, does
entitle him to the privileges covenanted: Therefore it must properly be the
condition; and Faith being that, is therefore alone so to be esteemed. Which we
may further urge, thus, either being admitted to the Covenant, one is freed
from the curse, and instated in all the privileges of the Covenant or not; It
cannot be said, not; because that were to make one a Covenanter and not a
Covenanter: and one cannot be conceived to be in Covenant with God, but God is
in Covenant with him actually, as a wifes marrying of a husband does actually
state her in what is the husbands. Therefore Faith being that whereby we are
entered into Covenant, as is granted, must be properly the only condition.
Again, either by Faith we are instated in the Covenant of Grace upon the very
instant of believing, and so justified, or, one may be supposed to be a
Believer, and not to be in the Covenant of Grace, or, to be in the Covenant of
Grace, and not to be justified: both which are absurd: Therefore Faith must be
the proper condition.

If it be said here that Justification is a continued act, Then we urge, 1. If
instantly upon believing, one be justified and freed from the curse, and
instated into friendship with God, Then it cannot be a continued act; But the
former is true, as is said; and to say otherwise, would overturn the nature of
the Covenant. 2. If Justification be a continued act, Then our being received
and admitted into Covenant as to a right unto the saving blessings promised
therein, must be a continued act also: For, these two must stand and fall
together, to wit, to be admitted thus into Covenant, and to be justified; for,
who are thus in Covenant, are justified; and who are justified, are thus in
Covenant: But the last cannot be said, to wit, that the act of our being
admitted, or whereby we are entered into Covenant, is a continued act: because,
1. so none living could be said to be in Covenant with God, nor account
themselves to be Gods, or claim God to be theirs: which is absurd. 2. So one
that is a Believer, might be said to be under the curse of the Covenant of
Works; which is contrary unto that freedom pronounced unto Believers: for, if
they be not under Grace, they are still under the Covenant of Works; and if
under Grace, then in the Covenant of Grace. To say here, that God continues to
justify, will not remove this: because Justification must continue only, as
their admitting or the act of their admission into Covenant, may continue; But
it cannot be said, that they continue in being admitted into Covenant, or, that
by a continued act, the Lord is still admitting them, or, that they are
continuing to enter, as it infers non-admission, or not entry, or an
imperfect admission, but as it supponeth the person to be entered and to
continue so: It must therefore be so in Justification. 3. If a Believer, so
ipso that he is a Believer, has a shield against all challenges, and a
righteousness that can abide the trial in justice. Then cannot Justification
be a continued act, because if Justification be not instantaneous and
immediately perfect, it must either be upon ones not-believing in Christ, or
because of some defect of the righteousness that Faith presents, and so
Faith were not a sufficient shield; or, it must be, because the Word does not
pronounce him just upon the ground of that righteousness: which were also
absurd; But the former is true, a Believer cannot be conceived to be such, but
he has a complete righteousness in Christ, and by being in Him, has a
sufficient answer to justice, upon the first instant of believing, as the whole
series of the Gospel does demonstrate, he that believes shall not come into
condemnation, etc. Therefore must he be upon the first instant justified: for,
if it were but a perfecting, it could not be said that he had an actual
perfect righteousness, but only that it were a perfecting.

Further, we may argue against Works concurring with Faith, thus, If Works be a
condition of the Covenant, Then it must either be Works as begun, or as
persevered into: But neither can be said: not the first; because it is granted,
that persevering in holiness is no less necessary than entering thereinto:
not the second, because perseverance is a mercy contained in the Covenant, and
(if we may say so) promised to us upon condition of our believing and entering
Covenant: it cannot therefore be the condition of our entering the Covenant.
Again, many have not actual works, and yet may be saved: therefore Works cannot
be the condition. If it be said, that such have resolutions of, and engagement
unto, Works; That cannot solve this: because this opinion does distinguish
Works and the necessity of them from Faith properly and strictly taken; yet to
them that hold it, Faith strictly and properly taken, (even that which is
justifying,) does receive Christ as Lord, and so implies this engagement: and
therefore, if that definition of justifying Faith were true, and this ground
also granted, that engaging is sufficient, Then also were Faith properly, that
is, strictly taken, the condition of the Covenant, according as they understand
it; and so there were no necessity to add or mention Works as distinct from
it, or to press Faith to be the condition as more largely and improperly
taken: and so in some respect there were no difference: for, this far none
denies but that actual engaging to Christ and to Holiness is necessary:
because, it is impossible to conceive one closing with the Covenant, but he
becomes, ipso facto, engaged who does close; Or thus, that which is the
condition to one, must be to all at age; (for of such we speak) But actual
Works cannot be the condition to all; because some may be saved without them,
as suppose (which is not impossible) actual consenting to the Covenant, and
engaging to holiness, were the last act of a person before death, neither can
they say that engaging to holiness were in this case sufficient, and that it
is here intended: because, Works are spoken of as the condition, as they are
distinguished from Faith, as it is taken by them to be the accepting of Christ
as Lord as well as Savior, as has been said. See more of this on Repentance.

But beside all that is spoken, these two mainly stand in the way of our
accounting works a condition of the Covenant, or of Justification, in the same
kind of causality with Faith; Because it obscureth the difference of the two
Covenants, to wit, the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace: for so,
works should be still the condition of the Covenant of Grace. Now the Apostle
does directly oppose these, the righteousness of the Law says on this ways,
the man that does those things, etc. and the righteousness of Faith is holden
forth as opposite to that, and so cannot be said to consist in doing of works,
Romans 10.5, 6. Gal. 3.12. If it be said, that He excludes legal works, or
Law-righteousnesse, which are not alleged by this opinion; but does not
exclude Evangelick works, which may well stand with Grace. Answ. 1. The
Apostles opposition is not made to exclude one kind of works, and take in
another; but simply to exclude all which may come under the expression, do
this. And hence Faith itself, as it is our work, has ever been excluded in
this respect. 2. If we look to works with respect to the Covenant of Works,
even so works have no proper merit, nor proportion unto the things promised, of
themselves, but as it is determined, and condescended to in the Covenant, and
by virtue of Gods promise made thereunto: therefore it is called a Covenant of
Works: not because of the merit of the works; but in respect of the formality
of the condition thereof, to wit, doing, that is, the righteousness which we
our selves do, Tit. 3.5. And in this respect, to work one day and to work
twenty years, or paying of a thousand talents, and one penny, does not
difference the nature of the condition of the Covenant (supposing the condition
of both to be expressed in these terms) although the degree thereof be
different. 3. Faith is opposed to works as the condition of the Covenant, or of
Justification, not as considered in it self, but as with respect to its object
Christ; and so we are thus to conceive the opposition, works inherent in us,
and performed by us, are called-for in the Covenant of Works, as the
righteousness thereof, and as the only ground upon which we can expect to be
justified by it: again, by the Covenant of Grace, Christ's Righteousness
without us, received by Faith, is only admitted as a Righteousness and ground
of Justification: that Faith is so to be understood, in Romans 10.5.6.and Gal.
3.10, 11, 12, etc. is evident: for, the righteousness spoken of, Romans 10.
verse. 3, 4. (which is the righteousness of Faith, and is opposed to our
righteousness) is Christ, the end of the Law for righteousness to all that
believe, who was stumbled at by the Jews, etc. So it is also in that other
place, Gal. 3. as the scope manifests, to wit, Faith as making use of Christ,
His becoming the curse for us. And it is observable, that in both these
Chapters the difference of the conditions of the Covenant of Works and of
Grace, is insisted on, to plead the necessity of a righteousness without us in
opposition to our own: and so Faith must be the condition of the Covenant of
Grace, as it acts or rests on that.

The second thing that mainly disswadeth from that opinion, is, that it does
propose something in our selves as the immediate ground of our Justification
before God, under that title of being our Evangelick righteousness: for, if
works concur in that same causality with Faith, Then our believing properly
must be accounted our righteousness, and not Christ's by Faith taken hold on:
because these two are inconsistent, to wit, Faith and works, in a proper sense,
to be our Evangelick-righteousnesse, and Christ also. For, suppose one to be
charged at Gods Bar for sin, the one way Christ is represented, and the other
way the man's believing and obedience. If it be faid, that when we mention
believing or Faith, it cannot but respect Christ. Answ. 1. Then there is no
difference; for, we acknowledge Faith correlatively taken to be our
righteousness. 2. Then also works cannot concur in that manner; for, they
cannot so respect him: which is all that is intended.

If it be said, that Christ is our legall-righteousnesse, that is, that by Him
we have satisfied the Covenant of Works, He having paid in our name; but Faith
and obedience are our Evangelick-righteousnesse, that is, as He has procured a
new grant of life upon these easy terms in the Covenant of Grace, and so as by
performing thereof we may come to have right to what He has purchased in
satisfying the first Covenant.

Answ. 1. This mis-representeth Gods way of Covenanting, who has not appointed
our paying of a small rent (as it were a penny) to be the ground of our right
unto Christ's purchase; but seeing Christ became Cautioner in our name, to pay
the debt, He has appointed the debtors claiming of, and submitting unto his
payment, to be the terms upon which he shall be absolved, as was at the entry
to this discourse observed, and is clear from Philip. 3.9. where the
righteousness of Faith (which is our Evangelick-righteousnesse, and opposed to
works) and to be found in Christ, are one; and the one is explained by the
other.

2. This way does make a Covenant to be a mids or way for attaining of another
righteousness for Justification beside Christ's; and so does make two
righteousnesses in Justification, and one of them to be the mids for attaining
the other, whereas the Gospel righteousness is but one in it self, by Faith
apprehended and made ours.

3. Although this may seem not to exalt works by giving them any merit; yet it
is impossible to account them even to be our Evangelick-righteousnesse, or a
condition of the Covenant of Grace, but there will still be a readiness to
heighten them above their own place, which derogateth to the way of Grace that
is laid down by Faith in Christ: for, it is easy to exceed in reference to any
thing in our selves, considered in it self; whereas when Faith is only
respected, as it apprehends Christ, it cannot be so considered; for, it not
only merits nothing, but it excludes merit and all boasting: and therefore the
Lord has thus wisely ordered that all may be kept from boasting, even of
Faith.

4. We may answer, if by legall-righteousnesse be understood that which may be
satisfying to the Law, so Christ indeed is our legall-righteousnesse; yet so as
by the Gospel only we have access to Him, and have a promise of being accepted
through Him, without the receiving of which by Faith, He is not a
legall-righteousnesse to any: and so He is our only Evangelick-righteousnesse
also: and thus our legall-righteousnesse and Evangelick, are the same; for
there is but one charge to a sinner, which only can be answered by fleeing to
Christ: and so, He is our legall-righteousnesse, as the Laws charge is
satisfied by Him; and He is our Evangelick-righteousnesse, as that mean of
answering the Law, is to us proposed in the Gospel and for us (upon the
condition foresaid) accepted by the same, without which Christ had never been
our legall-righteousnesse: and the dividing of these two righteousnesses, does
suppone, that there may be a legall-righteousnesse in Christ, to such as may
actually never partake thereof, (and we are afraid that some such thing may
occasion this distinction) whereas Gods way in the Gospel is to provide a
righteousness for such as were given to Christ, by which they may be actually
justified, Isa. 53.11. And if Christ be not this Gospel-righteousnesse, what
can be it? For it is by Him we are freed from the curse of the Law, which is
the end wherefore this Gospel-righteousnesse is preached. And it is by putting
on Him that even the Gospel holds forth Justification. But, if we consider
the Law-righteousnesse strictly, as it requires personal holiness, or
satisfaction from the very party; so Christ is not our legall-righteousnesse;
and in that sense it cannot be pleaded for: it must therefore follow, that He
is our Gospel-righteousnesse, seeing no other way but by the Gospel we have
access to Him. And therefore that distinction will not hold here: for, Christ
is either our legall-righteousnesse, that is, the righteousness which the Law
holds forth, and accepts of it self, or our Evangelick-righteousnesse, that
is, the righteousness which the Gospel holds forth, and which by it is
accepted; But he is not the first: Ergo, he must be the second. And so Faith,
properly taken, cannot be our Evangelick-righteousnesse, seeing Christ, and
Faith properly taken, without relation to Him, cannot both be so accounted.
Again, if Faith properly taken, and that largely, be our Gospel-righteousnesse,
upon which we are justified, Then it is either Faith, including that respect to
Christ, or not; But neither of these can be: for, if it respect and include
Christ, then it is what we say, Faith with its object, and not Faith properly;
and so not Faith in that same causality with works, which is asserted: if it
respect not, nor include Christ, Then is there a righteousness and ground of
Justification, wherein Christ is not comprehended, which will-sound no way like
a Gospel-righteousnesse.

If it be said, that he has procured Faith in that large sense to be accepted.
Ans. 1. That makes a new Covenant of Works, as is said, 2. That is not to make
Christ to be our immediate righteousness; but only to have procured that such
works should be accepted, and the former Covenant mitigated, but not in its
nature changed. And so, 3. It homologateth Popish Doctrine, which we hope is
far from being intended by the maintainers of this opinion. 4. That overturneth
the imputation of Christ's Righteousness ^s our immediate righteousness, which
is enough to make it to be shuned: for, if we lippen to such graces and duties
as abstracted from Christ and without resting on Him, that is not to be found
in him, but in them (for these two are opposed, Philip. 3.9.) and so they are a
righteousness that will never quiet the conscience, and which the Gospel will
never own as an Evangelick-righteousnesse, rest on it who will.

If it be said, Cannot Faith then, properly taken, be in any respect counted a
condition, or ground of right? For Answ. In sum we say, 1. That Faith at most
is but the condition on which Christ becomes our Righteousness, or is impured
to us for our Justification; and so Faith it self properly cannot be our
righteousness. 2. We say, that when Faith is called the condition of the
Covenant, or our righteousness, it does not imply that it is properly imputed;
but it shows to whom and upon what terms Christ's Righteousness is imputed,
or, how a sinner may have access to be justified by it 3. We say, that Faith
when it is called the condition, is ever to be taken strictly, that is, as it
receives Christ; and by that manner of acting, is differenced from all other
graces and works. And so, 4. We say, that it cannot be conceived under this
consideration, but as looking to Christ's Righteousness, as the object thereof;
even as we cannot conceive a consent, which constituteth a Marriage, without
respect unto the party consented unto, and his offer, or declaration of his
will preceding, without which no consent could be constitutive of Marriage, or
be a ground of claim to any of the goods or privileges of such a person; or,
as we cannot conceive looking to the brazen Serpent, as the condition upon, or
mean by which health was gotten, but with respect to the object thereof, to
wit, the Serpent; and the ground and warrant preceding, to wit, Gods
appointment; without which, a look, considered simply in it self, is not so to
be esteemed.

If it be yet urged further here, that if Faith properly taken, be the
condition of the Covenant of Grace, and has in that succeeded in the room that
Works had in the Covenant of Works, Then Faith must be our
Evangelick-righteousnesse, because Works then were our legal-righteousnesse,
and that upon which our right to life did stand; But the former is truth; He
that said, do and live, faith now, believe and be saved, Ergo, etc. Ans. 1.
This will say nothing for Faith largely taken, as comprehending Works; but at
the most for Faith strictly taken, as contradistinguished from them; and so
there will not be that same kind of causality in both, but the contrary. 2. In
this condition, Faith is never to be taken, without implying the object Christ;
or without respect to its proper aptitude, for receiving of Him, and so believe
and thou shall be saved, implies still this, receive Christ and rest on His
Righteousness, or submit to Christ's Righteousness, and accept of Him for that
end, that He may be righteousness to thee, and thou shall be saved: it is
impossible to conceive it otherwise, at least rightly. Now, when upon
believing, Justification does follow, and the person is declared just, it
cannot be said that the act of believing properly is imputed, and that upon
that account he is declared just; it is rather Christ's Righteousness believed
on, that is imputed to him; and upon that account he is declared just, which is
the very terms of the Covenant of Redemption, whereby the sinners sins are
imputed to Christ; whereupon He, as Cautioner, is sentenced and made sin, that
His Righteousness may be imputed to us, and so we upon that account made
righteous, and that in him, and not in our selves, as it is, 2 Cor. 5.21. which
implies, that even our Evangelick-righteousnesse, whereby we are absolved, is
in Him, and not in our selves, as the sin for which He was sentenced, was in
us, and not in Him. 3. There is this difference betwixt the two Covenants, as
was said, The one is a servile Covenant (to say so) and must have what is
engaged to in it, performed, before one have right to what is promised; and so
works were in the Covenant of Works, the condition upon which life was to be
expected; and without the actual performing of which, there could have been no
pleading for it: but this, to wit, the Covenant of Grace, is a conjugall
Covenant; therefore is not the condition thereof in all things to be squared by
that. Beside, works were the very material righteousness upon which
Justification was founded in the Covenant of Works; but to say of Faith, as
taken in itself and without respect to Christ, that it were so the condition
now, would be absurd, Christ being by the whole strain of the Gospel holden
forth to be rested on before we can be justified: and yet even this would not
confirm any way what is said of the joint concurrance of Grace and works in
that same kind of causality with Faith:

If it be further said, may not Faith properly taken be called the condition
upon which Christ's Righteousness becomes a sinners, and is imputed to him?
Answ. 1. This confirms what we say: for, if Faith be the condition upon which
Christ becomes our Righteousness, Then it is Christ who is our
Righteousness, and not Faith strictly and properly taken, much less largely,
as comprehending all other Graces: for if it were our righteousness properly,
there needed no imputation of Christ's after our believing, except it be said
(as some Papists say) that it is imputed to make up our defects, and to make
our holiness acceptable; and so it were our Faith and Works that should be
justified by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and not our persons:
which is contrary to Scripture. 2. This is, upon the matter, the same with what
we said, as is hinted: for suppose a debtor to be pursued, he pleads
absolution, because his Cautioner has paid, and he produces the discharge
given to him, wherein that is acknowledged; his pleading so and producing of
that discharge, may be someway called the ground that gives him right in Law
to have that payment of the Cautioners imputed to him, yet his absolution
flows from the complex business, not of his pleading simply, but of the
cautioners paying, his pleading of that payment, and the Laws accepting of that
defense and imputing of it to him; and so from all these together his
absolution flows: just so it is here, our Justification flows from Christ's
satisfaction, being accepted and rested on by us, and imputed to us by God. And
therefore, thirdly, though Faith properly be the condition upon which Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us (I had rather call it the mean by which it is
apprehended) yet it follows not, that therefore Faith properly taken, is our
righteousness, and as such, is imputed to us, and accounted so, seeing still
this presupposes the imputation of Christ's Righteousness in order of nature
to interveen betwixt our believing and our Justification: and therefore that
His Righteousness imputed, must be properly our righteousness, seeing we upon
account, and considered as such, (to wit, as having Christ's Righteousness
imputed to us) are justified; and upon that Righteousness imputed,
Justification is immediately grounded. Yet, Fourthly, All this does say nothing
for Faith largly taken, as comprehending all Gospel-duties: for, though Faith
strictly taken be necessary for having right to Christ's Righteousness, or
having it imputed to us; yet are not actual works so, by any means; but
through the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, we are first accepted, and
then bring forth these good works; which shows that they do not go before
that imputation of Christ's Righteousness, or our Justification, but that
rather they follow thereupon. For, if we cannot do good works, till we be
Sanctified, and if none be Sanctified, but such as are Justified, and these two
cannot be separated; no not for an instant of time (for it cannot be said that
a man is Sanctified, but not yet Justified, aut contra) Then it will follow,
that a man is Justified before he has actual works, (it is of such we debate,
and not of habitual seminall holiness) for he may be, and is Sanctified
before he can have them, much more ere he persevere in them. And so
consequently, actual good works cannot concur to Justification as Faith does,
or be the condition thereof; But the former is true and clear: Therefore so is
the latter also: which is the thing that was in Question. Lastly, we say, if
Faith properly, and largely taken according to their meaning, (or yet strictly)
be imputed to us for Righteousness, Then either Christ's Righteousness is not
imputed, but our Faith only, or Christ's Righteousness and our Faith properly
taken also; But neither can be said: not the first, to wit, that the
Righteousness of Christ is not imputed to us, but Faith only, That I suppose is
not intended: neither can the latter be said, viz. that Faith is imputed to us
for Righteousness and Christ also: for then, Christ is either imputed for our
total righteousness, and so Faith comes not in, or, as a partial
righteousness, and that is absurd. Again, either His Righteousness is imputed
to us before we believe, (and so before our Faith can be imputed) which is
false: for, that would make Christ's Righteousness to be ours before we were in
Covenant internally; Or, it is imputed to us after we believe, and so after our
own Faith is imputed to us and accepted for Righteousness; But that cannot be;
for then we would be righteous, before the imputation of Christ's Righteousness;
which is absurd: or, lastly, both must be imputed together; which also cannot
be: for, if both be imputed together properly, Then both in the same sense or
kind of causality, or in diverse senses: the first cannot be said; for that
would make both meritorious, which is disclaimed: if the last be said, then it
must be so as the one is imputed to us for our legall-righteousness, to wit,
Christ's satisfaction, and the other as our Evangelick, to wit, Faith; But, 1.
That is the thing already spoken to, and does divide Christ and our
Gospel-righteousness; Or, 2. It turns to this, that Christ is the thing that
satisfies Justice, but Faith is the ground or mean by which we come to have
title to that satisfaction; which is the thing that is granted, and we suppose
is the thing that by some is intended: and is in sum, that, to which others
give the name of the isntrumental cause. And if so, there needs not be
contending for words: for, both are acknowledged, to wit, that by Christ's
Righteousness, only as the meritorious cause, we are justified, and that there
is no right to plead Justification by that, except by Faith, or upon condition
of believing, by which, actual right to Christ, and by Him Justification, is
obtained.

Further, it cannot be said, that they are imputed jointly: for then, 1. Either
that imputation must be an instantaneous act, at the first believing, or
exercise of Faith; and so Justification must be an instantaneous act also;
which they will not grant: because the Faith that is imputed (according to
them) is Faith and the exercise of holiness persevered in; for which cause,
Justification to them is a continued act. 2. It must be instantaneous, but not
imputed, till Faith and Holiness be persevered into; and by this, neither
Christ's Righteousness, nor Faith is imputed to the person, not can he be
accounted in friendship with God, or to be in Christ, or righteous, till his
life be closed: for, he cannot be accounted so, till he be justified; and he is
not justified, till these be imputed to him for Righteousness: Or, 3. that
imputation must be a continued act, from the first closing with Christ till the
end. But how can that be? For, 1. It is hard to conceive the act of the
imputation of our faith to be continued, but more hard to conceive the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness to be a continuing act: for, Christ's
Righteousness, at the first, is perfect, and it is to be imputed to the
Believer; if therefore one may be called a Believer, it is to be imputed to him
instantly. 2. Imputation being a judicial word and act, it supponeth an
instant sentencing of such a righteousness to belong to such a person, as it
were, and to be accepted for him: for, if he has not perfect right, there is
no legal imputation, (to say so;) but if it be perfect, then it is an
instantaneous act. 3. If it be continued, then it is continued as if at first
it were not a perfect imputation or perfectly imputed; But that were to say
that it is not imputation: if it be continued as perfect, then it is supponed
to be instantaneous, and past; and what was said for Justification, does hold
here. Indeed if the meaning be that the Gospel does continue to impute
Righteousness, even after Faith, till the Believer be in Heaven, and to
account such a sinner just by virtue thereof, That is truth; But that speaks
the changed state of a sinner, upon the account of an imputation and
justification already: so indeed, the word of the Gospel continues still to
pronounce Believers justified upon that account, and that imputation in its
virtue never cease; But it cannot be said that the Word does continue to
justify, as justifying denotes the changing of a persons state, from a state
of enimitie to a state of friendship: even as an absolved Rebel, or Debtor,
once pronounced free by virtue of such a persons intercession, or Cautioners
payment, does continue to be declared free, that is, his absolution continues
in force; but properly, the act of freedom, or absolving, does not continue,
but is instantaneous upon the production of such rights.

To shut up this, we may illustrate the way of Justification, which is more
clearly expressed in the Gospel under these expressions, believe and thou shall
be saved, by comparing it with the more obscure and typical expressions used
under the Law: for, it is certain the substance is the same; and what is our
legall-righteousnesse, was theirs; and what was their
evangelick-righteousnesse, is ours also. Now, the terms or expressions of the
Old Testament run thus, Levit. 4. verse. 3, 4, etc. When a man sins, he shall
bring his offering, etc. and he shall put his hand upon the head of the
burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for him, to make atonement for him,
etc. In which words there is an express condescending upon the Lords side to
propose something as a righteousness for a sinner, which was to be accepted
for him; yet, I suppose, no Christian will say, that it was the external
sacrifice itself, that was to be accepted for such, nor that it was the act of
the Faith of the offerer alone, that was so accepted: for then there needed no
sacrifice, but it behoved to be the thing typified by that sacrifice, to wit,
the Sacrifice of Christ, looked to, apprehended and ple^ded by the Faith of the
offerer, that was so accepted. Yet, the external sacrifices in the Old, are as
expressly said to be accepted for a sinners Justification, or as an atonement
for him, as Faith is said to be accounted for righteousness in the New: and as
it cannot be said, that by virtue of Christ's satisfaction, or the Covenant with
him, it was procured that such performances and sacrifices should be accepted
of themselves, as the persons immediate evangelick-righteousnesse, though their
ceremonial Law was their Gospel; So it cannot be said, that there is any such
bargain concerning Faith in the New Testament; but that Christ apprehended by
Faith, is the Righteousness both under the Old and New Testament: which is the
thing we intend.

Concerning Repentance.
REpentance is much called-for in these Epistles, and that with peremptory
certification of coming wrath, if the same prevent it not, as we may see, Chap.
2. verse. 5. in the Epistle to these of Ephesus, who look like a people real in
the Work of God, though under some decay: It is also called-for from Pergamos,
verse. 16. Yea Iezebel has a door of mercy opened to her, upon supposition of
Repentance, verse. 21, 22. This also is required of Sardis, Chap. 3. verse. 3.
and of Laodicea, verse. 21. For clearing of which places, and other truths
concerning Repentance, it may be enquired, once for all, 1. If Repentance be
simply necessary for preventing of wrath and obtaining of the pardon of sin?
2. In what respect it is necessary, and how it does concur thereto? 3. If to a
Believers recovery after his sin, the exercise of Repentance be necessary? 4.
If so, what kind of Repentance?

For understanding of all, we would premit, that Repentance may fall under a
threefold consideration, 1. It may be considered as somewhat previous in time
to the exercise of Faith and Pardon of sin. This is properly legall-sorrow, and
is a common work of the Spirit, which may be in one, whose sins will never be
pardoned: it is therefore not of it self gracious, although the Lord may
sometimes make use thereof, for a sinners humbling and wakening before his
conversion. This is not the Repentance that is pressed here.

2. It may be considered, as it does not only follow pardon, but also the
intimation thereof; so it is a melting of heart, and a self-loathing that
flows from felt love, as the promise of the Covenant is, Ezekiel. 16.63. and
36.31. This is the melting of heart, spoken of in that woman, Luke 7. Who loved
much, because much was forgiven her, verse. 47. Neither is this that which is
principally intended here.

3. We may consider Repentance as a work of sanctifying Grace, rising from the
sense of bypast sin, and hope of future mercy, whereby the heart is both
affected with indignation in respect of what is past, and warmed with desire
and love in respect of what it expects, and so differs from the first,
which arises from apprehended future wrath; and from the second, which flows
from self-received mercy. This Repentance goes along with Faith and the
exercise thereof, for the attaining of the hoped-for remission, with a through
impression of the freeness thereof in respect of the persons felt sinfulness.
That is the sorrow after a godly manner, which is spoken of, 2 Cor. 7.11. and
it is that which is principally intended here, and in other places where
Repentance is required in order to remission of sin.

In Answer then to the first Question, We say, that Repentance, understood in
the last sense, is simply necessary for the obtaining of the pardon of sin, so
that without it no unreconciled sinner can expect peace with God: which we thus
make out, 1. from several places of Scripture, and first, by these places
where the command of Repentance is prefixed to the obtaining of pardon, and
preventing of wrath; and that by way of certification, that if it be not,
remission is not to be expected, as Acts 3.19. Repent that your sins may be
blotted out: which does imply, that without this, the blotting out of sin is
not to be expected: otherwise the proposing of the blotting out of sin, could
be no great motive to press the exercise thereof; which is the Apostles scope:
as also, Acts 2.38. Acts 8.22. and so in all other places, where Repentance is
pressed as a mids for attaining of that end.

2. We may add these places where the connection between Repentance and Pardon
is more peremptorily enforced, as Luke 13.2, 3. Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish: than which nothing can be more clear; and Prove. 28.13. He that
covers sin, shall not prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes (which
is, upon the matter, all one with Repentance) shall find mercy.

3. It is confirmed from such places as ground the cause of peoples ruin upon
their not repenting, as in Levit. 26. Amos 4. Ezekiel. 18. Ra^el. 16, etc. and
many such places, is clear, where this, they repented not, is given as the
cause of Gods continued quarrel against them.

All these considerations we will find in these Epistles, where the Lord does
not only require the exercise of Repentance by command; but does threaten
judgment, except Repentance prevent, Chap. 2. verse. 5, 16, and 22. and it is
particularly marked to be the ground of His continued controversy with
Iezebel, verse. 21. that she did not repent, and so Chap. 3.21.

In the second place, this may be made out, if we consider the promises of Gods
Covenant, in which remission of sins is subjoyned to the exercise of
Repentance, as necessarily antecedent; so that without it there is no access
to any promise of pardon. See, first, Levit. 26.40, 41, 42. If they shall
confess their iniquity, then will I remember my Covenant: which does
presuppose confession, and the exercise of Repentance, and the humbling of the
heart, to go before the application of the Covenant. And, left it should be
thought a legall-covenant, it is expressly said to be the Covenant with Isaac
and Abraham, which cannot be denied to be of Grace. The like also may be
gathered from the 1 King. 8.47. where Solomon expressly Covenanteth for pardon
on these terms: and, 2 Chronicles. 7.13. the Lord does expressly assent to these
articles. Yet this is a Covenant of Grace, being a Covenant for obtaining of
pardon through Faith in Christ Jesus, whereof praying toward the Temple and
Mercy-seat, was a type: and it is expressly said to be, upon the matter, Gods
Covenant with David: which cannot be denied to be the same Covenant of Grace
with that comprehended in the Gospel, seeing the mercies sworn to the Fathers
Abraham and David, are the same mercies that are now conferred upon Believers.
And, although there were some peculiar promises made to Abraham and David in
respect of their own seed, and some other things; yet these peculiar promises
were not the grounds of their own Justification, much less are they to be
pleaded by any other for that end. Now, the Covenants end, as it holds forth
remission, and its essential promises, must be common to all. It may be
confirmed also from 1 Ioh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, God is faithful to
pardon, etc. which supponeth that there is no engagement (to speak so) upon
Gods faithfulness to pardon any sinner but him who repents.

In the third and last place, the necessity of Repentance may be confirmed, if
we consider the qualifications of such persons as God pronounces pardon unto
in His Word; it is not to sinners, as sinners simply, but to lost sinners,
(that is, lost in their own eyes) such as are weary and loadened, such as are
broken in heart, grieved, wounded, etc. as appears from Isa. 61.1, 2. and
else where. All which qualifications show the necessity of Repentance in a
person that may expect pardon. It is true both Repentance and Remission are
Christ's gifts; but in this method, he gives first Repentance, and then
Remission, Acts 5.31. And though he came to call sinners; yet does he call them
to Repentance, as that which makes way for their getting good of Him.

From what is said, we may gather these two conclusions in opposition to the
Doctrine of the Antinomians. The first is, That Repentance is no legal duty
unbecoming for a Minister of the Gospel to Preach, or a Professor thereof to
exercise with respect to the obtaining of pardon; and that it is not only to be
looked after, and to be pressed upon the account of the faith of sins being
already pardoned. Secondly, It follows from this, That remission of sin is no
immanent or eternal act of God; but is a transient act, and that after the
committing of the sin: for, if remission presuppose Repentance, it must also
presuppose the sin to be committed, because Repentance does presuppose that:
and therefore it cannot be from Eternity. This opinion of sins being remitted
from Eternity, does stand and fall with the former, to wit, of the needlesnesse
of Repentance for the obtaining of pardon: and therefore the overturning of the
one, is the overturning of both. It is true, Gods purpose and decree of
pardoning sin, is Eternal, as all His decrees are; But this actual pardoing of
a sinner is no more from Eternity, than his creating or glorifying men, yea, in
the same decree, he has p^^posed the giving both of Repentance and Pardon, in
the method laid down.

If it be said, that thus it will infer, 1. That there is no difference betwixt
the Elect in respect of their estate before Repentance, and reprobates. And, 2.
That it will infer some change to be in God, if He should behold sin in a
person immediately before his Repentance, and not thereafter: both which, say
they, are absurd. For answer to the first, we say, That if we consider an Elect
person before conversion with respect to himself, and to the Law and Covenant
of Works, without respect to Gods purpose, There is indeed no difference
betwixt him and a reprobate: because, they are both as impenitent, unbelievers
without the Covenant, without hope, and dead in sins and trespasses, as is
spoken even of the Elect, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. and 12. and both of them are under the
curse, seeing the Law does indifferently curse all that have sinned, and are not
by Faith in Christ. This is no absurdity; but contributeth exceedingly to the
humbling of the Elect, and to the advancement of Grace. Again, if we consider
the Lords purpose, there is a great difference, although as it is His purpose,
it does make no real change, except in the manner, time, and method in which
he has purposed it to be.

To the second we answer, that this does not infer any change in Gods will, as
if he now willed that which He would not before, more than to say, His will
changes when He glorifieth a person which He did not actually glorify before,
although He purposed indeed to do the same. It only proves, that there is a
change wrought upon the creature, who is glorified, by that same unchangeable
will of God, which did, before the world, decree that in due time to be done:
so it is here, in time He pardons, and makes a change upon the creatures
state, by that same will, and in the same manner as it was decreed. And this is
no absurdity: because according to the rule, although God cannot change His
will; yet He may will a change upon the creature; etsi Deus non potest mutare
voluntatem, potest tamen velle mutationem.

There is more difficulty in answering the second Question, to wit, in what
respects Repentance is necessary for obtaining the pardon of sin, and how it
does contribute to the obtaining thereof? As Antinomians give too little to it,
on the one hand; so on the other, Papists, Socinians, and Arminians, give too
much. To guard therefore against those extremities, we say, against Papists, 1.
That Repentance is not necessary as having any efficiency in it for the
expelling of sin, by the in-bringing of a contrary gracious quality; as light
does expel darkness: For, remission of sins being to them the infusing of
habitual Grace, and Repentance being a part of that inherent Holiness, In
this respect they account Repentance necessary as a part of our formal
Righteousness, by which sin is expelled, and the person constituted formally
and inherently just: This indeed is an absurd overturning of the nature of true
remission of sins, (which consists in Gods not imputing the same to us, or in
His blotting them out) and alters the whole strain of the Gospel.

2. We say, that Repentance does not contur for the obtaining of the pardon of
sin, as any material cause disposing the soul for the receiving of a gracious
quality, for the expelling of sin; or, as being a pre-requisit matter to Gods
working thereof in the soul. This we reject as absurd, upon the grounds
foresaid: for, though we acknowledge the soul of man, yea, the whole man to be
the object whom God does pardon; yet pardon, being a judicial act of His
Grace, it can admit of no material cause.

3. Neither does Repentance concur for the obtaining of pardon by way of merit,
as if there were any congruity or condignity therein for obtaining thereof.
This marreth the freedom of forgiveness, and encroacheth upon Christ Jesus His
Offices, who is the alone immediate and meritorious cause of our being accepted
and obtaining pardon.

4. Repentance does not concur by way of satisfaction, as if the grief that
does accompany it upon our sensitive part within, were some satisfaction or
recompense for the offense committed against God, and so had influence (as it
were) to procure the easier terms from Him: in which respect they do place
whippings, fastings, and such like, as satisfactions without, concurring for
the remission of sin, at least, in its temporal punishment, as this does
within. This also we abhor, as derogatory to the alone satisfaction of our
Lord Jesus, who by His once offering up of Himself has perfected for ever them
that believe, Heb. 10.14.

5. Neither do we establish a Sacrament of penance, thereby instrumentally to
communicate remission of sins (that is, habitual grace, as they understand it)
by the power of the keys, in the Priests absolution, and that ex opere
operato: this we disclaim, as being without any warrant in the Word, and
certainly cannot be imagined to be the thing called-for in the forecited
Scriptures.

These ways are indeed pleaded-for by the Papists, who thereby do overturn the
whole nature of Repentance, remission of sins, and the Covenant of Grace; and
do enervate the consolation of poor penitents, (as may be further spoken-to
from Chap. 9.) but are disclaimed by us in Doctrine, and ought to be adverted
to in practice, least the Doctrine of the necessity of Repentance be abused
beyond that which is warrantable. We have for that cause disclaimed these
assertions explicitly; as also, that thereby many, and almost all the
Antinomian arguments and calumnies may be answered and removed, who have
nothing ryfer in their mouths and writtings than this, that the pressing of the
absolute necessity of Repentance is a point of Popery, a marring of the freedom
of Grace, a crying up of inherent holiness, and such like ^ which are most
injust, as is said.

The Socinians and Arminians, do also acknowledge the necessity of Repentance;
and although they give it no proper causal influence upon the remission of
sins; yet do they miscarry in reference thereto in these respects, which we
also disclaim:

1. Albeit Repentance be necessary; yet it is not necessary as any
pre-requisite qualification to be performed by us in the strength of our own
free will. This were indeed to make nature a sharer in our conversion, and to
give it occasion of boasting, contrary to the scope of the Gospel, which does
exclude that. I, is indeed we who repent formally, and our will and soul is the
subject wherein it is wrought; and to say, Christ is formally the penitent, we
abhor; yet it is by the strength of Grace working in us to will and to do,
Phil. 2.13. that we do repent, and that our wills are enabled to elicite acts
of true Repentance: so that if we will consider these acts of Repentance, as
they are acts simply, and are in Categori^ actionis, they are our acts, and
performed by our wills, as the next formal cause producing them. But if we
consider them as such, that is, as gracious, and acts of saving Repentance in
Categoria qualitatis, they are not from us; but do proceed from the grace of
God alone, sweetly and powerfully determining the will in the bringing forth of
them.

2. We say, Repentance has no moving efficacy in it, so as to be an external
impulsive cause, or, ratio movens, why God should forgive sins, as Repentance,
and resenting of wrongs committed, have influence to move provoked men to
forgive, and pity those that have offended them. This seems plausible-like to
men, who cast the way of grace in a mould of humane and natural reason; and
inadvertingly in practice may be fallen into by many, who, though they disclaim
a meritoriousnesse in their Repentance, yet are ready to conclude some
prevailing persuasive efficacy to be in it: which appears by this, that when
they are satisfied with their own Repentance, they more confidently expect
pardon; and when their sensiblnesse in Repentance dries up, they are ready to
question it, as if there were some weight in their Repentance of it self to
prevail with God, and persuade him (as it were) to pity. This, I say, is not to
be admitted: because Gods will, being absolutely pure, simple and sovereign, is
not capable of any motus from any cause without it self: and forgivness being
an act simply of Grace, and ordered alone in all its manner of proceeding by
His sovereignty, there can no reason moving Him thereto be imagined, although
He want not reason in His acting, as they say, Datur ratio voluntatis divina,
sed non ejusdem movens. This also would propose the most high and holy One, as
some way having passions to be wrought upon, like unto us; and would obscure
exceedingly the freedom and soveraignity of Grace, which has always its rise
in his own bosom: Therefore it is assered by Divines in this case, that
properly it is not our Repentance that makes our sins, either actually to be
remitted, or yet to be remissible, but God: Grace alone: for if Grace had not
ordered the connection between Repentance and Remission, upon grounds laid down
by it self, no sinners could have expected pardon, not would their sins have
been remissible even upon supposition of their Repentance, more than if there
had not been Repentance, if such a supposition may be made.

3. We say, that Repentance does not concur for the obtaining of remission of
sins, as it is a piece of our own new obedience, and of the condition of the
Covenant of Grace, and so now to be imputed to us with Faith and the other
Graces for Righteousness, in stead of the perfect holiness which was the
condition of the Covenant of Works; as if now, God in the pardoning of penitent
sinners, their sin should not respect Christ's imputed Righteousness as the
immediate cause making them acceptable to Him, but the very acts themselves of
Faith, Repentance, etc. and so the first Covenant of Works will be man's
performing of all holy duties according to the Commands perfectly; which
Covenant being now broken, and man made unable by sin to perform the condition
thereof, this opinion supponeth Christ's satisfaction to have procured (which
yet Socinians deny, as any procuring cause of) a new Covenant upon these terms,
that sinners who are short of perfect Holiness, and yet do believe and repent
of their sins, should be accepted; and these acts of Believing, Repentance, etc
should be accounted to them, by virtue of that Covenant; as if their obedience
had been perfect. This way is not sufferable, because it shuts out Christ's
imputed Righteousness from being the next immediate and meritorious cause of
our Justification; and continues the Covenant to be in substance a Covenant of
Works for its form: although it place no condignity of merit in these works;
yet by this, it is still some work of outs that is the ground of our defense
before Gods Justice; and so cannot be admitted; for even Faith it self, in this
case, comes not in to be considered, but as it uniteth with its object, to
wit, Christ Jesus in the promise, as has been said.

These ways which are more gross, being disowned (so that there is neither
ground to charge us with Popery nor Arminianis^us for our asserting the
necessity of Repentance) we come now to show positively in what respect it is
necessary.

1. We say, Repentance is necessary not only by necessity of precept, but also
of mids, necessitate and praecepti and medii, that is, not only as a duty laid
on by God; but as a mean appointed by Him for attaining that end; to wit,
remission of sins: in which respect, a penitent, or repenting sinner, may be
said to be using the means how pardon is attained, and to be in the way of
obtaining it, which cannot be said of a sinner that repents not. For although
Repentance, as absolutely considered in it self, does not make a penitent any
nearer unto remission; yet it being considered in respect of Gods contrivance,
and of the order which He has laid down, and the promise which He has
subjoyned to it, it may well be called a way and mean for attaining to pardon.

2. Beside this, there is a kind of congruity and suitablnesse in this order
which God has laid down, by subjoyning the promise of pardon to it, thus it is
more suitable that a penitent sinner should have pardon, than an impenitent:
because he is a more congruous object (to speak so) for grace to show it self
gracious upon, than if there were a continuing in security. Neither has this
congruity any causality or merit in it; but only does show Gods wise
contrivance in appointing a mids suitable to His end, which is the glorifying
of His Grace; and the making of Himself to be precious to the sinner.

3. Repentance concurreth in the obtaining of pardon, by qualifying the sinner
in reference to the promise, wherein pardon is proposed: which is not to be
understood, as if this qualification were a thing previous to a saving work of
Gods Grace, or, as if it did dispose the subject for receiving of any inherent
quality: Or, lastly, as if there were any merit in it to commend the person so
qualified unto God, for the attaining of pardon: these things we have already
rejected; But it may be said to qualify a person in these two respects, 1.
That it puts one within the reach of the promise, which speaks pardon to
none but to such who are so qualified: and thus it qualifieth the person merely
with respect to the promise, and the qualification contained it ^ and so a true
penitent sinner, may be said to be qualified for remission, and may take hold
of the promises that make offer of the same, which no other, not so qualified,
can do: because the promises are peculiarly holden forth to such who are so
qualified. 2. It qualifieth the sinner in reference to the promise, as it does
dispose him to accept the offered salvation freely, and to rest upon Christ
alone for that end. Thus it qualifieth for obtaining of pardon, as felt poverty
qualifieth a proud beggar to receive willingly an offered alms, and to be
thankful for it: neither is the alms the less free, that it requires one
sensible of poverty to receive it: but it is rather the more free, and
acknowledged to be so, when it is conferred: even so it is here.

There is one thing more questioned, even among Orthodox Divines, that is, if
Repentance may be acounted a condition of the Covenant with Faith, and if in
that respect, it be necessary, and do concur for the obtaining of Pardon? For
answer, (That we may not disgresse long in this) we shall lay down some
assertions, after we have premitted this distinction. A condition may be taken
more largely for any thing required as an antecedent for obtaining the thing
promised: in this sense, there may be many conditions. 2. It may be taken more
strictly and properly, for that upon which the closing of the Covenant
depends, and that which, as such, cannot be considered but as implying the
closing thereof. 3. A condition may be taken, as it looks to some consequent
following the close, and is virtually implied therein. As for instance, in
Marriage there are several things necessary, as the hearing of the proposal,
the believing historically the truth of the thing heard, an esteem of it, and a
desire to have it, with a loathnesse to offend the party proposing it: These
are supposed to be requisite and necessary in one that is called to Marry, that
she should forget her kindred and her fathers house, and cleave to the husband,
and so forth. Yet none of these resolutions, or qualifications, are properly
the condition of the Marriage-covenant; but the parties consent to accept the
offered match, upon the terms proposed. The actual and positive solemn
declaration whereof, in the approven way, is that which formally closes the
match, and entitleth the party so accepting to the husband, which none of these
former qualifications did't after which, there follows the performance of
Marriage-duties; the obligation whereof was contained in the Marriage-contract.
Yet cannot they be accounted properly the condition of the Marriage-covenant:
because the performing of them does pre-suppose the Marriage: just so is it
here, there are some things that in a large sense are pre-requisit to the
clossing of the Covenant, or at least do go along with it, as conviction of
sin, Repentance, historical faith, desire of peace and union with God, etc.
something, to wit, Faith, does actually close therewith; some things follow
thereon, as duties to be performed by one in Covenant, as the duties of
holiness and bringing forth the fruits of it, etc.

Now to come to our assertions, the first of them is this. If we take a
condition largely, Repentance may be called a condition of the Covenant, as
sensible poverty may be called a condition upon which alms is given, or, as
the forsaking of the fathers house and cleaving to the husband, may be called
the condition of the Marriage, as conviction may be called a condition of the
Covenant, because it is supposed.

Yet, secondly, we assert, That if we take a condition strictly and properly,
Repentance cannot be called the condition of the Covenant, but Faith only, in
that proper strict sense: because,

1. In the opposition of the two Covenants of Works and Grace, Faith is put in
opposition to Works, and Repentance is not so formally opposed, Romans 10. verse.
5, 6, etc. And Faith in that place is to be understood properly as
distinguished from other Graces of Repentance, Love, etc. because it is that
Faith which does peculiarly justify in opposition to Works, and as
contradistinguished from them.

2. Because that which is the condition of the Covenant of Grace, and does
succeed to the condition of the Covenant of Works, must be something laying
hold on an external object without a man, to wit, Christ's Righteousness: for,
the performing of the condition must be the ground of our expecting the thing
promised; which only Christ's Righteousness, laid hold on, can be reckoned to
be. But Repentance cannot act thus upon Christ's Righteousness by taking hold
of it without a man's self, but it acts upon an object within himself, to wit,
upon his own sins, in turning from them to God, which yet it does but
imperfectly; and so cannot be opposed in reckoning with God, in place of the
condition of the Covenant of Works: Therefore Repentance cannot be properly the
condition of the Covenant of Grace, nor yet any thing that is merely inherent
in us, and does not so act upon Christ; whereof more was said formerly.

If it be said, that Faith is an inherent Grace no less than Repentance: The
answer is easy, to wit, That Faith is not considered merely as an inherent
Grace, when it is called the condition of the Covenant, but as it uniteth to
Christ, and closes with Him offered in the Gospel: even as in a Marriage
consent, willingness and contentedness to Marry such a man, although it be
an act of the will; yet as it is an act of the will, it is not considered as
the condition of the Marriage-knot, but as it relates to a proposed match, and
is the accepting thereof. And hence, though love, respect to the party and
other things be necessary to Marriage, and in a large sense may be called
conditions thereof; yet are they not properly the condition which constituteth
a person married to another, because they act not so as to receive and close
with the proposed offer.

3. Repentance is not that which formally constituteth one a Covenanter:
because one is not a Covenanter as he is a penitent, but as he is a Believer:
for, the immediate satisfying ground of ones claim to the Covenant, is, because
by Faith he has received the offer; and therefore as such he has right to the
Covenant: it will not so follow from Repentance, to wit, upon this formal
consideration; he exercises Repentance: therefore upon that formal
consideration he is a Covenanter. It is true, it is an evidence of the former,
because a penitent is a Covenanter, but his being a penitent is not the ratio
formalis of his being a Covenanter; only it supponeth him to have by Faith
closed with the Covenant. For we may consider repenting as abstracted from
formal closing and covenanting, although we cannot separate the one from the
other: but we cannot consider believing as acting on its object, but we must
consider it as closing with the Covenant. Therefore Repentance cannot properly
be the condition of the Covenant as Faith is.

4. That which is properly the condition, does of it self, upon its fulfilling,
give one a title to the things promised, and does become the ground of a right
unto them: it was so upon supposition of fulfilling the Covenant of Works, and
it is so in all Covenants: But Repentance cannot do so: Therefore, etc. If it
be said, although Repentance cannot so do it alone; yet Faith and it may do so
together. And seeing by this opinion Faith is admitted with Repentance jointly
to be the condition of the Covenant, That argument cannot hold: because it is
not said that Repentance is the only condition. Answ. The argument does shut
out Repentance from being accounted any part of the proper condition, thus, If
Repentance cannot jointly with believing in Christ be put in as a piece of our
righteousness before Gods Throne, Then it can be no part of the proper
condition; because the performing of the proper condition has a ground in all
Covenants to plead for the performance of what is promised, and the absolving
of the party fulfilling the same, upon that account: But the former cannot be
said of Repentance; for, our Repentance can no way be alleged before Gods
Justice as our righteousness. Ergo, etc. This may be made out, thus, If
Repentance may be tabled as any part of our righteousness, Then it must be
either as a Grace inherent in us, or as it acts on Christ's Righteousness
without us; But neither can be said: not the first; because no inherent Grace
is to be admitted in that respect in whole or in part: not the second; because
Repentance has no such faculty of acting on Christ's Righteousness, as has
been said: and therefore cannot be said to concur so at all.

5. If receiving of Christ's offer be the formal and proper condition of the
Covenant alone, Then Repentance cannot be any part of the proper condition
thereof; because it is not by Repentance, but by Faith that we do receive Him;
But the former is true: receiving and closing with Christ by faith, is the only
proper condition thereof. Therefore, etc. Beside what is said in the former
discourse, this appears, thus, If receiving of Christ by Faith does only
formally entitle one to the Covenant, and all the promises thereof as such,
Then it must be formally the proper condition; because that entitling to the
thing promised, is the great character of a proper condition: But Faith only is
such: And therefore is the righteousness of this Covenant called peculiarly
the righteousness of Faith, and not of Repentance, Love, etc. because Faith
gives a title to the righteousness Covenanted, which Repentance does not. And
because in the performing of the mercies Covenanted in the way of Grace,
greater weight is laid on Faith, than on Repentance, or any other Grace. Again,
that Faith is the proper condition, may appear, thus, because it is properly
and expressly proposed as the condition. Act. 8. It is said to the Eunuch, If
thou beleivest thou may be Baptized; and Act. 16. to the Jailer, when the
Question is expressly proposed, What shall I do to be saved? Believe (says
Paul) and thou shall be saved. So answered the Lord, Ioh. 6.28.29. This is the
work of God to believe, etc. Neither can it in reason be objected, that as
these places do propose Faith; so other places do propose Repentance as the
condition, as Act. 2.38, etc. For it cannot be denied, but Faith does otherwise
act on Christ's Righteousness and the Covenant than Repentance can do; and
therefore Faith is acknowledged to be principal: whereas, if that objection
hold, Repentance and Works would be equalled with it. We therefore take it
thus, where Repentance is proposed, there the whole way of turning to God more
generally is proposed: But where Faith is proposed, that which more properly
and peculiarly does state our interest in God, is proposed, as the
consideration of the formal actings of these Graces will clear, and is wholly
denied by none.

6. That must be the proper condition of the Covenant which does entitle God to
the person, as the person to God: For, the Covenant being mutual, that which
gives men a right to God, and brings them within the compass of the
Covenant, must constitute them to be Gods, and give him as it were a right to
them by virtue thereof; But it is not Repentance that gives God formally a
Title to a soul, but it is receiving of Him by Faith, and submitting to His
Righteousness. Therefore it must not be Repentance, but Faith, that is the
proper condition. This is seen in a Marriage-covenant. For that is the woman's
condition, upon her part, which does entitle her to her Husband, as well as her
Husband to her. Now, it is not Repentance that gives up one to Christ as His,
as is clear, but Faith; etc. that delivers up a person to him, and is that
whereby one takes him and consents to be His. And therefore it is Faith that
does entitle Christ to be His. Ergo, etc.

7. If all these works were the condition of the Covenant, then entry into the
Covenant were a successive work, and not instantaneous; but this is absurd.
Therefore not these, but Faith alone is the condition of the Covenant; for if
in an hour; yea, in an instant at a Sermon, a man may have his heart opened to
receive Christ, and by that have a right to Baptism as a Covenanter, Then it is
not successive; But the former is truth Ergo.

8. If these Works were the condition, and not Faith only, Then upon
supposition of Faith could not the Sacrament of Baptism be administered; But it
behoved to have antecedaneous to it, not only the purpose, but the actual
performing of these works; because, Baptizing supponeth the accepting of the
Covenant: what therefore entitleth one in profession, must, when it is really
done, be the condition of the inward covenanting.

9. If Faith be the proper condition, Then Repentance cannot be so; because
Faith is not a condition of the Covenant merely as it is a Grace, but as it is
peculiarly qualified in its manner of acting. Now, Repentance not being
qualified with that manner of acting, cannot be a part of the proper condition,
1. Because if so, then were graces of different actings admitted to concur in
the same capacity and manner of acting, contrary to their natures. 2. If so,
then not only Repentance but every Grace, and all good Works, might be
accounted parts of the proper condition of the Covenant, as well as Repentance
and Faith, if there were no peculiarnesse in Faiths acting respected in this.
And though this may be counted no absurdity by some; yet to such as plead only
to join Repentance with Faith, it may have weight: And to others we propose
these considerations, First, That the evidence of light does constrain the
acknowledging of Faith to be eminently the condition beyond all; yea, that it
may be called the only condition of the new Covenant, 1. Because it is the
principal condition, and the other but less principal. 2. Because all the
rest are reducible to it, as necessary antecedents or means, etc. (so Mr.
Baxter, Apho. Those. 62.) and the formal and essential acts of this Faith are
acknowledged to be subjection, acceptance, consent, cordial Covenanting, and
self resigning. Now, if Faith be the principal condition, and that as acting
so, in which respects no other Grace can act, Then certainly Faith has a
peculiar property here, and that not as a Grace simply, but in respect of the
formality of its acting: which does confirm all that is said. And thus, Faith
is not the principal condition, as being only so in degree (like a chief City
amongst many Cities) but in respect of a different manner of acting, and an
excellency (to say so) that is in it in that respect, Such acts being peculiar
and proper to it, which are the proper characters of a proper condition: and if
so, seeing all other things mentioned are acknowledged as necessary antecedents
or means, or employed duties, etc. why should there be a contending about words,
and a new controversy stated for the nature of a condition when the Church is
almost suffocated with controversies already? Secondly, If Works be the
condition equally with Faith, Then our being accounted Covenanters, must follow
actual Holiness, and till then none are indeed Covenanters: which is absurd,
as was formerly said: for so, none could otherwise have right to any thing in
the Covenant. If it be said, These are seminally and in purpose at the entry,
That will not answer it: because it is not the purpose, but the actual
performing of the condition, that gives right. Beside, if a purpose satisfy
for a condition in these, Then either seminall Faith, or a purpose thereof is
to be admitted also; which is absurd: or, if actual Faith be required, and but
other conditions in purpose, Then it is actual Faith, and not these that is
the proper condition of the Covenant. Thirdly, If these Graces and good Works
be the condition of the Covenant, Then it is either in respect of their
particular acts, or of persevering in them; But neither can be said. Ergo, etc.
Not particular acts; because the Scripture hangs the prize on overcoming,
continuing to the end, etc. and not on acts. Nor can it be perseverance;
because so, no benefit of the Covenant could be pleaded till it were ended:
for, it is the entire condition, and not a part thereof that gives title and
right: But it is absurd, that none should have right to any benefit before
perseverance be ended, whereas perseverance, is a privilege that a Covenanter
may claim. These may indeed be called someway conditions of obtaining the
possession of the great benefit in the Covenant, but not of the Covenant it
self; and are duties implied to be performed by ^ Covenanter, but cannot be
conditions upon which he is admitted. And though somewhat to this purposes was
said formerly, yet the matter being so like, there is no hazard nor prejudice
from this co-incidencie.

Assert. 3. Although, in strict speaking, Repentance be not the proper
condition of the Covenant; yet as to the naming of it a condition, or not, we
conceive there is no great ground of debate: and if the matter be well guarded,
the expression may be suffered; Otherwise it is no strife about words. We
conceive that the guarding of the matter, does require, 1. That these Errors
both of Papists, Arminians, and Socinians, formerly mentioned, be carefully
eschewed, and that, by giving it the name of a condition, we do not fasten upon
it any of these senses, especially the last, to which it is most liable.

2. This would be guarded, that Repentance be not shufled-in as a piece of our
righteousness, or that which we make an immediate defense and shelter against
the Justice of God: of which somewhat has been formerly spoken.

3. This would be guarded, that Repentance be not accounted to be a condition
is that same capacity and formality of acting as Faith is: because that would
either confound the nature of these Graces, or wrong the way of the Gospel,
wherein ever something peculiarly is attributed to Faith.

We come now to the third thing proposed, that is, if Repentance be necessary
to a justified person for obtaining the pardon of sins committed after
Justification, as well as before it. To which we Answer shortly, That the
Scripture does hold forth the same necessity in this case, as in the former. 1.
Because there is the same order in the Commands that are given, and the
promises that are made to them for obtaining pardon, as may be gathered from
the Epistle to these in Ephesus, who may well be supponed to be Believers; and
the ground, is general, in this Epistle to Laodicea, verse. 19. Whom I love, I
rebuke and chasten, (says the Lord) be zealous therefore and repent: where
Repentance is put-in as a necessary mids for removing of Gods rebuke and
quarrel, even from them whom He loves. 2. The promises made to Believers, run
in the same terms, 1 Ioh. 1.9. If we confess, God is faithful to pardon, etc.
where John keeps the same method in reference to pardon, even when he wrote
to Believers; and puts himself in the roll. 3. Experience does also confirm
the same, as we may gather from David, Psalm. 32.3.4, etc. While I kept silence,
my bones waxed old, etc. but I confessed unto thee, and thou forgavest me, etc.
In which place, this connection and order is clear. Neither can it be said that
David only obtained the sense of pardon, 1. Because he himself does account it
pardon, and such happiness as does proceed from the not imputation of sin. 2.
Because, Romans 4. the Apostle makes use of this experience for the describing
and confirming of Justification it self: which could not have been, if the
place had spoke only of the declaration thereof. And it cannot be otherwise,
seeing the Law curses every sinner, and the Gospel absolveth none but the
penitent. It may be gathered also from Nathan's word to David, 2 Samuel 12.
declaring his sin to be pardoned after his acknowledging, which supposes it
not to have been so before that time. So also it may be gathered from the Lords
dealing with Jobs friends. Job 42. with whom the Lord was angry, till they
humbled themselves before God.

Neither can it be well objected here, That this may hazard the perseverance of
the Saints, supposing that some of them may die without actual Repentance.
For, 1. The Doctrine and nature of the Covenant betwixt God and Believers, does
include a twofold impossibility, 1. That a sinful Believer can be pardoned
without Repentance, because the Lord has appointed that order and method, and
that wisely and graciously for the scaring of Believers from sin, for the
humbling of them under it, and for directing of them how to be freed from it.
And there is need of this, least Believers being in a great part corrupt,
should abuse Gods goodness.

The other is, that it is impossible for a justified person to die under sin
without Repentance. And these two do not cross one other: because the first is
conditional; no justified person, having sin, if he repent not, can be
pardoned: the other is absolute, to wit, no justified person can die under sin
without Repentance: because they are kept by the power of God to Salvation, 1
Pet. 1.8. And he who has ordered the end, has also in His Covenant ordered
the midses necessary thereunto; so that they cannot be again renewed unto
Repentance. And it is in this, as betwixt election and effectual calling: for,
no elect can be justified, till he be effectually called, so that if it were
possible he should die at age before effectual calling, he could not be saved;
yet it is simply impossible that any of them can die before effectual calling:
so must it be here in respect of the renewing of Faith and Repentance.

It will be difficult to clear the fourth thing, to wit, what kind of
Repentance (to speak so) is to be accounted simply necessary for obtaining the
pardon of sin; because sometimes persons are not soon satisfied with the degree
and kind of their Repentance: sometimes again, even Believers after foul slips
are taken away without any sensible-like work of Repentance for the same. It
may be questioned therefore upon the former suppositions, what is to be
accounted Repentance? In answering to which, we shall first lay down some
advertisements concerning Repentance, in the general; and then some
distinctions of the same: from which the answer may be easily formed.

1. It is no peremptory degree of Repentance that is required, as simply
necessary; it is sincere Repentance, having its native fruits, that is to be
acquiesced in.

This sincerity of Repentance, is not to be judged only by the sorrow, horror,
or grief that sometimes do accompany it, nor by the continuance thereof in its
exercise; because Repentance may be true where little of these are: and it may
be unfound where much of these is sensible, and that for a long times
continuance, as experience does confirm.

3. The sincerity and sufficiency of Repentance therefore, is to be tried
mainly by the rise and effects thereof, etc. to wit, if respect to Gods honor
affect the heart with the sense of its sin; and if it so affect, as sin
becomes hateful, the person is humbled in himself, and brought to esteem of,
and put a price upon, Gods Grace in Christ Jesus, so as to be in love with the
same. This is properly turning, and does comprehend the essentials of
Repentance, what ever the degree of sorrow be.

These advertisements being laid down, we would now consider some distinctions
of that Repentance that is necessary for pardon, especially in the Regenerate,
as they are, or may be held forth in several expressions, by several persons.

Distinct. 1. Repentance is either express and explicit, that is, when men
both know such things to be sins, and themselves to be guilty of them, and do
expressly acknowledge the same, and are affected with them; or, it is implicit,
when men are generally affected for sin, although they be guilty of some things
which they do not know to be sins, or, know not themselves to be guilty of the
same. Of such sort may be the Polygamie of several Godly men: which is not
altogether to be justified, at least, in respect of the extent thereof, in all,
as to be so ordinary, to have so many Wives, to have them of such
consanguinity, as Sisters, etc. Of such sort may be the errors which were
maintained by many of the Godly in the Primitive times concerning meats, days,
etc. which not being known by them to be sins, cannot be said explicitly to
have been repented of; yet that they were impenitent, it cannot be said. Under
this also come-in many matters of fact, which are forgotten, not observed, or
considered, as appears from Psalm. 19. Lord purge me from secret sins. The
last is to be accounted necessary to pardon, to wit, that they be penitent; but
the first, to wit, that Repentance should be explicit with respect to every
particular sin they are guilty of; this is not to be esteemed necessary in this
absolute sense.

Distict. 2. Repentance is either actual, and that for particular sins, as
when Peter repented of his denial, and David of his murder, etc. or, it is
interpretative and virtuall, as when a man is heartily affected for such and
such a particular sin, and for the corrupt inclination and body of death that
is in him, that is the seed of all, although there be some particular sin,
which is either not known to him to be such, or is not actually in his mind;
and so cannot be particularly and actually repented of: yet it may be said,
that virtually he does repent of the same: Because, 1. He does repent of all
sin in the root and seed thereof; and he may well be constructed to repent of,
and to loath all the branches and members, when he is seriously humbled under
the impression of the indwelling root and body of death. 2. Because he
repents of the sins which are known to him, upon the account which is common
to all sin, as sin, to wit, its dis-conformity to the Law of God: and therefore
may well be constructed to repent virtually of all the sins he is guilty of;
because that which is the essence and form (to speak so) of every sin, is
detested by him as it is such: and (as it is said) a quatenus ad omne valet
consequentia. This last is only pleaded for, as simply necessary, as the former
instances do clear.

Did. 3. Repentance may either be considered intensively, that is, as it does
affect the heart with a high degree of sorrow; or, it may be considered
appretiatively, that is, when sin is seen and acknowledged: and though there be
no such intense sorrow, or so sensibly affecting the heart; yet sin is
accounted a thing to be sorrowed-for, and the heart is weighted that its sorrow
is not deeper; and the person reckons it self so far under the body of death,
as it cannot be answerable to its light in the exercise of Repentance. This
last may have the native effects of Repentance, to wit, the humbling of the
sinner, etc. without the former; therefore, at least, the former is not simply
necessary. Mark here, that the use of this distinction is exceedingly different
from the use which Papists make thereof, to wit, for supporting of a ruinous
inherent righteousness, whereof Repentance is a part: and because they cannot
find it in that intensnesse as may stand before justice; therefore they coin a
sort of appretiative Repentance, which to them is a desire and endeavor in the
uttermost degree possible to attain the former, that so they may underprop the
other that is like toruine; or put this in its room: but there is no such thing
here; for, as we understand the appretiative Repentance, it is to commend Grace
and humble us the more: but as they do, it is to support Works; and can never
give a conscience quietness, because it is still defective, even in what it
might attain, whereof we possibly shall say somewhat elsewhere.

Did. 4. Repentance may be considered as prevalent and taking up the whole
man: and thus it carries with it a sutablnesse in a man's affections and
actions, as may be seen in David, Psalm. 51. or, it may be considered as in the
renewed part, which may be lamenting sin, and its own condition in respect of
the tyranny of the body of death, even while it is kept in bondage. It cannot
be denied but in this respect Paul was exercising Repentance, Romans 7. when he
allowed not that which he did, and was prevailed over by the Law of his
members; and no question he was looked on as a penitent upon that account: and
therefore, not the first of these, but the last, is to be accounted simply
necessary. This also may be seen in Ephraims bemoaning himself. Ier. 31.18.

Did. 5. We may also consider Repentance, as it is known to be such before
men, or to the person himself by a palpable recovery: such was the Repentance
of David, Peter, etc. or, we may consider it, as it is known to be such to God
only, without such sensible evidences to others, or, it may be, any sensible
change to the person it self; yet may there be real Repentance indeed before
God. This may be said of Solomon, of whose Repentance and pardon we cannot
doubt, as also of Asa's; yet has the Lord left them in His Word under such a
cloud, that their change has not been, at least, very discernable: for, we
find these high places, that were builded by Solomon, continuing unremoved for
many gene^^tions thereafter: which does certainly show, that his Repentance
has not had so palpable a change before men, as that of Manasses had. And this
is ordered by the Lord in deep wisdom; partly, for a chastisement of their
backsliding; partly, to terrify others from the way of declining; and partly,
to make all men sober and sparing to pass sentences upon the state of others,
however their condition may look before men, when they are removed: for, the
Lord will have the sovereign and infallible decision of their state, to wit,
whether they be Penitents and Believers or not, left unto himself alone, who
has an insensible way of begetting Faith and Repentance, and also of
recovering and renewing the same, when he pleases.

If it be further moved, how, at the first exercising of Repentance and Faith,
a man can be said to be justified, that is, accepted as righteous and pardoned
of all his sins; seeing his sins after Justification are not pardoned until
they be committed and repented of?

Ans. Both are true: for future sins are not actually pardoned till they be
committed and repented of; yet is the man a justified person, and in a
justified state, having a ground laid in his Justification for obtaining the
pardon of these sins that follow, so that they shall not overturn his former
absolution: for, Gods Covenant has both fully in it, yet in due way to be
applied. And it is, as if a company of rebels were subdued, and by treaty they
are pa^doned, changed from that state of enemies to be natural subjects, and
privileged with their privileges; so that if they fall in after faults (as
subjects may fall in,) yet are they never again counted enemies; nor is their
first freedom cancelled; but they are dealt with as native subjects falling
into such offenses; and have privileges that strangers have not, nor can plead
in the same faults: one of which privileges may be supposed to be, that they
shall not be rigidly fallen upon, although their guilt deserve death; but that
they shall have means used to reclaim them, (and th^se, such as cannot but be
effectual) and that upon recovery, they shall be pardoned these faults, and be
preserved from the deserved punishment. It is so by the treaty of Grace and
Justification, the believing sinner is translated from the state of an enemy,
to the condition of a friend, this is unalterable, he cannot afterward but be a
friend: yet, because a friend may be ingrate, and fail to his benefactor;
therefore by that treaty, it is provided, that there should be a way to
forgivness by virtue of that Covenant, yet so, as there should be a new
exercise of Repentance and Faith, for the commending of the way of Grace: and
so a sinning Believer, is a sinner, but not in the state of sin; nor is an
enemy, as he was before Justification, even as a faulty subject is guilty, yet
is no enemy, nor rebel, nor can be punished by death, when he becomes
penitent, although he deserves it: because the Law of Grace is such to the
subjects of that Kingdom, that their pleading of their former treaty, and
betaking themselves to the terms thereof, is ever to be accepted as a
righteousness for them in reference to any particular sin following
Justification, as well as what preceded. And this no stranger to God can plead,
who has no such ground for his recovery from sin, or, that God will give him
Repentance for it, much less that he will certainly pardon him. Yes, it
differs from a penitents case at first conversion; because a Covenanter may
expect pardon by virtue of that same Covenant in which he is engaged, and to
which he has already right, and he has jus ad rem: another cannot do so, but
must consider the Covenant as offered only, and so expect pardon; not because
God is actually engaged to give it to him, as in the others case; but because
God does offer to accept of him on these terms, and then to pardon him.

Some general Observations concerning Preaching, and especially Application.
HAving now gone through these Epistles, we may see how wisely and seriously
our Lord Jesus, the Prince of Pastors, (who has the tongue of the Learned
given unto Him) does from Heaven speak to the condition of these Churches, to
whom they are directed: wherein we may have an excellent copy, according to
which, Ministers ought to carry themselves in discharging of their Trust. We
conceive therefore, it will not be impertinent to shut up these Epistles with
some general directions concerning the way of Ministers making application to
Heaters, which can hardly any where else, more clearly, fully, and together be
gathered: and although every thing may not be particularly pitched upon, which
is necessary in Preaching (that not being the Spirits intent in the place;) yet
we are sure, that as His prosecuting of the respective cases of these Churches,
is very comprehensive; so it cannot be but most worthy of imitation.

1. In general we see, that Ministers in their application, ought to conform
themselves to the case of the Church and persons to whom they Preach; to
erroneous people (or such as are in danger of error) more convincingly; to the
secure, more sharply; to the afflicted and tender, more comfortably, etc. as
may be seen in our Lords dealing with these Churches.

2. Ministers ought in their Doctrine to apply themselves to all sorts of
persons, to wit, to Rulers, and People, to hypocrites, and openly profane, yea,
to the good, and these that have most tenderness; reproving all, convincing
all, as there shall be cause: So that neither hoplesnesse of profiting some
that seem to be desperate, nor preposterous affection to these who are tender
and affectionate, ought to mar this manner of dealing. And thus we see our
Lord Jesus does threaten profane and gross erroneous Iezebel upon the one
hand, and backsliden, though Godly Ephesus, upon the other. Sometimes, it is
more difficult freely and faithfully to reprove one that is Godly, or to
withstand one Peter, than to threaten or contend with many that are profane:
and yet both are necessary and profitable for edification.

3. This universal application to all sorts, would yet notwithstanding be
managed with spiritual wisdom and prudence, so that every one may get their
own allowance. Hence the Lord does so threaten the secure and stubborn, that
yet he excepteth these who were not defiled; and so comfort the faithful, as
the profane may not have a ground to take the same consolation with them. This
is a main qualification of a Minister of the Gospel, rightly to divide the word
of Truth, and not to follow all applications promiscuously and in heap together
in any Auditory, without such discriminating expressions as may guard against
confusion therein: especially as to these four, 1. That a tender soul may be so
strengthened and confirmed, as a secure person be not more hardened; and that a
presumptuous hypocrite, be so stricken at, as an exercised soul be not wounded.
2. When both the good and profane are in one fault, the one is otherwise to be
reproved and restored than the other; and we see Ephesus is more tenderly dealt
with, than Laodicia, according to the rule, Gal. 6.1. 3. The faults of
Believers would be so reproved, as with these their state, and what is
commendable in their practice, be not condemned and rejected also: but that
there be intermixed commendations, or approbations of what is approveable,
least Godliness suffer, when the fault of a Godly person is reproved; and
least the sentence go beyond the Masters intent, which is not to condemn the
person, but to reprove the fault, as the Lord does tenderly distinguish these
in the case of Ephesus and Pergamos. 4. Times and cases would be distinguished
also: and where outward affliction, or inward exercise have seized on a person
or people, reproofs would be more sparing and gentle, than when there is
outward prosperity and a readiness to settle in a formal discharge of duties,
as by comparing the Lords dealing with the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, and
Philadelphia, and His dealing with Sardis and Laodicea, is clear.

4. This application would be pathetick, pungent and weighty, according to the
matter pressed; so as it may have weight upon the Consciences of Hearers. It is
a main piece of Ministerial dexterity to make a plain obvious ordinary reproof
weighty in application, so as the matter may look serious-like to the Hearers,
and they be convinced that he is in earnest: and for this cause, his
convictions, reproofs, directions, etc. would not rest in the general: for,
the Lord is particular in all these Epistles. 1. In mentioning the sins that he
reproves. 2. In giving the evidences of them, to show that he beats not the
air; and the more to bear-in the conviction in the application: for, as
general truths will need their proofs; so will particular applications, least
the conscience shift the challenge. 3. He ripes up the heart, by chopping at
inward sins, to wit, falling from the first love; thou say I am rich, etc.
thou have a name that thou live but art dead, etc. It is a main part of
searching Doctrine, to repel the answers that a heart may have within against
the power of Godliness, though they be never expressed; and this is a main
property of the Word, to be a discerner of thoughts, Heb. 4. And thus John did
with his Hearers, Matthew. 3.9. Think not to say within your selves, etc. 4. The
Lord Himself is in His expressions serious, that the Conscience and inner man
may be carried along in giving heed to the words spoken to the ear, and that
the outward man, may see the scope of the Word Preached, 2 Corinthians. 10.4, 5,
etc.

5. Application would rather be squared to the edification of the Hearer than
simply and only regulated by the Doctrine that it rises from: for, sometimes
there may be seemingly flourishing applications, when a Minister speaks in
the prosecuting of some truth, and in the pressing of some point with respect
to the matter that he is handling, which is in it self good; and yet it may be
little useful to the Hearers spoken unto, as not being pertinent to them. Our
Lord here conformeth His application to these He writteth unto: so such truths
ought to be insisted on, and pressed, as besit the Hearers.

6. The matter insisted upon, is diverse; sometimes reproof, sometimes
exhortation, sometimes it is in reference to corrupt Doctrine, sometimes to the
inward spiritual case, etc. which shows, that a Minister would not be
addicted to, nor always dwell upon one thing; but would sometimes convince
gainsayers and clear truths, sometimes Preach practical things, and that of
diverse sorts; because Faith and Practice is the end of Preaching; and
clearness in, and acquaintance with truth, makes Hearers solid, and well
grounded in both; beside, that in numerous Auditories there are varieties of
conditions which call for variety of edifying Doctrine.

7. In his striking at errors, we find, 1. That he does not insist on
questions of more remote concernment, such as many were in these times; but on
these that are in their nature more gross, and in their consequence more
hurtful. 2. The errors that he touches, were such as were presently
troubling the Church, and these Churches in particular to whom be writteth. Old
buried errors are not sit matter for ordinary Preaching. 3. He pursues these
errors as most gross and abominable things, to make them od^ous and
abominable unto his people; and for that end, compares the promoters thereof
to Balaam and Iezebel. It was regrated by holy Mr. Greenham, That some by their
trifling way of confuting error, made it but ridicolus, whereas they ought by
earnestness and gravity, to have made it hateful.

8. His practical matter is near the power of Godliness, to wit, marking the
Spiritual declining of the sincere, pressing the exercise of Repentance, and
the performing of holy duties upon all; and, with all, most searchingly and
convincingly striking at hypocrisy, presumption and self-confidence, as in the
Epistles to Sardis and Laodicea: thereby showing what Doctrine especially
Ministers should insist on in Congregations: and if we look to our Lords
practice while in the flesh, we will not find Him more frequent on any subject
than this, to wit, that the way to heaven is narrow, that many were first that
shall be last, that hypocrisy should be guarded against, etc. as His parables
of the sower, foolish Virgins, Marriage Feast, and many other instances, do
demonstrate.

9. The Lord does not insist upon the most high sublime and obscure things,
either in His Doctrines, Reproofs, or Directions, such as are the more obstruse
Questions of the Schools, or the most Spiritual experiences of grown
Christians, although this last, being well timed, has its use; but He presses
the most plain, obvious and uncontrovertible duties of Religion, to wit,
Repentance, Self-examination, Faith, Zeal, etc. It is a great and main part;
yea, the very life of application, to stir up to the practice of acknowledged
duties, and to restrain from confessed sins: for, as mainly the life of
Religion lies in the practice of these; so the most powerful preaching, is, in
the pressing of them. We may to this purpose see also in that Sermon of our
Lords, which is recorded by Matthew. in his 5, 6 and 7. Chapters, how familiarly
He condescendeth to expound the Law, to direct in the exercise of Prayer and
Fasting and other duties, both in the first and second Table; wherein certainly
He is still pressing Spiritual service.

10. In all these, the Lord so follows the application as He may imprint it
on the conscience, and leave some profitable fruit by it: and, in a word, He
convinces, exhorts, reproves, offers counsels, etc. as they may be
edified by it, and every word may gain its native end. Therefore we see when He
convinces of, and reproves for, sin, He does first point at the particular
sins where with He charge them. Secondly, He does aggrege these sins by
showing the guiltiness and sinfulness of them. Thirdly, He proposes weighty
and sad threatenings to scare them: and the more secure and self-confident they
be, (as in the Epistle to La^dicea) he does the more sharply ripe up their
inside, and the more emphatickly and significantly express his abhorrencie
thereof, and their hazard thereby. Again, when He exhorts to duty, He does,
1. make the duty plain, that it may be known what he calleth-for. 2. He gives
some helps for furthering of them in the performance thereof, to wit, the
remembering of what is past, or their examining of their own way, watchfulness
and advertencie for the time to come, and such like; which are both in
themselves principal duties and great helps in all the practice of holiness.
3. He presses these exhortations to duties with motives, which comprehend both
the prejudice of neglecting them, and the advantage that comes by the
performing of them. Again, when He proposes the offer of the Gospel, and
inviteth to believe (as to the Church of Laodicea) He does, 1. open their
sinful dangerous and hypocritical case, and battereth down the ignorant
self-confidence which they had in their own formal profession. And, 2. He
proposes the right remedy, to wit, Himself and His benefits, His imputed
Righteousness which can only cover their nakedness, etc. 3. He clears the
terms upon which that gold and white raiment is obtained, under these
expressions of buying, opening, hearkening, etc. And, 4. He does most sweetly,
and yet most vehemently press it: partly, by condescending friendly to counsel
and entreat; partly, by making His offer large, free, and particular to any man
that will open, etc. and partly by urging His call weightily and rousingly with
a behold, I stand; as if after He had made the offer and had knocked, He were
now taking instruments, in the consciences of hearers; thereby, as with a nail
to fasten His invitation upon them; and so, pressing their closing therewith,
or otherwise assuring that He will leave this instrument upon record against
them.

11. We find, what ever the case of the people be that He speaks unto, the
up-shot and scope of His message, is, ever to persuade a closing of the treaty
between Him and them. Therefore, when He charge with sin, He leaves not
there, but commends unto them Repentance; and gives a promise of welcoming
of them upon that condition: when He quarrelleth for hypocrisy and deadness
in profession, He proposes Christ, and advises to accept of Him: when He
exhorts to duty, as to Repentance and Zeal; yet, even then does He propose
Christ's Righteousness, as the only cure and cover of their nakedness (as in
the last Epistle is clear:) whereby we may see, 1. what a Ministers scope
should be, and whereat he should aim in conviction, reproof, etc. and where he
should leave his hearers, to wit, at Christ's feet, who is the end of the Law
for Righteousness. And it is not unprofitable, even explicitly to make that
the use and close of all. 2. We may see, that the Law and Gospel should be both
preached and pressed together, and that so, as the one seem not to encroach
upon the other. And especially this would ever be clear, that the weight of our
peace with God does not ly upon duties when they are pressed, but upon the
righteousness of Christ. As it is a great practice in a Christian, to give the
Law and Gospel their due place in practice; so is it a main qualification of a
Gospel-Minister, rightly to ridd marches between the Law and the Gospel. This
makes so much insisting in the Epistles to the Romans, Galatians, etc. to keep
Justification by Faith in Christ, clear and distinct from Works and Duties,
even when they were much pressed and practiced. And it is no less dangerous to
Professors to rest on Duties, than to omit them: and therefore the necessity of
being denied to them in the point of Justification, and of resting upon Christ's
alone, is to be cleared and pressed by Preachers, as a most necessary and
fundamental thing.

12. For this cause, the nature of the Covenant, and Justification by Christ,
are especially to be cleared, where a Church is formal, that is, free both of
errors in Doctrine, and gross scandals in practice, and resting there:
wherefore we see, that in the Epistle to the Church of Laodicea (which is
charged with neither of these) our Lord does most especially insist on this:
for, the beating down of error, and banishing of gross profanity, are but, as
it were, the taking-in the outworks of the devils kingdom; therefore when these
are gained, the main batteries are to be directed against self righteousness,
hypocrisy, presumption, self-confidence, etc. that the soul may be brought to
receive Christ in earnest, and zealously and seriously to study holiness,
without which a formal profession will be but as a stone of stumbling.

13. We see that our Lord Jesus puts together an entire mould of the whole
Doctrine and practice of Godliness, giving, as at one view, a sight of our
natural sinfulness and hazard, and of the way how these may be remedied; so
that when He proposes any quarrel, He leaves not off till He propose also the
remedy, press duty, and close with some encouraging conditional promise.
This is also profitable for a mixed Auditory (especially at solemn times, and
other occasions, wherein people are usually most serious and attentive) to give
together a view of the Doctrine of the Gospel; so that when a conviction is
pressed, and the Hearer is made somewhat hot, he may have some present
discovery of the way which he ought to take; and that he may either be
informed, or, at least, be put in mind of as much of the Gospel as may be a
ground of his peace, if it be improven, though he should never afterward hear
any more. This we see was the Apostles way in their occasional Sermons in the
History of the Acts, wherein the sum of the Gospel is usually comprehended; and
the Lord himself does so with Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. and though there be difference
now, in some respect, where the Gospel is ordinarily and daily Preached, so
that this is not so necessary to be done always explicitly, as if they had
never heard the Gospel before: and although it becomes a Minister to draw his
Doctrine from some particular Text; yet considering, that the generality of
Hearers, are very ignorant of the series of the Gospel, and others are weak and
inadvertent even in things which they someway know; and considering withal,
that a Minister may have occasion by way of Reason, Use, Mean, Motive,
Question, or otherwise, to hint a view of the Gospel almost from any material
Doctrine, and that without any just imputation of impertinencie, we conceive,
that generally and usually its expedient to follow this manner; especially on
the Lords Days, which are most fit for Gospel-doctrines (people being then for
that end set apart and sequestered from their ordinary bussinesses) and when the
body of the most ignorant people are gathered together. This way certainly by
Gods blessing would look more like a mean of conversion (and has in experience
been ordinarily found so) than when now one point, and then another, are
distinctly handled; and so the one is either forgotten by the most part, before
they hear the other, or at least is not so warm to them, although they have the
knowledge thereof. And these things being the Text of the Bible (to say so) and
the great subject and earand which Ministers have to insist on, It ought not to
be accounted grievous because of men's nauseating and loathing of them from the
frequent mentioning of them, seeing to the People they are profitable and safe,
as Philip. 3.1, 2. and even that loathing would, in the manner of proposing the
same things, be guarded against; that itching and curious ears get not occasion
of contemning the precious Gospel, and thus but few would be able to discern
that it is so.

14. In these Epistles, there is a Divine stamp, bearing forth an efficacy in
the manner of pres^ing all these things. And we will see, 1. Authority in what
is spoken, 2. Evident plainness and clearness, 3. Seriousness and vehement
earnestness in pressing what He presses. Indifferency and coldness in
speaking of weighty things, is most unsuitable in a Minister. 4. There is love
and affectionate tenderness to them to whom He speaks; ye^, even in the
sharpest rebukes, He prudently intimates the same, that He be not mistaken.
Ministers have gained much, when Hearers are convinced that they seek their
good in the sharpest words: and their way would be such, as, without
affect^^ion, may evin^e that in the Consciences of Hearers. 5. There is much (O
how much ^) wisdom in His pre^^^ting commendations, in His differencing the
guilty from the innocent, in His choosing such threatenings and motives as may
gain most upon these He deals with respectively, and not using the same to
all.

15. His style of speaking, is sweet and Heavenly, yet plain and familiar: It
has a sweet statlinesse in it, and is far from trivial expressions, which may
make the matter spoken weightlesse; yet is it plain and equable; because now He
is speaking to edification in practical things, Therefore does He abstain from
the dark manner of expressions, which afterward He uses in the following
Prophecy. But, 1. His plainest words are most significant, massy, and
apposite. 2. The titles that are given to Himself, are stately: weighty
expressions and titles of God, and of Jesus Christ, become the preaching of the
Gospel well; and and are useful to keep up the reverend estimation which
Hearers ought to have of Him. It is suitable usually to name Him so, as at the
mentioning of Him, it may appear that the heart is affected with the excellency
that is in Him; and that the man does not speak of that glorious Majesty, as of
other subjects: even as Ambassadors should give honorable titles to their
Masters. 3. The similitudes are pertinent and grave, serving more to illustrate
the matter and make it plain, than to please the ear and tickle the
understanding, as the comparing of Christ's Righteousness to gold and raiment,
and the closing of the Covenant, or believing in Him, to buying, opening, etc.
which manner is useful to people; and that way of speaking in Parables, was
much used by the Lord, who also interpreted them to His Disciples, to make the
significancie thereof the more to appear. 4. He does ever express Heaven by
some notable borrowed and various expression, thereby to commend the same:
partly, because it is a great advantage to have Hearers in love with it;
partly, because more proper expressions will not always so clearly, fully, and
to the life, suit, and hold forth the thing that is to be spoken of: whence it
comes to pass, that sometimes there is an allowance granted to use borrowed
expressions in such cases.

16. We will find an orderly method in all the Epistles. There is indeed no
affected curiosity, neither are there any Philosophic terms made use of; yet,
method being useful in it self, to clear the matter, and to help Hearers to
conceive and retain what is said (and so, subservient to edification) our Lord
does also condescend to that way. Therefore, in general, we see all these
Epistles have, 1. A Preface, 2. A Narration, 3. A Conclusion; as if He had
purposely casten them in one mould. More particularly, we see, He begins
them all with this, Thus says he, etc. Thereby to evince it to be His Word. A
main thing to be adver^ed to, as the foundation both of Preaching and
Application, that it may be made out, at first, to be warranted by the Lord;
and so to be His Word, as if He Himself were speaking. 2. He proposes in them
all, some stately style and title of Himself: which is also a main thing to be
adverted to in Preaching, that at the entry, both Ministers and Hearers may be
affected with the Majesty of Him, who is Master of the Ordinances, by some
serious, grave, and weighty insinuation, Thereby to dispose both for the more
fit speaking and hearing. 3. He does begin at these things which are more
general, and belong to information, as in letting them know their case, and
His thoughts of them: then he comes to particulars. 4. In particulars He
premitteth clear discoveries and convictions of sin, to exhortations, to
duties, and offers of the Gospel: and He premitteth exhortations to motives,
whereby He presses them. And lastly, He closes with what is most pathetick
and affectionate, either in way of threatening or promise, having that weighty
admonition added, He that has ears to hear, let him hear, etc. and so He
begins by working them up to some serious composed frame of spirit, and
closes with some affectionate impressing of the thing upon them in the most
pathetick manner. Although this here, be most in application; yet we conceive
that this order of proposing what is more general and doctrinal, and which
serves to the clearing of the judgment in the first place, and the subjoyning
of what is more convincing, pathetick, and affectionate which is done by way of
use and application in the last place, That thereby hearers may be dis-missed
with some impression of the thing; this order, we say, may be well gathered
hence. And indeed, it is the most native and genuin order, first, to inform the
judgment, and thereby to make the readier way to work upon the conscience,
will, and affections. To this purpose see Act. 13. how Paul does there proceed
and close, verse. 38, 39, etc.

17. In all this, the Lords way holds forth His great design of gaining them
to whom He speaks: so as it satisfies Him not to exonete Himself (to speak
so of Him) in doing of His duty; but He is zealous to get His message received;
and, in sum, to get them saved: therefore weightily does He follow it,
invi^ing, exhorting, pressing and protesting as unwilling to be refused. This
indeed is a fountain-qualification of a Preacher, to be traveling in birth
till Christ be formed in hearers; and so to Preach to them, as hungering and
thirsting for their Salvation, and not having only before him the proposing of
some profitable matter, or the handling of some point exactly; nay, not only
his own exoneration, and the justifying of God by making the hearers
inexcusable; but a single serious desire to have them gathered and espoused to
Christ; that the proud may be humbled, the hypocrite convinced, and the Word
made the savor of life unto life unto them according to their case. This, I
say, is a fountain-qualification, from which many other qualifications do flow,
it being seldom in any Minister but it puts an edge and weight upon the
Word in his mouth, as the want of it makes the most part want savor, and, in
the finest words, often to have but little weight.

18. We may gather here, That a Minister should hold forth the Authority of the
Ordinance and Word, and of Him in whose Name he speaks; and ought to take it
upon him, not from supposed weight in himself, or addition to it by his gifts;
but upon this account, that it is the Lords message, Thus says he, etc. being
that which gives himself confidence and boldness in the delivery thereof, and
which ought also to make it have weight upon others; yea, it follows from
this, that whatever a Minister be in himself, and whatever his thoughts be of
himself and of his gifts; yet, being called to carry the Lords Message, he
ought so to carry in it, as not to lessen the Masters Authority, by his
fainting and discouraging apprehensions of his own inability and unworthiness,
and by his heartlesse and languid way of speaking; but, to speak it as the
Oracles of God ought to be spoken, and as having weight in it self, for the
vindicating thereof, although he be weightlesse: and that therefore there ought
to be an eye to him for weight thereto, and a through-clearnesse that the thing
which is spoken in the Name of the Lord is His Truth and Message, without which
there can be no great confidence in saying, Thus says the Lord, and with which
a Minister may boldly and authoritatively speak.

19. As Preaching would be undertaken and begun with an eye to God; so both in
the carrying on thereof, and in the expecting of fruits thereby, the weight
would be still left upon the Lord: and Ministers would beware of attributing
any efficacy, either to the warmness of their own frame in speaking, or to
their liberty in pressing any point, or to the plainness and weightinesse in
their manner of proposing or pres^ing the same, as if that had any influence
(as from them) to give the Word weight and Authority upon Hearers; but still
the efficacy would be acknowledged to be from the holy Ghost, therefore, is
that word always at the close, He that has ears to hear, let him hear What
the Spirit says. Whereby, as at the entry the instrument is laid by, and the
Lords Authority held forth as only to be acknowledged by thus says the Lord;
so in the close, the Minister, even when in the most affectionate temper and
frame, is to leave what is spoken, as weighty only upon this account, that it
is the Spirit who speaks, and who only can make it effectual: and the more
singly this be done, the more weighty will it be; and thus weighty preaching
differs from the most powerful rethorick that can be. See somewhat to this
purpose, Chap. 10. verse. 4.

20. In the general, we may see, that Application is the life of Preaching;
and there is no less study, skill, wisdom, authority and plainness necessary
in the applying of a point to the Consciences of Hearers, and in the pressing
of it home, than there is required in the opening of some profound truth: and
therefore Ministers would study the one as well as the other. Much of these
Epistles is delivered in the second person, I know thy works, I counsel thee to
repent, etc. for this end, that they might know it was them particularly that
he meant. It is much for Ministers to get the Word leavelled at Hearers, so as
to make them know that it is they who are reached; and that it is not only
these that at first it was written to, or these to whom Christ and the Apostles
did immediately Preach that this Word belongs; but that equally it belongs
to them, even to them who now hear it. Hearers are often ready to shift-by the
most particular words, much more when they are more shortly and generally
touched. Hence, Preaching is called persuading, testifying, bes^eching,
entreating, or requesting, exhorting, etc. All which, import some such dealing
in Application: which is not only a more particular breaking of the matter; but
a directing it to the Consciences of the present Hearers. And in this
especially does the faithfulness, wisdom, and dexterity of the Preacher, and
the power and efficacy of the gift appear. This is to fulfill or fully to
preach the Word of God (a very significant and much used phrase, Romans 15.17.
Col. 1.25. 2 Timothy 4.7. a thing also desiderated in Sardi^, Chap. 3.) or to make
a full proof of the Ministry, that is, when a Minister extends himself to
the uttermost in his pains, seriousness and exercise of his gift, to be at the
yondmost of the Peoples edification; and, as it is, Acts 14.2. to speak so as
many may be made to believe: an excellent copy whereof, is in Paul, Coloss.
1.28, 29. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, whereunto I also
labor, striving according to his working, which works in me mightily. And, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10.11. Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and
unblameably, we behaved our selves among you that believe. As you know how we
exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you, (as a father does his
children) We conceive therefore, that it would conduce exceedingly to make
Application weighty upon the Consciences of the Hearers, if Ministers after the
more general part of their Doctrine, and at their entry to make Application
thereof, should pause a little, and by some serious and grave advertisement,
put the people in mind, that even this Word so applied, or to be applied, is
the Word and Message of God to them in particular, and as necessarily requisite
to the office of a Pastor as the former general opening of the truth was: for,
Hearers are often ready to take more liberty in shifting of Application, as if
what were even so spoken warrantably, were not equally the Lords Word with the
general truth opened-up. Thus we see Paul, after his opening up of general
truths, Act. 13. when he comes to make Application, puts his Hearers to it
by this Word, verse. 26. Men and brethren, to you is the word of this Salvation
sent, etc. And as it is the main part of a Pastoral gift, dexterously to feed
by Application; so are they the most thriving Christians, who, as new born
babes, drink in the Word so applied, and take it home to themselves, and their
own Consciences, as they do receive the general truths by their judgments.
Which shows, that both Ministers and People have the greater cause to be
watchful and solicitous concerning this main mean of edification, to wit,
particular Application.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 1. AFter this I looked, and behold, a door was opened in heaven: and the
first voice which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet talking with me, which
said, Come up hither, and I will show thee things which must be hereafter.

2. And immediately I was in the spirit, and behold, a throne was set in heaven,
and one sat on the throne.

3. And he that sat, was to look upon like a jasper, and a sardine stone: and
there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald.


Follows that part of this Book, which is properly Prophetical: for, John now
has a second call to come up, that he may have things which were to be
hereafter shown unto him. Before we speak particularly to the words, it will be
fit to premit somethings in reference to the Prophetical part which follows,
for our more easy and clear uptaking thereof and proceeding therein.

First, It is to be remembered, that on Chapter 1. verse. 19. we did divide this
Book in three sorts of things, to wit, 1. the things that then were. 2. The
things which John had seen in his time. 3. The things which were to come
thereafter. The first sort of things, have been already spoken unto in the
second and third Chapters. That part of the prophecy which follows, must
then contain the other two, to wit, the things which John saw in his time, and
which were to follow after that: both these are comprehended under this
expression, things which must be hereafter, verse. 1. for, that phrase, is not
to be taken strictly, as if all that follows were prophesies of things and
events following the time of John's having this Revelation manifested to him;
because we will see in the sixth and twelfth Chapters the prophecy begins
at the rise of the Gospel, and the white horse his beginning to conquer, and
the woman's traveling under persecution; both which, came some length before
this Revelation was written. Therefore they are said to be the things which
were to be thereafter: not because there was nothing of these events already
come to pass, or begun to be fulfilled, as the former reason clears; but
because the great part of them were of that nature, and also because the events
which John had seen to be fulfilled in their beginnings, were but in
perfecting, and so, in some respect, might be said to be to come thereafter
also: upon which grounds, the whole Book was called a prophecy, Chapter 1.
verse. 3. And so when this Book is divided in two parts, the things which John
saw, that is, the things which were in his time, are comprehended under one
expression with things that were to come. Again, when it is divided in three
sorts of things, as in Chapter 1. verse. 19. things to come, are taken more
properly and strictly, as comprehending only such things as were for the time
to be fulfilled. And this is the reason why sometimes it is divided in two,
sometimes in three parts; yet both to one purpose.

Secondly, The great subject and matter of all that is coming, is comprehended
in this word, I will show thee things which must be hereafter: which is not to
be extended to all events that were to fall out to the world, but to chief
events that were to fall out in the Church, as concerning her thriving,
persecution, etc. and what was to befall the enemies thereof unto the end of
the world. Also it is to be observed, according to the former advertisement,
that we are not to fix the beginning of these events at the time of John his
having this Prophecy revealed to him, but are to begin with the Gospels rise,
and the first preaching thereof unto the Gentiles after Christ's Ascension,
which we conceive is comprehended under that expression, the things which John
had seen, Chap. 1.19. as was said.

Thirdly, The Prophetical part of this Book, is ordinarily divided in six
visions, or six prophesies: for, when it is divided in seven, the first three
Chapters are accounted one. Now whither we call them visions or prophesies, it
is not much upon the matter; for, every vision comprehends a distinct
prophecy, and contrarily; so that it will come to the same thing. When they
are accounted seven, they are thus reckoned: The first vision, is in Chapters
1, 2, and 3. The second, is in Chapters 4, 5, and 6. The third, is in Chapters
7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. The fourth vision, is in Chapters 12, 13, 14. The fifth
is, in Chapters 15, and 16. The sixth, is in Chapters 17, 18, 19. And the
seventh, is in Chapters 20, 21, and 22. to the end of what is Prophetical. But
of this division, we will speak more particularly, Chapter 6. Lecture 1.

Fourthly, These visions or prophesies, that are to come, are again to be
distinguished in principal prophesies, and such as are explicatory only: we
call these principal prophesies of things to come, that are principally and
primarily such, that is, which hold forth distinct matter in themselves, not
holden forth in any former prophecy of that kind, and so, in respect of the
matter contained in them, and time which they relate unto, they differ one from
another: of this sort are the Prophesies of the seven seals, Chap. 6. of the
seven trumpets, Chap. 8, 9, 10, and 11. and of the seven vials, Chap. 15, and
16. for these have a dependencie one upon another, carrying the Prophecy of
the estate of the Church on from John's time unto the end of the world; and yet
neither of them do express what has been contained in any of the other.
Again, we call these explicatory prophesies, which contain no new matter, nor
relate to any other time different from the former Prophesies, but are
explicatory of the same things contained in some of these principal Prophesies
under other types and expressions: of this sort are, the third vision, Chap.
12, 13, 14. which is explicatory of the first two principal visions of the
seals and trumpets; and the two other Visions, that are from Chap. 17. to the
close, which are explicatory of the vials, especially of the last three: for,
the first of them explaineth the fifth and sixth vials, in the 17, 18, and 19.
Chap. The second, is explicatory of the seventh vial, Chap. 20, 21, etc. So
that in sum, there are three principal Prophesies set down in one form, to
wit, of seven seals, seven trumpets, seven vials: and again, other three that
are less principal and explicatory, which are expressed by other types,
according to the division formerly laid down: of which more may be said when we
come to that 6. Chapter, already referred unto.

Fifthly, The form of this Book, as to the manner of Gods revealing these
prophesies, would be observed: for, to make things the more clear and plain to
John, that which was to come, is represented to him in vision, as already
acted; and for this end, John in the Spirit is brought to heaven to behold this
comedy, (to call it so) or tragedy: for, it may be called a comedy, in
respect of the Godly, whose affairs have a sad beginning, but a joyful close:
but in respect of the wicked, it is a tragedy; for, they have a seeming sweet,
and pleasant beginning, but a sad and sorrowful close. And because the Lord
thinks good to represent these things to John in this manner, there are
several things in the progress of this prophecy, which are brought in for
this very end, as the speaking and acting of several persons and parties,
diverse interludes and songs, etc. which are not so much for bringing forth any
distinct matter or prophecy, as to make up that form wherein the Lord thinks
fit to reveal this prophecy: for preventing therefore of excessive and too
curious diving to find out mysteries in these things beyond the scope, we would
take notice of this advertisement, which we may more particularly consider in
these instances.

First, To all these principal prophesies, there are some things preparatory,
wherein the Lord sets forth His Majesty and Glory; thereby to rouse up John
and others to carry the more humbly and reverently in the search of these
prophesies: such is this part of the vision, Chap. 4, and 5. which is
preparatory to the prophetical part following: for, in them, the Lord, as it
were, represents the place where this great comedy is acted, describes the
actors, and shows the nature of the things which are to be acted; but these
preparations, are not properly prophetical, as the visions themselves, which
hold forth the things that are acted, are; yet, the allusion, which may be
gathered from such representations in their general strain and scope, is not to
be despised.

Secondly, We will find plain words of Doctrine mixed-in with the darkest
prophesies, as, blessed are they that die in the Lord, blessed are they that
keep their garments clean, etc. In which and such like words, there is a plain
doctrinal and comfortable meaning, the Lord thereby sweetning the darker
prophesies, and giving His people somewhat to feed on in the search of these,
as was once formerly hinted; yet, from the scope of such sentences, and their
being inserted in such places, and such like, some light may be gathered for
understanding of what is prophetical beside them.

Thirdly, There are some interludes of songs and playings upon Harps, mentioned
in several places, which are not properly prophetical in themselves, but as
circumstances in a parable, they are brought to make the intended mould of this
Book complete, and to make a connection between the parts and prophesies
thereof: these indeed are not to be abstracted from, or extended beyond their
particular scope respectively; yet are they so wisely expressed by the Lord,
that even they may be subservient to the understanding of the matter contained
in the principal prophesies to which they belong. Of this same nature we take
the representations of diverse parties, as actors in this comedy, to be, as
sometimes Angels, sometimes Beasts, sometimes Elders, etc. which, no doubt, is
wisely done by the Lord, and wants not signification; yet we do think that
deep mysteries are not to be drawn from such expressions, except something, in
the current and strain of the prophecy, evidence the same to aim at such
things, as at least a part of their scope.

Fourthly, We will also find many expressions borrowed from the Old Testament,
and from the manner of the Prophets therein, especially from Daniel, Ezekiel,
and Zechariah; yet often these expressions are to set forth a different thing
from what was principally intended by them under the Old Testament; as by
considering the particulars in the progress, will be clear.

We come now to the preparation to the first prophecy, in the fourth and fifth
Chapters: which also in some respect may be called preparatory to all the
visions that follow. It has two parts: the fourth Chapter holds out the
Majesty of God the Creator, and expresses His praise, considering Him as such:
the fifth Chapter holds out the Glory and Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ
the Mediator and Redeemer; this is not to be understood as if the Son were not
honored in the fourth Chapter with the Father, or the Father with the Son in
the fifth: for, that cannot be, seeing they are One God* and the honor that is
given in both Chapters is divine. But the works of Creation and Redemption,
being the grounds upon which all creatures, especially the Redeemed, are
obliged to praise God, and the great evidences of His manifold Glory, Therefore
both of them are explicitly spoken to, and the Lord, under both these
considerations, taken up; thereby to express Him to be the more eminently and
singularly glorious: so, when the ground of the praise is given in the 4. Chap.
verse. 11. it is, Thou are worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and
power: for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were
created. Again, in the fifth Chapter, the work of Redemption is mentioned, as
we may gather from verse. 9, and 12. yet so, as both are put together in the
same thanksgiving, Chap. 5. verse. 13.

In this fourth Chapter, beside some circumstances, making way to the vision,
we have these three principal things, 1. A stately description of the Majesty
of God, who is described in His own appearance, as sitting upon a Throne, like
a Jasper, and a Sardin stone, etc. verse. 3. which does set forth (to speak so)
the posture wherein God appears to John, thus stately in Majesty. They are
excellent expressions, and yet they come far short of the thing they represent,
but they are the furthest that men can win to, to wit, by things known, to
express, or someway to conceive an unconceivable thing. 2. We have a
description of His train and attendants, set out at large from the beginning of
the 4. verse. to verse. 8. wherein God is described from all the royal
attendants that wait on Him, and the excellent and stately way He is waited
upon. 3. From the midst of the 8. verse. to the end of the Chapter, we have a
description of the Glory of God, from the work and exercise that these
attendants are about: for, verse. 8. it is said, They rest not day and night,
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, Which was, and is, and is to come.
And the expressions of all the glory they gave Him, are set out in several
circumstances, to the end.

The scope is, to set forth to John, and all the Church, the Majesty of God,
the giver of this revelation, the Creator of all things, He that guides all
this World, and rules His Church; and, at the entry, to put an impression of
the Majesty of this God upon John, and upon all that should read and hear these
things that follow: for which end, He began with such visions to Ezekiel, Chap.
1. to Isaiah, Chap. 6. and to John, Chap. 1. of ^his Book.

To come more particularly to the words; There are in the first and second
verses, four circumstances that make way to the vision. 1. After this, that is,
after the first vision, spoken of in the first three Chapters: for, though it
is like (as Chap. 1. verse. 10.) John had all this revelation revealed to him in
one day from the Lord; yet the Lord gave him some breathings between visions,
First, things present, and then things to come, being revealed to him; which is
one cause why the prophesies and visions of this Book, are distinguished from
each other.

The second circumstance observable, is, the Lords giving access to John to
see what he saw, Behold, a door was opened in heaven: what is meaned by Heaven
here, whether the Church Militant, which is often, in this Book, and in
Scripture called Heaven, or, whether the third Heaven, spoken of, 2 Cor. 12.2.
we shall not insist on it: What John saw, was concerning the Visible Church,
and for their behove and advantage: but it is like, the place where John saw
these things in vision, was even that which we call Heaven literally, God
extraordinarily making way to him, to look in where His Glory was manifested;
and it is called here an opening of a door in heaven, and there showing him
things to come concerning His Church, which were afterward to fall out; yet
this is now shown unto John in vision, as if it were for the present time acted
in a kind of comedy before him. And therefore may either be supposed to be
revealed to him in Heaven, or in a trance represented to him, as if it were
there. And it agrees best with the scope, that it be thus understood, to wit,
that Heaven should be in this manner opened to John, and things revealed to him
there, which he was to reveal to the Church.

The third circumstance, is, the voice which he heard, and what it said, and
the first voice which I heard, etc. that is, the former voice which I heard,
Chap. 1. verse. 10, 11. The voice of our Lord Jesus Christ, which said there, I
am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; that same voice speaks again, and
renews John's Commission to come, and see, and write; and the voice bids
him, come up hither, and he will show him, etc. to tell that a heavenly mind is
a great furtherance to acquaintance with the Mysteries of God, and
earthly-mindednesse is a great hinderance and obstruction; and then he
proposes what things he has to show him, Things which must be hereafter. So
that in the expli^ation and application of this revelation, we are not to look
back to the four Monarchies, but to Christ's way with His Church in the days of
the Gospel, according to the first general which we premitted.

The fourth circumstance, is, verse. 2. And immediately I was in the Spirit:
whereby it is like, there has been some intervall betwixt the ecstasie he was
in, Chap. 1. verse. 10. and this ecstasie of spirit he is now in: and it is the
second way how our Lord Jesus fittteth John to receive these following
Mysteries: First, He carries up his affections, and makes him Heavenly, and
then ravisheth him in the spirit, whereby (as Chap. 1.10.) in an extraordinary
way John is, as it were, taken out of himself, put in an ecstasie, impressions
of things to come made on his spirit, and palpably and visibly made discernable
to him, in a Spiritual way, as if he had seen them with his bodily eyes.

We come now to the vision it self: And in it we have, 1. Gods Throne (to speak
so) set forth, 2. Himself sitting on it, 3. A description of His Glory as He
sits upon it.

1. Behold, a throne was set in Heaven. These are borrowed expressions: for,
God needs not a material Throne, neither has He any such in Heaven; but as
among Kings, Thrones are used as seats for Judgment, and for places where they
appear in their Royalty; so the same similitude is borrowed here, to set out
the Sovereignty of God in Heaven, and in Earth, and in His Church (especially
His Gospel Church) which is called His Throne, Ier. 3.17. for in it He has an
absolute Dominion and Government, and is continually exercising and acting that
Government as a King on His Throne. It holds out, 1. Not only Gods greatness
and power: But, 2. His absolute Dominion and Sovereignty; And, 3. His actual
exercising of that Power and Soveraignity: which is further holden out, in the
second expression, one sat on the throne: the Throne is not empty, but has
one sitting on it, acting and exercising that Power. Such words are frequent in
Scripture, Psalm. 11.4. The Lords throne is in heaven; his eyes behold, his
eyelids try the children of men. It expresses what is meant by His Throne, to
wit, His absoluteness and Soveraignity in Government, and His Justice, and
severity, being angry with the wicked every day. God in His Glory and
Excellency is holden out, as sitting on His Throne, verse. 3. in other sort of
robes than ever were seen on the greatest that ever were in the World; He that
sat on the throne, was to look upon like a Jasper, and Sardine stone: and there
was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an Emerald: these are
expressions, not of His form, (for He is purely spiritual and unconceiveable)
but borrowed, to set forth His splendour and Glory; and because that which men
usually think most excellent, is gold, and precious stones, these are made use
of for this end. There are two stones mentioned for resembling of His Glory;
the first is a Jasper, an exceeding precious stone; it was one of these
precious stones that was put in Aarons breastplate, Exodus 28.20. and it is
among these stones wherewith the foundations of the walls of the New Jerusalem
are said to be garnished, Revel. 22.19. And because one stone is not
sufficient, even but to resemble the Glory and splendour of the Majesty of God,
there is another added, to wit, the Sardine stone: which is also precious as
the former was. These being unknown to us, we shall not insist to describe
them: for, the scope is clear, to wit, to point out this, that God is admirably
and inconceivably excellent, even so excellent that all the most precious
things in earth, being put together, are but poor shadows, and infinitely
disproportionable resemblances of that excellency which is in Him.

A second thing whereby this Glory is set forth, is, And there was a rainbow
round about the throne, in sight like unto an Emerald. In Ezekiel. 1. (where the
same description is almost in the same terms) there is a Firmament, a Throne,
one sitting on it, and a rainbow; as the appearance of the bow that is in the
clouds in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round
about: the scope in both places, is, to show the glorious Majesty of God, who,
as He has a Throne attributed to Him improperly, to express His Soveraignity,
so has He this as a cloth of State over His Throne, thereby to show how far
His Soveraignity and Majesty is beyond the greatest Monarchs on Earth: for, He
only has immortality, and dwells in a light that no man can approach unto,
whom no eye has seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy 6.16. Therefore is justly called the
only Potentate, verse. 15. all others being but slaves and worms in comparison
with Him. And that this bow is compared to an Emerald, is to show that it was a
more glorious thing than that rainbow in the clouds, which is visible to us.
This rainbow, Chap. 10. verse. 1. is said to be upon his head; whereby it would
seem, that it is something which He does (as it were) account His Crown and
Diadem of Glory: It is like, that respect is here had to that Covenant, which
the Lord made with Noah, that the waters should not overflow the earth, whereof
this rainbow was given as a sign and seal for the confirmation thereof, Genesis
9.13. and the mentioning of it here, and Chap. 10. is not to relate to that
particular promise, that the earth should not be drowned, but is to relate unto
the Covenant of Gods Grace through Christ Jesus with His true Church: for, when
it is called a bow, in sight like unto an Emerald, it points out an
excellency beyond the ordinary rainbows: and so may be thought to relate to a
more excellent Covenant. And indeed, considering that this is an eminent piece
of the Lords Glory, and, as it were, a Crown, we can apply it to no other
thing. In reference to the scope in these places, it does hold forth, 1. That
this glorious God, who is the Creator of all, is a God who has condescended to
Covenant with His People. 2. It holds forth, that this gracious condescending
of His to enter in Covenant with them, is a main part of His Glory and Majesty,
which He accounts to be as a Crown unto Him. 3. It holds forth, that as the
Lord does not reveal His Glory to His People abstractly, but in the way of His
Covenant; so, His People cannot winn to the comfortable thoughts of the Majesty
of God, nor ought to look on His Glory, but as under that relation. 4. And more
particularly, it is added here, to confirm John in this, that though the Church
was to meet with many persecutions and trialls at first from heathens, yet
should she not be overwhelmed with the same, more than the earth can be
overwhelmed again with water: and though after that, Antichrist and enemies
within, should trouble her by Errors and Heresies, yet should she also be
kept from being drowned by them; and therefore when the Lord begins the
consolatory part of the second principal prophecy, and comes to comfort John
against the trialls of Antichrist in the beginning of the 10. Chapter, He does
there again appear with this bow upon His head, to show, that He is no less
mindful of His Covenant with His People, and of their preservation from being
overwhelmed by enemies, than He is of that promise which He made to Noah in the
place formerly mentioned.

From the scope, Observe, 1. The great necessity and advantage that there is
for all that would know God, and the mind of God, to be rightly instructed what
God is. It is the first lesson, that all, whether Ministers, or others should
learn, to have right thoughts and impressions of the Majesty of God, and a
right conviction of that glory that is in Him.

2. As this is requisite to the up-taking of Gods mind in any thing, so it is
particularly applicable to this Book: There can be no up-taking of the mind of
God in these Mysteries, till we be rightly instructed what God is, and have the
impression of His Majesty on our hearts, 1. Because it sets out His
absoluteness and Government over His Church, whether in the times of bloody
persecution, or of prevailing errors: in all these, God sits on His Throne
Governing. 2. That the Faith of Gods People may be confirmed, in expecting the
performance of the promises to them, and the execution of the Judgment here
pronounced on their enemies, notwithstanding of many interveening difficulties;
the ^ying of Gods absoluteness and Dominion, makes for this. 3. The looking
on Gods absoluteness, is necessary at the entry to this part of this Book, to
stay our curiosity, and the needless vain searching that curious spirits may
decline to, and so go a whoring from the scope, and turn aside to vain
jangling, whereby they obscure rather than clear the meaning. We close this,
wishing for this impression in our meddling with any part of Gods Word, and
especially in meddling with this prophecy.

Obser. 3. Where God is rightly seen, He will be seen exceeding stately and
Glorious: O so wonderful* whom nothing can resemble, whom no tongue can
express, nor eye behold, nor heart conceive* what were it to imagine thousands
of mountains of the most precious stones imaginable, and thousands of Suns
shining in their brightness? these are inconceiveably short of God, and the
Glory that is in Him; what an excellent happiness will that be to dwell with
this God for ever? to behold His face, to see Him as He is, and to be
capacitate (to speak so) to know Him, as we are known of Him? Wonder and admire
at Him, who is glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing wonders,
terrible in Majesty, and in all perfections past finding out: To Him be praise
for ever. Amen.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 4. And round about the throne were four and twenty seats, and upon the
seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and they
ha^ on their heads crowns of gold.

5. And out of the throne proceeded lightnings, and thundrings, and voices: and
there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God.

6. And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in
the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts full of
eyes before and behind.

7. And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and
the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying
eagle.

8. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were
full of eyes within, --


THese Verses hold forth the second thing in the Chapter, to wit, the glorious
attendants of this great God, who sits upon His Throne as great Sovereign of
heaven and earth. Great Kings have their thrones, and their clothes of State,
the Lord is beyond them in both these: they have also their inferior Judges,
Nobles, and Counselors waiting on them, as also, others to execute their
orders and decrees; the Lord is brought in here as more eminently furnished
with glorious attendants and instruments to execute His pleasure, than any that
ever was heard of.

Before we proceed, one thing is needful to be cleared, to wit, whether the
scope of this vision be to represent the Glory of God, as it is manifested to
the Church Triumphant in Heaven, and the Spirits of just men made perfect? or,
whether it be intended to express the Glory of God, as shining in His
Ordinances, in the Church Militant? Answ. We conceive neither of these is to be
secluded, but both may be well included: for, to consider God, as manifested in
His Glory in heaven, agrees well with the scope; as aiming thereby to impresse
the reverence and awe of the Majesty of God upon hearts: yet we say, that this
is not only intended; nor is the other to be excluded: because, 1. it also
agrees well with the scope, which is to set forth events concerning the
Militant Church, and for that end to represent (as it were) a Theater and
actors for bringing about these events, whereof the Majesty of God is Supreme
Governor, etc. Now, it conduces more to the scope, and comes nearer what is
intended, to conceive this representation as holding forth Gods Glory and Way
in His Militant Church. 2. It is also usual in this Book to express the
Visible Church under the Title of Heaven, and things done in it, by similitudes
of things, set forth as acted in heaven, as in the progress we will see. 3.
This preparation being consolatory against the coming trials of the Church,
(for which cause the Lord appears with His bow about His Throne,) it will
agree best to that part of the scope, to apply it to the Militant Church, by
which His glorious presence therein, His nearness thereto, His care and
protection thereof, etc. will most manifestly and comfortably be set forth. 4.
There is a resemblance between the Lords glorious presence in His Church and
that which is in heaven: for, He has a glorious Throne of Grace in His Church
as He has one of Glory in heaven; and what is more immediately manifested in
Heaven, does someway shine by His Ordinances amongst His people. 5. If we
consider all the attendants mentioned in this, and in the following Chapter,
particularly, verse. 10. we will find it necessary to understand this, as
respecting the Church Militant; because some are spoken of, who are redeemed,
and are to reign upon the earth. Whence, we conceive, it is not unsuitable to
look upon this representation as expressing Gods glory in His Militant Church:
which is represented by Heaven and the practice of perfected Saints there, to
show unto them, while here, a copy of their duty in praising and thanksgiving,
and in doing the will of God in earth as it is done in Heaven.

We come then to consider more particularly this description of the Lords
excellent train and attendants. First, verse. 4. there are round about the
throne four and twenty seats, and upon the seats, I saw four and twenty Elders
sitting, and they had on their heads crowns of gold. By Elders here, we
conceive, are understood the true professors of the Militant Church in the
days of the Gospel: for, in the Song, Chap. 5. verse. 9. and 10. we will find
that they are such as are redeemed, such as by that Redemption are made Kings
and Priests, as all Believers are, Chap. 1. verse. 6. and to reign upon earth,
which shows, that they are Members in the Church Militant: and they being
followers of the four beasts, and privileged but with such privileges as are
common to all Saints, it appears they are not Officers or Guides, but private
Professors. They are called Elders for the dignity which they are advanced unto
beyond others, to be, as it were, Elders and Governors in Gods House in a
spiritual sense: in which respect, they are called Kings and Priests, Chap. 5.
verse. 10. or, as the Word is usually taken in the New Testament, they are
accounted for special Ministers and Servants, having a nearness to God, and
to share of His Glory which none else in the world had; and thus the Lords
People are called His Ancients, or Elders, Isa. 24. verse. 23. They are said to
be twenty four in number; which we conceive to be a definite number for an
indefinite: it may be there is an allusion to the twenty four courses that
David appointed for the service of the Tabernacle, 1 Chronicles. 25, 26, 28, etc. to
show that the ministration of the New Testament is no less Glorious. Also
seeing the Church in old was reckoned by twelve Tribes, who it is like had their
twelve Princes, as Elders and Governors answerable to that number; so, twenty
four is mentioned here, to show, that the Church, in the days of the Gospel,
shall be extended to a double and greater number of Saints than was at this
time: but on these we shall not insist, seeing the general may be safely rested
in. Again, they are said to be clothed in white raiment: which shows, that
their innocence is their greatest glory, or their most stately robe, and the
greatest badge of their dominion: for, white raiment signifies either Christ's
imputed Righteousness, or their begun Sanctification, as we heard, Chap. 3.
verse. 4. and is often elsewhere in this Prophecy. The last thing spoken of
these Elders, is, they have four and twenty seats, or thrones, upon which they
sit, and on their heads, crowns of gold: Both which, are to show, 1. The
settled and secure happiness that these possess beyond all others in the
world. 2. The spiritual Dominion that they have begun in them here over their
lusts, and spiritual enemies: in which respect, they reign even on the earth,
Chap. 5.10. And 3. it is to give a type of the glorious Dominion that is laid
up for them in Heaven, when they, having been Assessors at the judging of the
world, shall be set down upon one Throne with Jesus Christ, as was promised,
Chap. 3. verse. 21.

In verse. 5. We have the second thing whereby this stateliness is expressed,
and out of the throne proceeded thunderings, and lightenings, and voices: It is
like there is an allusion to Gods manner of giving the Law, Exodus 19. whereby
He appeared so terrible, that even Moses did exceedingly fear and quake; And,
Deuteronomy. 33.2. it is said, that from His right hand went a fiery Law: the scope
is, to show, that though God appear without great outward splendour and terror
in His Ordinances, in the days of the Gospel; yet is there in His Church Power
and Glory whereby the mightiest may be terrified and confounded: in which
respect, the Church is terrible as an Army with Banners, Song 6.4. and 10. and
the witnesses, Chap. 11. verse. 3. and 5. though prophesying in sackcloath, are
said to have fire proceeding out of their mouths, and to bring on many other
dreadful plagues. By this He would teach men to approach to Him with fear;
for, He is a great God, and to be bad in reverence of all that are about him,
Psalm. 89.7.

There is also a third thing observed in that fifth verse. And there were seven
lamps of fire burning before the thron^, which are the seven spirits of God: by
these we understand the holy Ghost in His manifold and various operations, as
we heard, Chap. 1. verse. 4. and by comparing Chap. 5. verse. 6. it is clear:
for, these seven Spirits are the horns and eyes of the Lamb, that shows both
the Omnipotency and Omnisciencie of the same, and they are sent forth into all
the earth, which could not be, if the Spirit were not infinite and Immense, and
so cannot be understood but of the holy Ghost. Where, by the way, we may
perceive the absurdity of the application of Doctor Hamond on this place
formerly mentioned, who does apply these seven spirits, as representing the
seven Deacons of the Church of Jerusalem. These operations of the spirit, are
compared to Lamps, because of the shining light that flows therefrom to the
Church: they are Lamps of fire burning, that is, to point out that the saving
operations of the Spirit have heat, and a purifying efficacy with their light,
to warm the heart with love to God, and to consume and eat up the dross of
corruption that is in the same: therefore it is said of Christ, Matthew. 3.11.
that He should Baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire: which last word
expresses the nature and efficacy of the former. They are called seven lamps,
or spirits, because though there be but one and the self-same spirit, yet there
are diversities of gifts, and differences of administrations and operations, as
it is, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, etc. of which we spoke, Chap. 1. Lastly, These lamps are
said to be before the throne, to show, that as Kings have their Thrones and
Courts lightened with lamps and torches, so the Lord has His Church lightened by
His Spirit, and has the operations thereof, as it were, so placed, as thereby
light may be given to His Church and Elders that are round about Him; this is a
special part of the Lords stateliness, and of the Churches Glory, that His
spirit is there; and by Him it is Covenanted to His Church for their good unto
the end of the world, according as the word is, Isai. 59.21. As for me, this is
my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my word
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord,
from henceforth, and for ^ver.

The fourth thing marked as before this Throne, is in the beginning of verse. 6.
And before the throne there was a sea of glass, like unto crystal: A sea, is
a great vessel for containing of water, called a sea, for the bigness thereof,
as 1 King. 7.23. it is said that Solomon made a molten sea for the use of the
Sanctuary: The end thereof was, that therein the Priests might wash their
sacrifices, and also themselves in their approaching unto the Altar: this was
both for great use and ornament in that legal service, and also was typical
of Jesus Christ, by whom we, and our sacrifices are accepted in our approaches
to God. By it here, may not unfitly be understood the blood of Jesus Christ in
its efficacy, which does really that in the Church, which was but typically
performed by that sea in Solomon's Temple. Certainly all circumstances will
agree well to confirm this: For, 1. It agrees well to the scope, to show the
glory of God in the Church; for, it cannot be denied but this blood is one of
the special ornaments thereof: hence, Heb. 12.23. and 24. when we are said to
come to the heavenly Jerusalem (which does there expres^e the Militant Church)
it is also added, that we are to come to God the Judge of all, etc. to Jesus
the Mediator of the new Covenant; and that excellent Society is closed with
this sweet expression, and to the blood of sprinkling, etc. which intimates
this to be a main comfortable part of the glory and furnitour (to say so) of
the Gospel Church. 2. Seeing the gifts of the Spirit are mentioned immediately
before in their sanctifying virtue, it is not unsuitable that the justifying
virtue of the blood of the Lamb should be understood by this, as joined
therewith; for, they go well together: therefore Chap. 15.2. this sea is said
to be mingled with fire: which is to be understood of this fire of the spirit
here placed with it. 3. This will agree well with the reason why it is called
the sea, to wit, to show the fullness thereof, and the greatness of the
efficacy of the same. 4. It is before the throne, to show that God has
provided that blood to wash sinners, that they may approach unto Him with
boldness, as may be gathered from Heb. 10.19. and withal, that there is no
approaching to Him but by the same* Lastly, It is said to be of glass, like
unto crystal: which we conceive is not to express the britelnesse thereof;
for, the mentioning of it to be like crystal contributeth nothing to that,
But is to express its excellency and fitness to contain and preserve what is
in it clean and pure; in which respect, it is of an excellency beyond that of
Solomon's, which was but of brass. Yet, it may also signify how reverently and
warrily it ought to be made use of, left by proud presumption that blood be
trod under foot and despised, which is so tenderly reserved, as in a sea of
glass. This interpretation we think is agreeable to the scope, and also not
inconsistent with that which is spoken, Chap. 15. verse. 2. of the Saints their
standing on this sea after their victory over the beast, which may well be
understood to be their washing of their robes, and making them white in the
blood of the Lamb, as the expression is, Chap. 7. verse. 14. which also relates
to the same persons, and in the same condition: for, there is no obtaining of
victory over the beast by any, no^ yet a maintaining of the ^ame, but by having
footing upon Christ by Faith, which will make the Saints indeed to sing as
Victors and Conquerours over all, which is confirmed by Chap. 12. verse. 11.
They overcame by the blood of the Lamb, etc. I know it is ordinarily applied to
the world and its brittlenesse, which has a sense and application not
un-usefull; yet, considering that this is mentioned as one of the ornaments
which wait upon the Lord in His Church, and as a singular evidence of His
Glory; and considering that it is placed before the throne, even in that same
room which the seven spirits of God have; as also considering that it must be
conceived to be within the guard of Angels, mentioned, Chap. 5. verse. 11. we
conceive, it cannot aggree to the world, taken as distinguished from the
Church, especially considering, that its being resembled to a sea of glass,
and that not of common glass, but that which is as crystal, is not to
aggrege the brittlenesse thereof, but clearly to commend and set forth its
excellency, as being something of more than an ordinary value. Beside, this
word sea, in this place, does not look to these raging waters, which are called
sea, as contradistinguished from the dry land (the mistake whereof may be the
ground of this usual application) But it expresses a great vessel made for
use and ornament, and accordingly made use of in the houses of great men, and
was particularly mentioned among the ornaments of the Temple and Ceremonial
worship, as was formerly marked, and is especially for washing, or bathing
thereinto. Now, these considerations will by no means suffer it to be applied
to the world, as expressing the vanity and worthlesnesse thereof; neither will
there be any just analogy found betwixt the two, whereby the one may be found
to resemble, or to be resembled by the other.

The last thing mentioned here for the commendation of this glorious Train, is,
four beasts, which are largely insisted on, verse. 6, 7, and 8. That these
beasts are mentioned immediately after the sea of glass, it shows, that by
the sea of glass must be understood something that tends to the commendation
of Gods presence in His Church, seeing it is placed in the midst of the other
commendations; for, that these beasts are mentioned to set forth His Glory,
cannot be questioned. The word rendered beasts, is in the Original (...), and
might be well translated living creatures, as it is, Ezekiel. 1. or, living
wights. By these, are not understood Angels, as in Ezekiel. 1. and 10. because,
Chap. 5.10. etc. they are among the Redeemed, and verse. 11. are expressly
distinguished from the Angels, who are said to be round about them: and indeed
their following description, being compared with that of these living wights,
or Cherubims, Ezekiel. 1. there will be found a great difference. Nor, Secondly,
by them can be understood any of the glorified Triumphant Church, because of
the reasons that were given when we spoke of the Elders; for, they also reign
upon the earth, Chap. 5.10. and the scope is, by them to express something of
the Church Militant. We conceive therefore by these beasts so described, are
understood the Ministers of the Church in the days of the Gospel, as being
distinguished from professors, who are called Elders, and as being described
like Angels, to show their eminency in some respect beyond the other. For, 1.
These beasts, or living creatures, (for some of them are like to men) do ever
go before the Elders in the worship of God, as guides to them therein. 2.
Because they do invite, excite and inform others to and in their duties, as
they say come and see, Chap. 6. verse. 3.5.7. 3. They are described as these
Cherubims or Angels are, Ezekiel. 1. and yet being such Angels as are Members of
the Militant Church, they must be understood of the Ministers of the Gospel,
seeing these are ordinarily designed by the title Angel in this Prophecy: it is
therefore the more likely that they are described after the manner of Angels,
even as they get their name. 4. We will find all the particulars of the
description to be pertinently applicable to them; As, 1. They are said to be
beasts, or living creatures, to show a special activity and fitness that is
communicated to them even beyond others. 2. Their number is four; which is
less than the number of the Elders or Professors was, yet sufficient to carry
the Lords message to all the four corners of the earth: and, as it were, to be
upon all sides of the Lords Throne for the edification and oversight of His
People, as the Tribes of Israel marched with four standards on all the quarters
of the Ark. 3. They are said to be full of eyes before and behind: they have
not one eye, but many eyes, because they have many to watch over, and many
snares to give them warning of. They have eyes before, that is, to show their
dependence on God, who being the great Leader and Captain that goes before His
People, these that are under-guides have their eye on Him for direction in the
way that they ought to lead their people in: and thus their eyes before, are
mentioned before their eyes behind, to show, that ere they give any direction
to the Flock that follow them, they will look to the Master for His orders; and
so have their eye upon Him, as the eyes of Servants look unto the hands of
their Masters, for observing of their directions, Psalm. 123. 2. They are also
full of eyes behind, to show, that they are watchful over these committed to
them, by pointing out that way to them which they had discovered from God, and
by watchful observing how they follow the same, as the word, is, Psalm. 32.
verse. 8. I will instruct thee; and teach thee in the way which thou shall go, I
will guide thee with mine eye: which is to express the most tender way of
direction and instruction. Also these expressions serve well to show their
particular watchfulness over themselves, who have eyes before them, that
imports tenderness in the undertaking of any thing; and eyes behind, which
respects their tender observation of their bypast failings. 4. These beasts
are placed in the midst of the throne, and round about the same: it may seem
strange-like to say they are both in the midst of the Throne and about the
same; yet, in the Scripture Language, to be in the midst of a thing, is to be
near it, or to be fully upon it; and this part of the description shows their
nearness to God, and their dignity beyond others: for, the Elders had Thrones,
and Crowns; but these beasts and Ministers have the same Throne with the Lord,
as being nearer to Him in respect of their service, and as being of more
eminent dignity, because they are Ambassadors for Him, and act in His stead,
and in His Name, and by virtue of the same Authority, 2 Cor. 5.20. They are
round about the throne also: which is not to be understood as if they were (to
speak so) without the circle of the Throne; but it is to show the Lords wise
way of disposing His Ministers unto all quarters for His Churches edification:
so that all of them are not together, or upon any one side of the Throne, but
they are disposed by Him upon all quarters thereof, for edifying of the Elders,
or, His People, set out by them, which are round about the Throne, as we
formerly heard.

In the seventh Verse, we have a more particular description of the several
shapes of these beasts, which is the fifth thing by which they are described:
the first beast, is like a Lion; the second beast like a Calf; the third beast
had a face as a Man; the fourth beast, is like a flying Eagle. By this
diversity of forms, or shapes, is set forth the diversity of gifts and
furnitour, which the one holy Spirit uses to dispense unto the Ministers of
the Church, as 1 Corinthians. 12.4, 5. etc. and hereby the Lord shows, that as
private Christians may be more eminent in some Graces than others, so Ministers
are some of them eminent in one gift, some of them in another, as the Lord
minds to make use of them, (as we may see by comparing Barsabas, the son of
consolation, with B^^nerges, the sons of thunder) yet all these gifts work for
the good of the one body of the Church, that there may be no schism or defect
in the same, as it is, 1 Corinthians. 12.25. In the description of these Cherubims,
or living Wights, Ezekiel. 1. every one of them has all these properties and
perfections, as their description clears; because the scope is there to
describe holy Cherubims; but here, being applied to Ministers of the Gospel,
not one of them has all these properties; yet all of them jointly have them
all: which shows, that though the Lord furnish not every Minister eminently
with all gifts, that yet He uses to furnish Ministers, jointly considered,
with what gifts are needful for His Churches good; so that what one wants,
another has; that the hand, and the eye may acknowledge they have need of the
foot, etc.

More particularly, the first beast is said to be like a Lion: which does
express the zeal, undantoned courage and boldness wherewith some Ministers
are eminently furnished in carrying on the work of the Lord, especially in
difficult times. Thus were the Apostles furnished, and many others in
aftertimes who have adventured boldly upon such hard work, as has made the
world to think them mad in such undertakings; yet have they been carried
through the same. And from this we may see how our zealous Reformers have been
set a work to pursue Reformation against so many difficulties, to wit, it has
been by being made partakers of this lion-like spirit. The second beast, is
like a calf, or ox: which though he be not so bold in attempts as the other,
to wit, the Lion; yet is useful for his ^ureablnesse and service. By this are
set forth Ministers, furnished with patience, humility, and painfulnesse in
labor, and submissivenesse in suffering; which is also no little gift. And as
the former prove profitable to the Church in respect of their zeal and
boldness, so do they with their patient and constant drawing in the Lords yoke
even under the cross. This is not to be understood as if the first wanted
patience, or the second courage; for there is a zeal and boldness in
suffering, as well as in doing; and if boldness have not a readiness to
submit to the cross, it will not be approven: but the meaning, is, that some
Ministers who have patience and endurance, are yet (to say so) predominant and
more eminent in the exercise of their zeal and courage* and others who are
stout and courageous also; yet, in Gods providence, are called to vent the same
in suffering, so as their patience and painful laboriousnesse appears to be
predominant in them. The third beast has a face as Man: this sets forth
such as are furnished with reason, prudence and wisdom in an eminent manner,
for mannaging the affairs of His house: which is not a humane natural policy,
but a gift of wisdom and discretion bestowed by God upon them, as it is, 1 Cor.
12.8, 10. And by this wisdom and prudence, they edify and build the Church as
others that are more observably zealous and courageous: though they seem not to
keep the same manner of proceeding in all things with the former; yet is the
same end pursued by them, and the same rule is observed in pursuing of it, and
the same Spirit acts them all. Wherefore it would not be thought strange, if
diverse Ministers, driving the same design, be yet thought different in their
manner of following the same. The fourth beast, is like a flying Eagle: this
shows the deep reach and insight wherewith God has furnished some in the
mysteries of the Gospel, as also a Spiritualnesse in their gift and strain
beyond others, whereby hearts may be drawn from this earth to the pursuing
after things that are above. Of those we may have occasion to speak, Chap. 6.
Only now we see, how wisely the Lord fitteth His Servants for His Work, and
does usually time and tryst such and such qualifications in Ministers according
to the state of His Church. It is ordinary for some to apply these four beasts
to the four Evangelists; but there is no ground for it: beside, John being one
of these Evangelists, cannot be thought to invite himself to come and see, as
all these four beasts do, Chap. 6.

In the eight Verse, these beasts, are further described. A sixth part of their
description, is, and the four beasts had each of them six wings about them:
this is borrowed from Isa. 6.2, 3, etc. where the Seraphims are so described:
(by which it further appears, that Ministers, the Angels of the Militant
Church, are represented by these beasts) These wings show their expeditnesse
and readiness to obey Gods will. And further from Isa. 6. we may gather the
reason why they are called six, First, Because there is need of two to cover
their face who are admitted to such nearnes^e with God: this signifies the
impression which they have of the holy Majesty of God, and that Godly fear and
reverence that ought to be in Ministers in their going about holy things: this
is commended in Levi, Mal. 2.5. that he feared God and was afraid before His
Name. Secondly, The use of other two wings, is, to cover their feet: whereby is
expressed the sensiblnesse which they had of their own sinful infirmities: this
is a thing well becoming a Minister in his ministerial duties, to be walking
with fear and with humility, as being sensible of his own sinfulness, and the
great disproportionablnesse that is between God and him. This is Paul's word, 1 Corinthians. 2.3. I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.
And it is certain, that where the first is, to wit, the right impression of
Gods holiness, there this will be also. Thirdly, The last two wings, are for
their duty; for, with two they are to fly. Here is a good contemperature when
Ministers walk under the impression of Gods holiness, and of their own
sinfulness; and yet are not by these more indisposed, but made more fit for
His work, and cheerful and ready in the performing of their duty. If the
first four wings be not in exercise, the two last will not be very fit for
their work; and it is Spiritual wisdom to keep all these in the right place.

The seventh qualification whereby these beasts are described, is, They were
full of eyes within. In the sixth Verse, they were full of eyes before, which
respects their dependencie upon God; and full of eyes behind, which
represents their care over their flocks: here, they are full of eyes within,
which holds forth their watchfulness over themselves, in that they so look
to others, as they do not overlook themselves, but are seriously reflecting
upon their own inward condition: so they are good Ministers, and they are also
good Christians in their own private walk; and their being good Christians in
having respect to their own Spiritual thriving, is no little qualification for
their discharge of ministerial duties, and for their being admitted to so great
nearness to the Throne of God. Ministers that have but eyes behind them, so
look upon the ways of others, and have not eyes within them, to consider
themselves, are but in a great part blind-guides, as Christ speaks of the
Pharisees, Matthew. 15.14. This having of eyes within, as well as eyes without,
is expressed by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.16 in that precept, take heed unto thy
self and to the doctrine; and Acts 20.28. take heed to your selves and to all
the stock, etc. Ministers that look to others, would take their retirings to
look upon themselves, left they become strangers to their own condition: and
what is spoken of Ministers here, is a duty well-becoming every Christian.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 8. -- And they rest not day and night, saying Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

9. And when those beasts give glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sat on
the throne, who lives for ever and ever,

10. The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the throne,
and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the
throne, saying,

11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.


IN this part of the Chapter, we have the third part of this stately
description: wherein the Majesty of God is set out by the great work and task
that these attendants of His, to wit, these four beasts, and the four and
twenty Elders have: and that is the work of praise, whereby both, in their
places, concur to have Him exalted. In the latter part of the 8. verse. the four
beasts begin; and in the three verses following, the four and twenty Elders go
on.

In the Elders praise, we may consider these two, 1. The un-interruptednesse
thereof, and they rest not day and night, saying, etc. this is to show, first,
the great matter of their praise that does still continue, they are furnished
so with grounds thereof. 2. It is to show their diligence and seriousness in
letting no opportunity of praise pass: for, praise being an affirmative duty,
we conceive that this practice is to be expounded according to the precepts of
rejoicing always and praying evermore. 3. It may more especially set forth the
diligence and seriousness that the Ministers of the Gospel are said to be
furnished with, according to the word, Isa. 62.6. I have set watchmen upon thy
walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night, etc.

The second thing in the^^ praise, is, the matter thereof; which is the
ascribing to the Lord three of His own glorious and essential Attributes. The
first, is, Holiness; which is thrice repeated, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God,
etc. this seems to be taken from, Isa. 6.3. where the Seraphims begin their
song with the same expression. This shows, 1. how infinitely and inconceivably
holy the Lord is, when once mentioning of this Attribute is not sufficient. 2.
It shows that no Attribute of God, will have more impression upon a tender
Minister that is near Him than His holiness: this affects the very Angels,
and the more near any is admitted to Him, the more will this affect them. 3. It
shows, that Ministers ought to be Angel-like in their speaking of God, and
that it is a main part of their task to hold forth His excellency to others.
The second Attribute, is, the Lords Omnipotency; Lord God Almighty, etc. By
which the Lord is conceived as infinitely above all, and able to do all things,
as Job speaks, Chap. 42.2. and it is both a notable ground of praise in
reference to God, and a comfort in reference to His People, who have Him, (who
is able to do above what they can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20.) covenanted to be
their Almighty God, even under that same consideration, Genesis 17.1. The third
Attribute mentioned, is, His Eternity, in these words, which was, and is, and
is to come: whereof often has been spoken; and it is here mentioned to advance
the Glory of God infinitely beyond all created Idols who have had their
beginning, and are going on unto a decay, and will ere long come to be
destroyed: but the portion of Jacob is not so, who in all the tossings of the
world, continues the same, and of His years there is no end.

After this, follows the praise of the four and twenty Elders. The beasts go
before; because they represented the Ministers and Guides, as we said. In it
three things may be observed; First, The timing of their praise, verse. 9.
Secondly, Their practice, verse. 10. Thirdly, Their verbal expressions or song,
verse. 11.

The time of the Elders praise, is, And when these beasts gave glory, honor
and thank to Him that sat upon the Throne, who lives for ever and ever, they
fall down, etc. In which words we may see, first, what the work of the beasts
is. This is set forth in three expressions, 1. To give glory to God: this is
their acknowledging of the Majesty that is in Him, and does respect His own
glorious excellency. The second, is, Honor: this respects the relation that
is between Him, as Creator, and His creatures, who, having their being from
Him, and standing in that relation to Him, ought by that rye to honor Him. The
third, is, Thanks: which looks to former benefits freely received from Him,
by which there is an engagement put on them to be thankful; which here they
acknowledge to be due, when they can do no more.

The first thing in these words, is, the rise or the timing of this praise of
the Elders, to wit, it is when those beasts give glory and honor, etc. Which
is to show, 1. The orderlinesse of the Lords worship is His Church, every one
keeping their own place. 2. It i^ to show, that though every one be not a
Preacher, and in that respect admitted to such dignity and nearness with God
as others; yet all in the Church have ground and matter of praise, and
emploiment in their stations sufficiently to express the same to the
commendation of the Lords grace. 3. It shows also the sweet harmony that
ought to be between Minister and People by their joining in the same work. And,
4. it expresses the great influence that Ministers example, faithfulness and
diligence will have upon the quickening and upstirring of People to their duty:
for, when the beasts begin, then the Elders follow: And it is like, the silence
and dumbness of many Ministers, may also be the cause why many Congregations
are silent and dumb in this respect. And this may be a reason why Ministers are
expressed by this title of living wights, or living things (as was formerly
observed) because not only they ought to be lively and stirring themselves, but
because by their liveliness they have great influence on others to quicken
them also.

The second thing in the Elders praise, verse. 10. is, their practice, see forth
in three expressions, 1. Though these four and twenty Elders be sitting upon
Thrones, yet, when they hear the beasts, or Ministers, mentioning the Holineste
and Excellency of the Lord, the Word has that weight with them as to make them
quit their* Thrones, and fall down before Him that sat on the Throne: This is
to show, 1. their high esteem of God, before whom they cannot be too vile. 2.
It shows their humble estimation of their own grandour, and their being
denied to it, when any thing of the honoring of God comes in competition
therewith. And, 3. it shows their acknowledging of all to be from Him, and
their accounting of it their greatest honor, not to sit upon Thrones, but to
be humble before Him, and to have Him high. The second thing in their practice,
is, They worship Him that lives for ever and ever: This is added, 1. to show
that their falling down is out of no astonishment, or confusion, but out of
deliberation to glorify God. 2. To show that the more humble Saints fall
before God, the more fit are they to worship Him, and the better progress will
they make therein. 3. It is to express the inward adoration of their hearts,
as going along with their external humbled condition. God is expressed by
this, that they worship Him that lives for ever and ever, (even as it was in
the former Verse, in the beasts their giving praise) that thereby it may be
seen that they worship no Idol, but the living God, in opposition to the
heathenish and Antichristian worshippers: and also to show, that they know whom
they worship, and are not worshipping an unknown God* Further, it expresses
the reverent impression which they have of Him, so that they cannot men^ion on
Him but with such Titles and Attributes as prefer Him beyond all others. The
third thing in their practice, is, and they cast their Crowns before the
Throne: this shows further, their great zeal to the Glory of God, their great
sense of the hudge dis-proportionablness that is between Him and them, their
acknowledgment of their having their Crowns from Him, and holding them of Him;
and their great, and only design to improve that honor and dignity to which
they have been advanced, unto the honor of Him that sits upon the Throne,
from whom they have the same: and that they account it their greatest dignity,
if their honor might any way be a footstool for advancing, or ex^olling of His
glory in the least.

The third and last thing in the Elders praise, is, their song, or verbal
expression, verse. 11. when they are fallen down, they say thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Wherein, 1. we have
their acknowledgement of Gods gloriousness, and that praise is His due. 2. The
reasons whereby they demonstrate this. In their acknowledgement, we may
consider both the matter and manner of their expression: The matter is in three
words, 1. they acknowledge that Glory is His due, this flows from the
essential excellencies that are in Him. The 2. is, Honor; this respects the
Lords Sovereignty, who, by His place, being Head and Lord of all, ought to be
honored by all. The 3. thing acknowledged to be due to Him, is, Power; which
is confirmed from the exercising of His Omnipotency in the Work of Creation,
as the reason following clears. Again, the manner of their acknowledgement is
observable: for, they say not, we give unto Thee glory, honor, etc. but, Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honor, etc. which is done, not because
of their unwillingnesse positively to ascribe the same to Him; but because
their hearts, being warmed and affected with zeal to the thing, could not come
up as they desired in the expressing of the same: and therefore (as it were)
they say; although we cannot give Thee glory, honor, etc. as becomes; yet
Thou art worthy of the same, and it is becoming* that Thou should have it, and
we are so far convinced of the same, as, by this acknowledgement, to put our
seal to this truth that Thou art worthy to have all praise, honor, and glory
given unto Thee. And thus they rather express their affection to that work of
praise, than their satisfaction in attaining any length therein. In which we
have an excellent copy of a heart affected with Gods honor, to wit, it is
always desirous that He should be glorified, and yet never satisfied with its
own glorifying of Him.

They give two reasons to demonstrate the justice of this their acknowledgement
that God is worthy of all praise; The first is, from His interest in, and
superiority over all things, by His creating of the same, for thou have created
all things; and so He being the great Master, and Potter of all things in
Heaven, and Earth; there being nothing but that which has its being from Him,
and there being much power, wisdom, goodness, etc. exercised in this Work of
Creation, and to be read on the creature; Is it not just that all should
ascribe glory, and honor, and power to Him? and is it not most reasonable that
that relation of His should be acknowledged by all? Where we see, that though
the Work of Creation be past many thousand years since, yet may it be, and
ought it to be a fresh ground of praise unto the end of the world. Also, we see
that where the Work of Creation is rightly considered, souls will never want
ground of praise. And, lastly, that these who are affected with the Glory of
God Himself, will be discerning matter of praise and admiration in all His
Works, and in every creature, which will be again turned about to His praise.

The second reason of their praise, is in these words, and for thy pleasure
they are and were created: which in sum is this, not only were all things
created by Thee, but when there was no tie upon Thee to make them, Thou of Thy
good pleasure thought fit to do so; and when Thou might have done in this
manner, or in another, by that same good pleasure of Thine it was concluded to
be done as it has now come to pass, in which there was no other motive, end,
or rule in proceeding but Thy own pleasure, and the setting forth of Thy Glory,
for which end they are still sustained in the being that they have: and
therefore it is most just and equitable that Thou should have praise from all
Thy creatures, which for this very end were created. This is a strong reason,
taken not only from Gods creating of all things, but from the end which
soveraignly He proposed to Himself in the same, to wit, that His good pleasure,
which had wisely molded midses for His own Glory, might be accomplished. This
will or pleasure of God, does not only respect the Work of Creation in
general, but it holds forth His end in the manner of the same and in the
events and effects that follow thereon; in all which, Gods will and pleasure is
accomplished, as the word is, Prev. 16.4. The Lord made all things for Himself,
that is, for His own Glory; yea, even the wicked that fight against God, and so
bring upon themselves an evil day, were by the same Lord created for the
glorifying of His Name. In this reason, there is, 1. a clear assertion of the
Lords Sovereignty over all His creatures, who has no other rule in the
ordering and disposing of them, but His own will and pleasure: for, seeing that
was the end for which he made them in such and such a manner, there is no
ground to enquire a further reason of Him in respect of His Decrees, but that
it was His will and good pleasure so to do. 2. It appears from this, that men
will never rightly praise God till His Sovereignty over them be conceived
aright and acknowledged; and that His will and pleasure is enough to stop our
reasoning when we cannot come to satisfy our selves in His proceeding. The
want of this, makes carnal reason to fret, as if the Holy One were to be
bounded and limited in His proceeding: whereas, if we did consider, that He
gives account of none of His matters, and that it becomes not man to reason
with God, Romans 9.20. nor the potsheards of the earth to strive with their
Maker, this would put all to silence. And upon this ground, many bold Questions
may be answered, as, Why did God make man mutable when He might have confirmed
him in Innocence, as He did the Elect Angels? why was he made so, seeing He
foreknew his fall? why were so many created and in such a posture as the Lord
knew would bring upon themselves destruction? why are not all saved by Christ?
why has He made an absolute decree of Reprobation concerning many? and such
like. There can no other answer be given but this, even so it pleased Him to
do, and that which is in the Text, for His pleasure all things were created;
And this Sovereignty of God, which carnal reason does so much murmur against,
is here a main ground of praise, and that whereby He is exalted, as being
thereby glorious and infinitely above all His creatures. 3. The asserting of
this Sovereignty of God, is a Doctrine well-becoming the Church, whatever
others think of it; and it is ever comfortable and refreshfull to His People,
and a ground of song to them, because there can be nothing more satisfying to
them than His good pleasure. And we suppose, that the opposing, or fretting at
this Doctrine of Gods Sovereignty, will be found to be no great evidence of the
disposition of one who is a child of God, nor to proceed from that native and
kindly respect to God, which ought to be in creatures, especially in Believers,
The acknowledging and praising of which, is here a great part of the Churches
work.

The general scope of the vision looks to these two, 1. To show something of
God. 2. Something in the Servants of God.

First, Something of God. And hence, Obs. 1. His absolute and sovereign
Dominion in Heaven and Earth: which we gather from the similitude it self, He
sits on a Throne, and has all these attendants waiting on Him; and from the
song, brought in to point at this as the scope, which shows the great end God
had and has before Him, in creating and preserving all things, It is to show
Himself glorious, from this ground of His absolute Dominion over all creatures.

2. Not only is He a stately King on the Throne, but He exercises His
Dominion; He has made all, and He sustaineth all for His good pleasure, and
sits on the Throne ever executing His pleasure; and the world never wants
a Governor, as long as this King sits on the Throne; and as there is a
Sovereign God, there is also a Sovereign Providence in all the World, but more
especially in the Church.

3. His being well furnished with means and instruments for doing His work, is
held forth: therefore He is said to have such attendants, fitted with wings and
eyes, And Chap. 5.11. He has ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands of Angels to execute His commands, round about and before His Throne:
these glorious Spirits wait on directions from Him, and are ready to do His
commandments, in caring, and providing for His Church,; and He has also beside
Angels, His own Almighty Power, and thunderings to execute His wrath on
enemies, as well as for the creating of things; and for carrying on the Work of
Grace, He has seven Spirits to spread the everlasting Gospel.

4. The Lords great shot in all this, is, to get praise to Himself, and to give
matter of a song to His attendants. These four generals are clearly held out in
the Chapter, however we expound the words. And it is comfortable, that His
praise, and our song are so joined together, that what is matter of the one, is
also matter of the other.

Secondly, Something in the Servants of God, is holden forth, however we look
on these Beasts and Elders, 1. Their nature and qualifications are here holden
out, and how they are fitted with eyes before, and behind, and within, each of
them with six wings, and with several shapes, some being like a Lion, some
like a Calf, some having a face as a Man, some like a flying Eagle; in which
their furniture for their work, and their activity in it, and their humble,
serious, watchful and speedy manner of going about it, is set out: which
should be a pattern to Believers how to walk in all commanded duties, and pieces
of service.

2. There is here holden out the great dignity and happiness of Gods Servants,
and attendants: however we expound the words, this is clear, that to be His
Servants, is a great privilege; they sit on Thrones, they wear Crowns, they
are clothed in white raiment, they are all Kings and Priests to God, Chap.
5.10. they are as the Angels, they attend on Him, and have places among them
that stand by, Zech. 3.7. It is the completing of our happiness, to have
liberty to look upon God sitting on His Throne. The Queen of Sheba says, that
Solomon's servants were blessed that got liberty to behold his face, and hear his
words; but O how much more happy are they, who day and night rest not, but are
always taken up in beholding and praising God ^ for, a greater than Solomon is
here.

3. We are here taught, what should be, and is in some measure the great task
and work of the Servants of God, and of all that inroll themselves under that
title and name, that is, day and night to be taken up with magnifying of God,
to be making His praise glorious, Psalm. 66.2, which is to make it illustrious,
and that by a native way of going about it. Again, here is holden forth the
manner how we should go about it, to wit, with humility and reverence, with
cheerfulness and zeal, laying all we have before Christ's feet, acknowledging
all we have received, to flow from Him, giving Him the Glory of it, employing
all, so as may most contribute to make Him great that sits upon the Throne.

Lastly, There is the delightsomenesse, and heartsomnesse of this task: though
they rest not day nor night, it is not a wearisome work; for, it is singing:
and his saying they rest not, is not to hold out any burden, yoke or restraint
laid on them; but to hold out the bendednesse of their spirit within, with love
and joy, that they cannot rest; it is (so to speak) an ease to be venting it in
praise. There is such joy and cheerfulness from that wine that comes from
under the Throne, that they cannot hold their peace, but it is their continual
refreshment, night and day to be speaking and praising. In a word, it says
this, That it is a good thing to be Christ's Servants, and that His service is a
sweet work, and it will be known ere long how good a thing it was to be
Christ's, and to be His Servants; and how happy a life it will be, to be
praising Him. It were good some touches of it were warming our hearts
beforehand, and that we had the proof and experience of it, what it is. The
Lord give us to know it.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. ANd I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne, a book
written within, and on the backside sealed with seals.

2. And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to
open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?

3. And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to
open the book, neither to look thereon.

4. And I wept much because no man was found worthy to open, and to read the
book, neither to look thereon.

5. And one of the elders says unto me, Weep not: behold, the lion of the
tri^e of Judah, the root of David, has prevailed to open the book, and to
loose the seven seals thereof.

6. And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the throne, and of the four beasts,
and in the midst of the elders stood a Lamb as it had been slain, having seven
horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all
the earth.

7. And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon
the throne.


IN this Chapter, the preparation to the following revelation goes on; and in
it He who was described in the former Chapter to sit upon the Throne, is here
represented as having a sealed Book in His hand, which none in Heaven nor Earth
can unfold but Jesus Christ the Mediator, who, for His Churches good, does the
same; which is turned to be matter of praise, in the last part of the Chapter.
The scope of all tends especially to these three, First, To show the
absoluteness, determinatnesse and particularnesse of Gods Decrees in all
events that concern the Church: which with Him are, as it were, written in a
sealed Book. Secondly, To show the special Office of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who, being upon His Fathers secrets, does reveal so much of the same to the
Church as is useful for her; and that without Him there is no access to the
knowledge of the same. Thirdly, It is to make way to the more clear
understanding of the Prophesies following, according to the mould wherein they
are revealed: for, it could not be understood what were intended by the opening
of the first, second, or third seals, etc. were it not that here God is
represented, as having a Book with so many seals in His hand.

We may take up the Chapter in these three parts. 1. There is a vision seen, to
wit, A book in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne, etc. verse. 1.2.
There are some circumstances expressing both the difficulty and possibility of
attaining to the understanding of what is written within the same: this
follows unto the eight Verse. 8 From that unto the end, is set down a most
excellent song of Praise, as we will see in the words.

The first part, to wit, the vision of the Book has, four things remarkable in
it. As for the Throne, what it is, and who it is that sits thereon, we heard
thereof in the former Chapter; and therefore may now proceed to these four
things here set down. First, It is called a book: this is not literally to be
understood, as if God had use of Books, more than He has material Thrones, or
Hands; but (as was shown on Chap. 3. verse. 5.) it is after the manner of men,
to show how particularly and orderly all things are determined by God, as if
they were particularly inserted and recorded in a Book. By this Book here, is
not understood Gods providence in general, nor yet His special purpose in
reference to His Elect; but His Decrees concerning the special events that
were to befall His Gospel church. In a word, it is this same Revelation: for,
what is afterward revealed to John, is by opening one of these seals, and the
last seal will be found to comprehend both the trumpets and vials, as we will
find in the progress. The second circumstance, is, that this book is written
within and on the back side, that is, in a word, it is all filled up, there is
no blank in the same: for, known to God are all his works from the beginning,
Act. 15.18. and no new occurrence, which is so as to men, does put the Lord to
take any new counsel, or to make any new decree (for, to say so, there is no
blank in His Register to contain the same) but all things were concluded of old
in His counsel, and accordingly in time are brought to pass. Thirdly, This
Book is said to be in his right hand: Which shows, 1. That there are none
accessory to His counsel, but Himself; for, He took counsel of none. 2. That He
Himself is Master of His own purposes, and there is none that can alter His
decrees, or change any of His purposes; for, the Book is in His own hand. 3. It
shows, that what He has once in His Wisdom concluded, He does by His Power
proceed to execute, and that so as He cannot be frustrated of His end;
therefore is He said to have it in his right hand: which shows both His
admirable dexterity and Omnipotency, that are exercised in executing the same.
The fourth circumstance is, this Book is sealed with seven seals: sealed, that
is, undiscernable and unconceivable to any, as the words following do clear,
and as may be gathered from Isa. 29.11. although all things be known to God,
yet are they unknown to creatures, till they be particularly revealed by Him,
or in His providence brought to pass. Again, this Book is sealed with seven
seals: which is partly to show the exceeding great depth of Gods secret
counsel, whereunto none can reach, seeing it is not only sealed with one seal,
but with seven; and especially this number is so definite, because the
following principle visions do so much consist of sevens: for, the number of
the seals of this Book does distinguish the steps of this first principal
Prophecy. To clear it, we must know that in these times their Books were not
like ours now, but generally were long scrolls of Parchment rolled up on a
stick, as we may gather from the writings of the Old Testament: in respect of
which form, one part of a scroll might be rolled up, then sealed; after that,
an other part rolled up, and that likewise sealed, and so forth, till there
might be seven parts, and seven several seals: and therefore the opening of
the first seal, would only admit one to read that part of the scrol until he
came to the second, and again there were no reading of what followed until the
second were opened, etc. Of this sort is this Book mentioned here; for, Chap.
6. we see that the opening of every seal gives some new vision, and that there
is no understanding thereof till the distinct and several seals be opened.

The second part of the Chapter, which concerns the opening of the Book, and
makes way for expressing the honor of the Mediator, follows in the next six
Verses. Wherein, First, There is a Proclamation made, to find out some fit
person to open the same, verse. 2. Secondly, There is a disappointment, verse. 3.
Thirdly, There is John's exceeding great heaviness and weightednesse therewith,
verse. 4. Fourthly, There is a consolation against the same, first, intimated,
and thereafter seen, verse. 5, 6, 7.

The Proclamation, verse. 2. is in these words, I saw a strong Angel,
proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the
seals thereof? This Proclamation is not made as if there were an expectation to
find any creature by whom this might be done; but by putting all creatures to
it, (and thereby declaring their insufficiency) the greater way is made for the
glory of Christ, the Mediator, the performer thereof. The party proclaiming,
is, an Angel: for even these admire Gods way with His Church, and desire the
unfolding of the same. It is a strong Angel, to show the concernment of the
thing proclaimed, and that even the most excellent Angels count it their
happiness to be serviceable to God in the affairs of His Church; also it
makes the thing proclaimed more observable. By comparing this with the 5. and
6. verses, we may see, that by beasts, are neither understood any of the host
of Angels in general, nor some special Angels (as some allege) of a more
eminent degree: for they are opposed to this strong Angel, who yet must be
understood to be of eminency amongst them. Again, the matter proclaimed is
observable, which is not, Who is able to open the Book, etc. but, Who is
worthy, or meet to do the same? and this, upon the one side, is to put a dash
upon all creatures, as being unworthy and unmeet to pry into Gods secrets
immediately; and, on the other side, it does exceedingly commend the Mediator,
who alone is found to be such. This is done with a loud voice, that thereby the
mouths of all creatures may be stopped, and that this singular worthiness of
the Mediator, and this His peculiar privilege might be afterward found to be
the more unquestionable.

A second circumstance, is, the answer of this proclamation, or, the effect
which followed upon it; which may be gathered from verse. 3. and no man in
heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth, was able to open the book, nay, nor
to look thereon: this is plain, and shows that not one of all the creatures,
even of the most excellent Angels in Heaven, none of the men in earth, nor
devils in hell can reveal Gods secret counsel till it be done by the Mediator:
nay, they could not look thereon, which is an aggravation of their dullness and
ignorance in that respect: for, they were so far from opening this Book, that
they could not look upon the same. And if it be thus in the works of common
providence, What could all creatures have attianed to in the uptaking of the
great Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, etc. had not the Lord
thought good to reveal the same?

The third thing, verse. 4. is, John's heaviness, because of that apparent
impossibility, And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open, and to
read the book, neither to look thereon. Which does set forth, 1. That John did
esteem the understanding of what was within this Book to be of great worth. 2.
That he did exceedingly long to understand the same. 3. That he seemed now to
be hopeless of attaining this. 4. That this disappointment was sad and heavy
to him. It is not like that it was John's curiosity, which made him thus to
weep; but conceiving the thing to be useful to the Church, it did affect him
much to see the ficklnesse of all creatures, and men's emptiness in particular,
for all their boasting of their attaining to the knowledge of so great
mysteries: yet there may be some infirmity in this excess, by his thinking the
thing desperate, because it was impossible to creatures, and his overlooking
the Office and Excellency of the Mediator, who can do when all others give it
over: which is a fault too often incident to Believers.

The fourth step, is, verse. 5. Where the consolation begins: for, the Lord
suffers not John to weep long, even though his infirmity had occasioned his
own heaviness. The consolation has two parts: The first is, by sending good
news, or glad tidings unto John, verse. 5. The second is, by making him a
beholder of a comfortable sight, verse. 6. and 7. wherein he sees that to be
performed, which was told unto him.

In these glad tidings, we may consider, First, the carrier; Secondly, the
comfort; Thirdly, the ground thereof. The carrier, is one of the Elders, that
is, as was expounded in the former Chapter, some private Professor or member of
the Church, whom, in way of vision, God makes use of to help and comfort John
in this his heaviness and infirmity: and what is here in vision, may be often
really performed in the Church. From which we may gather, 1. That the strongest
of Gods Servants may have their great fits of heaviness and weeping, and their
mistakes of His dispensations, and be ready to count things much more desperate
than they are. 2. The Lord is tender of His Peoples heaviness, even when it is
out of infirmity. 3. His comforts are seasonably trysted, and often then are
they most near and refreshfull, when men think things most desperate. 4. He may
make use of any instrument for the comforting of another; and when the strong
are overmastered with heaviness, He can stir up weak Professors to prove
comfortable to them. And in the last place, more particularly, we may see, That
weak Professors may sometimes be more comforted in the usemaking of Christ's
Offices, and in exercising faith on Him, than great Teachers: who, by seeking
to exercise their light, invention, and reason to satisfy themselves in things
that are dark, may have many disappointments therein, and heaviness following
thereon, so long as the Mediator is not employed; whereas the simple tender
Believer, that at first looks to Him for answering of all difficulties, may
have much peace and cheerfulness.

Secondly, The particular comfort is expressed, weep not: which shows both
that that was not the duty which John was called unto, though for the time he
did let out himself therein; and also that there was not such ground for the
same as he supposed.

And because simple directions will not prevail to comfort these that are
heavy, In the third place, He gives the ground of this, Behold (says he) the
Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has prevailed to open the Book,
and to loose the seals thereof: which is in sum, thou may be comforted and
stay thy weeping; for, though no creature be able to open the Book, yet the
Mediator can and will fully do that bussinesse. He begins this with a
Behold, thereby to rouz up John with the glad tidings that He was to tell him,
and also to make what was said the more to be observed, and the party spoken
of, the more to be admired. This party who opens the Book, must be no mean
person, seeing he does what no creature in Heaven, nor Earth could do; and so is
contradistinguished from them. He is here expressed by two titles: the first
is, He is the Lion of the tribe of Judah: this seems to be taken from Genesis
49.9. where Judah is said to couch down as a Lion, and as an old lion: who
shall rouz him up? And this is attributted to Him, 1. To show that He is of the
stock and lineage of Judah, and the very Messiah, or Shiloh, spoken of there. 2.
To point out the excellent qualifications where with our Lord Jesus is
furnished for the undertaking and prosecuting of the most dangerous exploits,
if so His Peoples need call for the same. He is indeed such a bold Lion as
never drew back for a strait: and, as none can rouse Him up but to their own
prejudice. So none can expect otherwise to be dealt with, that rise up against
Him. The second word, is, He is the root of David: this is taken, as would seem
from Isa. 11. verse. 1. where He is called a rod out of the stem of Iesse, and a
branch out of his roots; so that if we look upon Christ as Man and come of
David, He is a rod out of the stem of Iesse, etc. or, if we look upon Him in a
more Spiritual and mystical sense, as He is God-Man, Mediator and head of His
Church, in this respect He is the root of David, because so, David, as a
member, has his being from Him: in which respect, Chap. 22. verse. 16. the Lord
does style Himself both the root and offspring of David. And this twofold
consideration of Christ, is the only way to loose that Question which puzzled
the Pharisees, Matthew. 22. verse. 42, etc. to wit, How the Messiah could be both
David's Son, and David's Lord. It is said, He has prevailed to open the Book,
etc. which intimates many difficulties that the Mediator had to overcome in
the executing of His Office; and yet withal, a most full Victory, that now
this courageous Lion by His dying had obtained over them all, So that there
could be nothing alleged why He should not possess the privileges that were
due to the Mediator.

The other part of the consolation, is, by making John in vision to behold the
performing of this, verse. 6, and 7. Wherein, 1. John's ^ooking is mentioned, and
I behold, (says he) that is, having so good news told me, I revived (as it
were) again, and looked to Him that sat upon the Throne, to see if there might
be any hopes of that which formerly. I supposed to be desperate. 2. It is
marked what he saw after he had looked; and because the vision is wonderful,
there is ^ustly a Lo prefixed unto it. This vision is, ^^ general, a vision of
Jesus Christ the Mediator, whom now John sees, to his great comfort and
satisfaction, to be the performer of that which formerly he thought desperate.
And because He is a singular Person, He is several ways described in these
two Verses. First, He is called a Lamb: this is a Title ordinarily given to
Jesus Christ in the Gospel of John: And we conceive, it is especially for these
two reasons, 1. To express Christ Jesus His Priestly Office and His offering
of Himself a Sacrifice for His People: therefore ordinarily, when He ge^teth
that Title, something is added thereunto, as, to take away the sins of the
world, to be slain, etc. as even here in this same Verse; which expressions do
palpably relate ^o His Sacrifice and Offering. 2. It is to show His mildness
(to speak so) in reference to His People: for although He be a Lion, in the
former Verse, in respect of His undertakings for them against enemies; yet, in
His dealing with them, He is more gentle than any Lamb, and this is mentioned
as one of this Highpriests properties, Heb. 7.26. that He is holy, harmless
or illesse, etc. which is no little commendation of Him to His People. In a
word, He is a Lion to purchase and conquer, and a Lamb in dispensing what He
has purchased to His People. Secondly, He is said to be ^^ it had been slain:
so is He represented to John in vision, that it may appear by what mean^^ble
thus prevailed to obtain such privileges for His Churches good, to wit, it is
by His dying, and giving His life for His sheep: and upon this ground ( Job.
10.17.) it is said, that the Father loves Him, that is, accepts of Him,
approves of Him in the discharge of the Office of Mediator; and as He as the
Son of God was necessarily beloved without respect to this, so we ought to
esteem much of what Christ has revealed to us in the Gospel, and of what He
reveals to us in the same Prophecy; for, by His death He made way to have
the same revealed unto us. Thirdly* This Lamb is placed in the midst of the
Throne, that is, He is a partaker of the same Glory and Dominion and Authorithy
with the ^ather, as He is God, and is admitted to His right Hand, and to Glory
and Majesty, f^r above every name that is in Heaven and in Earth, as He is
Mediator. And it is in ^^m, what is asserted, Chap. 3.21. Also, He is in the
midst of the four Beasts, and four and ^on^y Elders: which is not for naught
expressed: But, as it does show, 1. His Dignity and Glory beyond them; So, 2.
it shows His presence in the Church, upon the same Throne with the father,
that thereby His People may be the more bold in their approaches unto God by
Him, seeing they want not a friend always present in that Court. For this end
also, He is said to be standing, someway to declare His readiness to execute
what may tend to His Peoples edification and consolation; for, as a painful
shepherd, He stands to feed the Flock, Micah 5. verse. 4. Fourthly, He is said
to have seven horns and seven eyes, and these again, are expounded to be the
seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth; by these, no created thing
can be understood, for, that which is the Lambs power or horns, must be
Omnipotent; that which is His eye, must be Omniscient; and that which is
through all the Earth, must be Omnipresent: this therefore must be understood
of the third Person of the holy Trinity, as was expounded, Chap. 1.4. And
Chap. 4.5. Here He is called, in respect of His manifold operations, seven
horns and seven eyes of the Lamb, because of that order of operation that is
among the Persons of the blessed Trinity, whereof we spoke in the places
formerly cited. The last part of the description recorded here, is, in verse. 7.
where the Lambs advancing (as it were) to Him that sits upon the Throne, and
His actual taking the Book out of His hand to open the same, is expressed, And
he came and took the Book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the
throne: this could not but be a comfortable sight to John, who having formerly
given over the case as desperate, does now see this lovely Lamb proceed so far
in the discovering of what was contained in this Book. And here we have, first,
the three Persons of the Holy Trinity distinctly holden forth: For, there is
1. one upon the Throne with the Book in His hand; 2. there is the Lamb; 3.
there are the seven Spirits of God distinct from the former two, and all these
on the same Throne. Secondly, We may see the three Offices of the Mediator,
holden forth here; For, 1. That He is a Lamb slain, signifies His Priestly
Office. 2. That He is upon the Throne, and has horns and power, does hold
forth His Kingly Office. 3. That He takes the Book to open, and to reveal Gods
mind to His Church, is an express evidence of His being Prophet.

From all that is spoken, two things are mainly to be observed, 1. That the
Lord has a special overruling providence over all things that concern His
Church. There is nothing that falls out, which is new to Him, but what He
has determined and written down, as it were, before the beginning of the
world. This is a great consolation to His Church, there is no enemy that does
rise up against her, nor any heresy that breaks out among her members, nor
any event that occasionally she seems to meet with, but these were fully
determined by the Lord before the beginning of the world.

In the second part of the words, we see of what excellent worth the Mediator
is beyond all creatures in Heaven and Earth, how great need there is of Him,
and how wretched and miserable we would be without Him. All the most glorious
creatures in Heaven beside, and all the fullness of the earth could not give us
ground of comfortable worshipping before God, if there were not a Mediator. We
may see also, that the great cause of His Peoples heartlesnesse, is, that he is
not acknowledged in their straits. O how excellent a One is the Mediator! and O
how happy a thing were it continually to be improving Him! Lord teach us that:
and to Him be praise for ever. Amen.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 8. And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and four and twenty
elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them, harps, and golden
vials full of odours, which are the prayers of saints.

9. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to
open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy
blo^d, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation:

10. And have made us unto our God kings and priests, and we shall reign on the
earth.

11. And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne,
and the beasts and the elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands,

12. Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing.

13. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the
earth, and such as are in the sea and all that are in them, heard I, saying,
Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto Him that sits upon the throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

14. And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders fell down
and worshipped Him that lives for ever and ever.


THis is the third part of the Chapter, and expresses the main scope of what
went before, to wit, the exalting of the Mediator. This is cast in betwixt His
taking of the Book out of the hand of Him that sat upon the Throne, and His
proceeding actually to open the same, that this singular work of the Mediator
may be made the more observable. The occasion of the Song, is in the beginning
of verse. 8. And when he had taken the Book, etc. that is, when by this
appearing of the Mediator in His Office they had ground to expect the opening
up of the within-contained Mysteries, Then they praise.

The praise it self may be taken up in three parts, according to the several
parties that take part therein. For, 1. The redeemed Church begin, and they
sing, in the last part of the 8. verse. and in the 9. and 10. verses. Then, 2.
The Angels follow, verse. 11, and 12. In the third place, all creatures are
brought-in joining in this Song, verse. 13. And because the Redeemed have most
interest in, and obligation to the Mediator, whose praise is peculiarly
expressed here, Therefore, as they begin, so they close, verse. 14,

In the first part, First, The redeemed Church are described in reference to
this work, verse. 8. Secondly, Their praise is expressed, verse. 9. and 10. In
their description they are called four beasts, and twenty four Elders: whereof
we spoke in the fomer Chapter, and show that by them, most probably is holden
forth the Ministers and Professors of Christ's Militant Gospel Church; and this
place does confirm the same: for, they are contradistinguished from Angels,
verse. 11. and are said to be Redeemed and made Kings and Priests unto God,
which agrees to all Believers even upon earth, as Chap. 1. verse. 6. Again,
their work here, is, not only to praise, but to pray; for they have vials full
of odours, as well as harps, verse. 8. And they are said to be sharers of
Christ's spiritual Dominion, and to be Priests to Him even on earth: yea, their
spiritual Priesthood will most properly agree to that, according to the usual
application thereof in Scripture. These Redeemed, are said to fall down before
the Lamb: which is to show their humble and reverend way of going about this
work of praise, and was spoken of, Chap. 4. verse. 10. Lastly, They are
furnished for this work, having every one of them harps and golden vials full
of odours, or incense, which are the prayers of Saints; this shows their
fittednesse and readiness for the work; and it is done in expressions borrowed
from the Ceremonial worship under the Old Testament, when yet the scope is to
express the spiritual Worship that is given to God under the Gospel; By
harps, are understood instruments for praise, as is frequent in the Psalms; and
we will find the Saints in their cheerful condition ( Chap. 15.2.) so
described. This shows a warmness and bendednesse of heart, ready to burst
out in the praise of the Mediator, and to make melody thereby within themselves
before Him; which is more acceptable to Him and comfortable to them, than the
sweetness of any material instrument whatsomever, as Ephesians. 5.19. and Colos.
3.16. where we are commanded to praise with grace in our hearts, which may well
be the thing signified by these harps. Beside this, They have golden vials full
of odours, or incense. Incense was used in the Ceremonial worship, when the
people approached to offer up their requests to God; therefore we have the
word, Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense: vials,
are vessels wherein these were offered; and so vials full of ordours, will
signify a spiritual fittednesse with the Spirit of Grace and Supplication (as
is promised, Zech. 12.10.) to pour out the heart to God in prayer as well as in
praise. They are two notable qualifications of Believers; and it is ordinary
both in the Old and New Testament to understand by sacrifices and offerings,
the moral duties of praise and prayer in the days of the Gospel. As to the
last part, this is confirmed in the words following, which are the prayers of
Saints: where two things are answered, 1. Would we know who these beasts and
Elders were who have these vials: It is answered, they are Saints, that is,
Believers, Members of the Militant Church, according to the usual acception of
the word: and this confirms the former exposition which we gave of these
parties. Again, would we know what these odours are which are in the vials: the
Text says, they are the prayers of Saints, that is, these odours represent the
prayers of Saints: which may either be understood indefinitely, as interpreting
what is meaned by odours in the general, and so all the prayers of all the
Saints on earth in general may be called odours and incense; or, we may take
it with a special relation to this place; and so the odours here will signify
the prayers of the same Saints who had the vials in their hands; and thus they
bring not properly the prayers of others to offer up to God (which yet were not
absurd, considering that these officers were living Saints on earth) but, they
bring their own prayers, even as by harps is signified their own expressions of
praise, or the praise expressed by themselves, as the Song following will
clear. This therefore has no affinity at all with the Popish Doctrine of the
intercession of Saints departed, which is utterly cross to the scope of this
place. It is to be observed also, how different this phrase is from that which
is attributed to Christ, Chap. 8. verse. 3. where he alone offers the prayers
of all Saints, adding incense thereunto.

Their song follows in the ^. and 10. verse. Where, 1. there is the expression
of their praise, 2. The grounds or reasons thereof. Their song is said to be a
new song; and they sing a new song. 1. Because the matter was so great and
excellent, that no former expression of praise could, as it were, reach the
same: for which cause ( Psalm. 40.) David says, He had put a new song in his
mouth, when by a new and singular mercy, He had given him matter thereof. 2. It
is new, as contradistinct from the more obscure expressions of praise that were
under the Old Testament. Now, the Office of the Mediator being more clear, and
He having made Himself more known to His People, they accordingly express His
praise in a new song. The matter expressed, is, Thou art worthy to take the
book and to open the seals thereof, that is, in sum, thou art worthy to be
Mediator, and to execute what belongs to that Office* This looks not to be
very much, at the first, yet, there cannot be more said. For, if we will
consider, 1. This expression puts Him beyond all creatures* for, none of
them was found worthy; and so by this, they acknowledge Him to be beyond all.
2. This expression has in it an acknowledgement of His worthiness and
fitness to be Mediator, and in all things to have the preheminencie and a Name
above every name that is named, which is the greatest conferred Glory that is
conceivable, and more than Angels and Men are capable of, or can comprehend. 3.
This expression implies their hearty assent to Gods constituting of Him in
that Office, and their exulting to see Him prosper and glorified in the
executing of the same: which is a thing well becoming a member of Christ's Body,
and a subject of His Kingdom; and is the greatest length they can come at, to
wit, to be assenters by their acknowledgement of His worth to Gods advancing of
Him to this dignity.

The grounds of the praise follow in three steps, the last being always more
particular than the former, and an effect thereof. The first, is, for thou wast
slain, that is, in the execution of Thy Office, and in obedience to the Fathers
will, Thou have submitted Thy self to death, even to a violent death, and
accordingly has suffered the same, and so Thou wast slain. This dying of an
accursed death, is the great article and condition required upon the Mediators
side of the Covenant of Redemption, upon the undertaking, and undergoing of
which, all privileges promised to Him therein, are grounded; and from thi^*
all the Works of Redemption flow: therefore here it is made the reason of His
worthiness to administer the Office of a Mediator in every thing, and why He
cannot but be thought worthy to do the same, and to be praised by His People,
because He was slain, and so has performed what was undertaken by Him.

The second ground, is, And have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of ^very
kindred, and tongu^, and people* and nation. In this there is a very sum of the
Gospel and Work of Redemption, and it is the more particular application of the
former ground, and the effect thereof, as was said; and this inforceth the
former reason. We have reason (say they) to praise Thee for Thy death; for, by
it, we that were lost and sold under sin, are redeemed unto God, etc. To
consider the words more particularly, we must follow the similitude of
Redemption, as it is used amongst men, and in this case is made use of to help
us to understand somewhat of this great mystery of the Gospel. And here is
implied, 1. That God had a peculiar right to these that praise in this song,
before ever they came to be sold or morgaged; So, to redeem a thing amongst
men, supponeth a man once to have had a right to such a thing: here, we take
Gods right to these redeemed, not only to be that interest which He had in them
by Creation, for that is common; but that which He had from Eternity by His
purpose and decree of Election: in which respect, the Elect are called His
singularly, and Job. 17. verse. 6. Thine they were, and thou gave them to me,
etc. where these that were Elected and given to Christ, are in a peculiar
manner said to be Gods; and this is employed in the phrase, Thou have redeemed
us to God: for, it supponeth, that by Christ's purchase, as it were, access is
made for them again to be the Lords possession, according to His former right.
2. Here is employed, that even these to whom God had this peculiar right, are
before this Redemption someway morgaged, or, as we use to say, wodset; and yet
so as the former right was not fully dissolved: for, if there had not been some
morgageing and alienation, there had been no need of Redemption; and if there
had been a total dissolution of the former right, there had been no access to
redeem. This morgageing in Scripture, is clearly expressed to be that
spiritual bondage under the Law, wrath, and curse of God, whereby even the
Elect by their sins have inthralled themselves; and because of that, are lying
under the curse of God till He be satisfied, and His honor repared, which
suffered by their sin: this is largly expressed, Romans 3. Ephesians. 2. and Gal. 3.
beside many other places. The tie which notwithstanding stands betwixt the Lord
and these, is, that purpose of election; (for even then in that respect they
are His, as was said) for, Election being founded on nothing in the Creature
but on Gods free will, purpose and good pleasure, there can nothing in the
Creature dissolve the same. 3. Here is employed, that before these Elect can be
freed from the curse, there must be a price laid down, as it were, in
compensation for the same: this is clearly employed in the word Redemption,
which imports some equivalent satisfaction given to the party offended, or to
the party for whose behoove such persons were justly morgaged; and without
whose prejudice they could not be set free, except an equivalent price were
paid; and this is called Redemption. Now, the party offended, for the
vindication of whose honor the Elect for a time are imprisoned, and put under
the keeping of the Law, etc. is the Lord; and therefore in reason ere they can
be freed, there must be some equivalent price for His satisfaction, which may
glorify Him, and vindicate His honor as much as the keeping of them in prison
or under the former morgage; and this is called satisfaction or Redemption. 4.
The scope of this Redemption, is expressed in that word, Thou have redeemed us
to God, that is, that the Elect may be admitted unto Gods friendship and
favor, and communion with Him, and to the enjoying of the title that stands
betwixt Him and them, as freely as if they had never had sin, or had never been
under such a morgage. 5. They express who this Redeemer is; THOU h^st redeemed
us: O blessed Thou! This cannot indeed but affect; Thou, the Lamb; Thou, the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah; Thou, the Son of God, that has eyes like a flame
of fire, etc. Thou have redeemed us. Christ is called a Redeemer; because when
the Elect had nothing to free themselves from the captivity and morgage which
they had brought upon themselves, and when the Justice of God, by virtue of the
Law and Curse, (to say no more) did call for a satisfaction and price before
they could be admitted to freedom, Then He undertook, and was content to pay
what they were due, either in the same kind, or, in the equivalent, that so
they, who were as a morgaged possession, detained from the right owner, might
be restored freely to him again. 6. The price by which He redeemed them, is
mentioned, Thou have redeemed us by thy blood. It was wonderful that He who
was such a Person, should be the Redeemer; But, O how wonderful, that He
should perform this Redemption by laying down such a price as His own blood!
And, in this we may see, First, That seeing the threatening against sin,
includes death; (That day thou eats, thou shall die) So the Redeemer
condescended to undergo death for satisfying that. Secondly, When it is said,
Thou have redeemed us by Thy blood, there is imported a testimony of the
singularity of His worth, and also of His love: for, no blood of goats, nay,
nor of men, nor of mere creatures could make this Redemption, (for, no man can
redeem his Brother, Psalm. 49. so precious is the Redemption of Souls, that it
cease for ever, to wit, in respect of created redeemers) yet, then Thou
condescended to do it, even with Thy blood, which ( Act. 20.28.) is the blood
of God. Thirdly, This redeeming by His blood, does express His death to be
purposely, and formally laid down by Him, and accepted of by God, as a price
and satisfaction in the room of these Elect, for the obtaining of their
Redemption: otherwise, the whole strain of this Scripture will be to no
purpose, except Christ be acknowledged to be the Redeemer, and His blood and
sufferings to be the price which is laid down as a satisfaction to Gods Justice
in the room of the Elect sinners, that thereby they may be set free. And
Christ's blood in this respect, is said to be a satisfaction equivalent before
Justice, because, by His undertaking that debt, and submitting to pay the same,
and Gods actual exacting it of Him, the Holiness and spotless Justice of
God, is more gloriously manifested, than if these themselves had been kept
still in the prison, who were yet never able to have paid one farthing, whereas
now the Redeemer has paid to the uttermost. 7. There is here the object of
this Redemption, to wit, us; Thou have redeemed us; and these are (to say so)
two ways qualified, 1. In respect of the extent of this object; it is not some
of one Family, City, Nation, or Kindred, etc. but it is extended to every
kindred, tongue, people, and nation. And this is seems is done, to show the
universality (to say so) and extent of Christ's Church under the Gospel, in
opposition to what it was under the Law and formerly. Now, say they, the Church
is not included within one Family, or Nation; but the Gospel being spread, the
Elect are gathered-in out of all Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues; and we, who
are not of the stock of Abraham, but are of strange Nations, have reason to
praise for this Gospel, and to bless the Mediator who has purchased it unto
us. Again, although this object in some respect has been extended to all
Nations, Kindreds, etc. without distinction or discrimination, Yet somewhat is
added to qualify and restrict the same, that it may not be understood
collectively of all of every Nation, Language, etc. but distributively of some
of these Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues: for, the redeemed, their Song is
expressed in these terms, Thou have redeemed us out of every tongue, and
kindred, and people, and nation. And certainly, there is a palpable difference
between these two, to wit, to say, Thou have redeemed all Kindreds, Tongues,
and Nations; and to say, Thou have redeemed us out of every Tongue, Kindred,
and Nation, whereby the redeemed are contradistinguished from the rest of the
Kindred, Tongue, and Nation, out of which they are redeemed; and yet, it cannot
be thought, but that all who are redeemed, do concur in this Song: therefore
the other, contradistinguished from them, cannot be said to be redeemed.
Beside, this peculiarnesse of Redemption is a special ground of the redeemeds
praise, to wit, when they were lying under the curse with others, Christ has
redeemed them from among them. Further, all this Song does agree to any person
that has been redeemed by Christ's blood, They that are redeemed are also made
Kings, and Priests. And seeing all cannot praise for this mercy, as experience
shows; therefore can it not be said, that they are comprehended under the
former. And, if we will remember what was just now said, to wit, that
Redemption does import a peculiar right to these that are redeemed beside
others, to wit, a right by Election; Then it will follow, that no other can be
said to be redeemed but the Elect that were given to Christ: and seeing all men
are not Gods by this peculiar right (for, to be Gods in this respect, and to be
given to Christ, and so to be actually redeemed, are of equal extent) Therefore
can it not be said that all are redeemed.

The third reason, or ground of their praise (which is also the effect of the
former) will confirm this: and it is contained, verse. 10. And have made us unto
our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign upon earth: So that if it be
asked, what are the advantages which they reap by Christ's Redemption, which
make them thus to praise? They answer, they are very great; for, not only are
they freed from the former bondage they were under, and set at liberty, as in
the former verse, But they are honored and blessed with many excellent
privileges, exceedingly commended in four words, 1. Thou have made us Kings;
this respects that spiritual freedom that the Believers have from their
former enemies, and that spiritual dominion which they have over them, and
that eternal glory whereof they shall be partakers when they shall sit upon
one Throne with the Lord Christ. This is a great privilege, that all the
redeemed who were formerly slaves, shall be made Kings. 2. They are made
Priests; this was also a title and office of great dignity under the Law, and
by it is signified, that by Christ Jesus all the redeemed are honored to have
access unto God with boldness, and to offer up their own prayers and praises
unto God by Him, with hope of being accepted: which privilege is founded upon
Christ's Redemption, and without this there had been access to no sinner to
pray or praise acceptably and with any comfort before God. But now (say they)
we are Priests and may offer our own sacrifices; yea, now under the Gospel, we
are not tied to any typical service, nor to one place or Temple, nor to seek a
Priest to offer our sacrifices unto God for us, But we our selves may approach
therewith unto Him. 3. It commends and sweeteneth this privilege, that they
are made Priests to our God; which implies that now by Christ's purcha^e they
may worship and serve God as in Covenant with them, and as their own God: which
does make all the services they can be put to, very light and easy, and
strengthens them against all the difficulties they may meet with therein, seeing
it is no idol, nor strange God, whom they worship, but their own God, who will
pity them in their service, as a Father pitieth his Son. Lastly, They say, and
we shall reign upon earth; which is set down, not only to show the
spiritualnesse of this Kingdom, which being on earth, and common to all the
redeemed (many of whom have a poor being here) can be no other ways understood
than of His spiritual Dominion; but mainly, we conceive, it is mentioned here,
as the ground of their Song, that not only have they a hope of reigning, and
being freed from sin in Heaven; but that, in some measure, they are made
partakers of the virtue of Christ's purchase in the subduing of their sin, and
the mortifying of their lusts; whereby they are kept from the dominion of
sin, because they are not now under the Law, but under Grace, according to the
promise, Romans 6.14. And this is a kindly evidence of a redeemed person, and a
convincing ground of praise to a truly gracious soul, to wit, to have
Sanctification thriving, the body of death born down; and even before they come
to Heaven, to be looking Heaven-like, and to be brought someway to triumph over
their spiritual enemies; than which, as there is nothing that will be more
desired by them, so there will be nothing more acceptable to them, even thus to
be privileged and dignified, to reign spiritually on the earth. And we may
see, that as this is a great mercy to be Sanctified, So it is a fruit of
Christ's death, and flows from His purchase, even as Justification does: in
which respect, He is our Sanctification, as well as our Righteousness, 1 Cor.
1.31.

The second company who join in this Song, is, the Angels: who are described,
verse. 11. and then their Song is expressed, verse. 12. They are described,
First, by their title and number, they are Angels, that is, glorious ministering
spirits, Heb. 1.14. called sometimes in Scripture the host of heaven; and
because of their excellency, the Sons of God, Job 38.7. And they are many
Angels, The number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands
of thousands; this is a great number: it seems to be taken out of Dan. 7.10.
where thousand thousands are said to Minister unto Him, and ten thousand times
ten thousands to stand before Him; yet the expression is but put for an
indefinite, to show the innumerable company of glorious and mighty Angels which
the Lord has waiting on Him, as servants and ministers to do His pleasure in
any part of the world, as it is, Psalm. 103.21. The scope, is, to show how
glorious He must be who is thus waited upon. Secondly, The place where they are
seen, is observed, they are round about the thron^, and the beasts, and the
elders: by which, it seems they have the outmost rank of all the attendants
that ( Chap. 4. verse. 4, 5, etc.) are mentioned, and said to wait upon this
Throne; and we may conceive it thus, upon this Throne is the Majesty of God, of
which dignity the Lamb, and the seven spirits, are also said to partake, verse.
6. next unto them are the four beasts, or Ministers, upon the several corners
of the Throne; then are the four and twenty Elders, or the Professors, round
about the Throne; and again, about them are the hosts of the Angels, as is
expressly asserted here. This is not to set forth the prerogative of the
Church-militant beyond Angels simply, or, as if Angels were at a greater
distance from God than they; for, it is the great privilege of Saints
glorified, to be like Angels, and to have a place among them that stand by:
but, this shows the infirmities and difficulties which the Saints Militant
are subject to, and the Lords tenderness and carfulness of them, who has
His hosts of Angels encompassing them for their defense and protection,
according to the word, Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that f^^r him, and delivere^^ them. There is no mention here neither of
the sea of glas^^, nor of the seven spirits, spoken of, Chap. 4. verse. 5. and
6. The reason is, as we suppose, because by them is understood the same that is
expressed by the Lamb-slain, with seven horns and seven eyes, verse. 6. of this
Chapter. And however, considering that the sea of glass has the same place
with the seven spirits of God, to wit, before the Throne, and so betwixt the
Throne, and the Elders; We cannot conceive of either of these, but they must be
within this guard of Angels, even as the rest are. And so it is comfortable
that the people of God have no less Guard and Army waiting upon them, than the
Lord has Angels waiting upon Him, they being all of them ministering spirits,
sent forth to minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation.

Their song follows, verse. 12. They say with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain, etc. That this is done with a loud voice, it shows their
seriousness and affectionatnesse in this work: what they ascribe to Him, is,
upon the matter, what was ascribed to Him by the redeemed, verse. 9. and what
was ascribed to God, Chap. 4. verse. 11. It is, first, in the general, an
expression of His worth, Worthy is the Lamb, etc. which i^ their putting to
their seal to the acknowledgement of His worth, and carries also, as employed
in it, an acknowledgement of their being unsuitable to express what was due to
Him: and therefore the expression, is, He is worthy to receive power, etc.
which does insinuate, that the work is beyond them, as was observed, Chap.
4.11. And when Angels are at a stand in the Mediators praise, What must be our
unsutablenesse in expressing of the same? Then, in the second place, they
mention many things which are His due, in seven comprehensive words, 1. Power,
because He is furnished with A^thority, and Commission, ample and large for the
discharge of His Offices; in which respect, Ioh 17.2. He is said to have Power
given Him over all flesh. 2. Riches, that is, a royal possession, because He
made Himself poor to purchase a seed to Himself by a great price. 3. Wisdom,
beause He has dealt prudently in the executing of His Office, as, Isa. 52.13.
and with great Wisdom does He manage the trust committed to Him. 4. Strength,
because He has bound the strong man, and carried away the prize, spoiling
principalities and powers in making a show of them ^penly, Col^s. 2.15. 5.
Honor; this respects the Glory and Majesty of His place, who, being made
head over all things, ought so to be honored by them. 6. Glory, that is, the
acknowledgement of the Excellency and Majesty of His Person with the dignity
and preheminencie of His Office, and does import also His being God, to whom
only Glory is due, The seventh word, is, Blessing; this looks to the many
advantages that come by Him: so that when hearts can do no more, they bless
Him; which implies, not only an acknowledgement of His being blessed, but also
the ardent desire that they have to have Him so, as in all the former words
respectively. By all these put together, is understood, that every thing which
may contribute to set forth a person to be glorious, and to make Him to be
acknowledged such, is in the Mediator.

If it be asked, How the Angels come in to praise the Mediator upon this
consideration of His being slain, as is expressed in the song? Ans. This is
done, not as if they were equally sharers in the benefits of Redemption with
the redeemed: for, the Elect Angels, being never under sin, nor at a distance
with God, cannot be said to be reconciled by Christ's death; therefore we will
find, that though both mention Him as slain in the song, Yet there are these
diff^rences, 1. The redeemed do expressly acknowledge this benefit of Redemption
to come by His Blood, and do derive their privileges of being Kings and
Priests, etc. from that, as the meritorious cause, which is not to be found in
the song of the Angels. Secondly, When the redeemed mention Christ's death and
purchase, they look on it as intended for them; and therefore do apply the same
in the song, as claiming a special interest therein, and acknowledging a
special obligation to lie upon them beyond others because of the same. And
therefore they say, who has redeemed us by Thy blood, etc. whereas the song of
the Angels, is more general. It appears then, that though they agree in
giving praise to the same object, to wit, the Lamb, yet they differ in respect
of the particular grounds on which they proceed. The grounds then of the Angels
praise, may be conceived, 1. to be the excellency of our Lord Jesus His Person
and Office, and the wonderful glory of Grace, Love, Goodness, etc. that kyths
especially in His humiliation and sufferings. And it may be justly looked on as
admirable and praiseworthy, even to Angels, to see God manifested in the
flesh, as it is, 1 Timothy 3.16. and yet more, that He was content to die for
satisfying the Justice of God, and vindicating of His Glory. 2. Although Angels
cannot be said to have reconciliation by Him, Yet according to the judgment of
many worthy men, they have confirmation through Him, in which respect to them,
He, as Mediator, is head of the Elect Angels. And though we will not enter upon
this particularly; yet, we suppose, that there is great accession to the joy of
the Elect Angels by Christ's incarnation and suffering, as having thereby a more
clear discovery of the Glory, Majesty, and Goodness of God, so that in this
respect He is said to be seen of them, 1 Timothy 3.16. and thereby they discern
His manifold wisdom in the way of the Gospel, as it is, Ephesians. 3.10. for which
cause, they sing at His birth, Luke 2. verse. 13. as, being glad to be the
declarer^s of such glad tidings: And, no question, many other ways they are in
this delighted and rejoiced, and so have good ground to praise. 3. This
suffering of Christ's and His Redemption, brings with it the Salvation of the
lost Elect who are many; and their Salvation being a thing that glorifieth God,
and relieveth such as have been loved of Him from Eternal Woe, it cannot but be
delightsome to them; for, even the Elect Angels have a kind of sympathy with
Elect sinners who are given to Christ, for which cause, they are said to have
joy over a repenting sinner, Luke 15.7, and 10. and therefore they may be
conceived to praise upon the account of Christ's dying, because that redoundeth
so much to the good of the Church. 4. Christ by His death, has obt^ined a
Name, even above principalities and powers, unto which God has highly exalted
Him, Philip. 2.9, etc. for which cause, it is said, Heb. 1.6. when He
bringeth-in the first begotten into the world, He says, let all the Angels of
God Worship Him. So that in praising Him that was slain, they give obedience to
Gods Ordinance in adoring Him who is the Son of God, and who by His death has
not lost any thing of the Glory due to Him, but thereby has declared Himself
to be worthy of the same: and therefore it is particularly worthy to be
mentioned to His commendation.

The third company that praise, verse. 13. is, Every creature which is in
heaven, on earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that
ar^ i^ them, etc. This looks to the reasonlesse creatures that are
contradistinguished from the redeemed and from the Angels, called sometimes the
whole Creation, which by sin is made subject to vanity, and is said to groan
under the same, Romans 8.20, 21, 22. These are brought in, not as if formally
they could express praise; But, 1. to show the gloriousness of this Object to
whom praise, is due. It will be a task and employment to all creatures to
praise Him. 2. It shows some advantage, that by Christ's death sometime is to
redound to them, when they shall be freed from the bondage of corruption and
brought unto the glorious liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8.21. In
reference to which, it is said, they groan and travel, as desirous of this
change, verse. 22. and according to this, they may be said to praise here, as
they groan there. The words wherein they express their praise, are four, to
wit, blessing, honor, glory, and power, which were formerly spoken of. There
is some difference in the object of their praise, as to the expression thereof,
from these who went before; for, they ascribe it to Him that sits upon the
Thron^, and to the Lamb for ever, whereas the Lamb only was mentioned formerly.
Yet indeed there is no difference: for, when the Lamb is mentioned, who is
Mediator, God that sits upon the Throne is understood as dwelling in Him.
And by this we may see, 1. that the Glory and Worship which is given to the
Lamb here, is Divine, and Supreme, because its that same which is given to Him
that sits upon the Throne. 2. We may see, that it is the same worship, and
that, whether God or the Mediator be expressed, they are both worshipped in the
same act: for, it cannot be said that this is any other worship than what the
redeemed or Angels gave in the former Verses; nor, that there is any different
object worshipped here, seeing that it is the same worship which is ascribed in
all the songs. Neither will any think that He that sits upon the Throne, was
less worshipped in the song of the redeemed, and of the Angels, where He was
not formally mentioned, than in this. If any say that the Lamb is said to be
worthy to receive glory, etc. which supponeth this to be a communicated glory?
Ans. We may see the inconsequencie of this, by considering what is said of Him
that sits upon the Throne, Chap. 4. verse. 11. and we may acquiesce in the
interpretation thereof that is given.

In the last place, when all the creatures have done, the redeemed again come
in, verse. 14. and they close this song: because their interest is most, and
their engagements deepest. 1. The four beasts say Amen: thus the Ministers
begin. What they say, is in this word Amen, which is a word that usually
closes Prayer, and does import some clearness of Faith and confidence in the
thing asserted, and some vehement desire of attaining the thing prayed-for.
Here it is set down as the expression of hearts, who are indeed passionatly
desirous to have the Lords praise glorious, and yet convinced to be uttterly
insufficient for the same, and therefore they close in a manner when they
begin, and they are beginning when they close. And all is but rather an
as^enting to the glory that is given, and an acknowledging that all is due to
Him, than a real performing of any thing in their own estimation. In the last
place, the four and twenty Elders follow, and they have nothing to say, but
fall down and worship Him that liv^th for ever and ever; The beasts say not
much, they express nothing, but fall down silent, as being overcome and
infinitely outreached by the glorious and incomprehensible excellency of the
blessed Object; yet, is their praise no less acceptable to God than if there
were many expressions: because, silence, both in Prayer and Praise, does often
speak more and louder than great noise of words. And here we see, that where
the heart is inwardly weighted with the convictions of Gods goodness and ones
own need, and bended with love, or overwhelmed in a manner with holy fear and
reverence that it can express nothing; yet, even then there may be an
acceptable worshipping of God. Yea, this silence is marked as the yond-most
step, or greatest length of praise that they did, or could attain unto.

Observe, 1. That in our Lord Jesus, and in the execution of His Offices, there
is much ground of praise, so much as may take up all creatures, and an infinite
deal more; and it should be the task of all creatures in Heaven and earth to be
setting forth His praise: all of these companies say, Worthy is the Lamb, etc.
It is a wonder, when this is their task, that so few are taken up with it. From
the occasion, Obs. 2. That the opening of this Revelation, is a ground of
praise. 3. That many excellent things come by Christ's purchase to the Redeemed.
These cannot be soon numbered. O, what are they beholden to Him! Obs. 4. That
it is praise to Jesus Christ, and it is even almost all that Believers come to,
in the work of praise, to be telling over, to His commendation, what He has
done. Obs. 5. The Faith of interest in our Lord Jesus His purchase, is the most
kindly motive, to make folks bless and praise Him, that is, when they can say,
Thou have redeemed us. Obs. 6. That as it is a life that has many rich
advantages, so there is no such heart-some life in all the World, as to be
among the Redeemed; they have an un-interrupted song, and will continue to have
it when all others will howl. Obs. 7. From Christ's taking the Book and opening
of it; from His doing this, and the Redeemed their praise. Observe, Christ does
all; we enjoy all, and therefore should praise for all; It is an easy task
that the Redeemed have in respect of that which Christ had. Obs. 8. There is a
sweet consent here, no different note, they have all one Song, no diff^rent
Opinion, no Contradiction, no divided Praise, nor Prayers, nor Fasts, no
separating in this Worship of one of the Redeemed from another, all concur,
which is not one of the least advantages, once they will all meet and sweetly
agree together. Obs. 9. It is but a mint, at the best, that the Saints make at
the Lambs praise; their praise is but a beginning to it, an assent to the work,
or a conviction of their duty; when they begin, they say only, He is worthy to
have it; and when they have undertaken, they must sing, Who can show forth all
thy praise? Psalm. 106. Therefore here, Amen, is the first word, and they fall
down silent; praise overmastereth them, it is the greatest duty: and these that
praise till they think they have done enough, they understand it not: it is
right in this respect to leave it as we begin. Obs. 10. All their song is,
Worthy, worthy is the Lamb, as if they said, if we could praise Thee, Thou art
worthy to have it, and that is all we can attain to, to acknowledge praise is
Thy due. Obs. When folks have gone their yond-most in the matter of praise, it
is rather to say and think it should be, than any way to rest as though it
were. The reason is, because God, who is to be praised, is far above all
blessing and possible praise, Neh. 9.5.

Concerning the nature of Christ's death, or, if it be properly a satisfaction.
BEside what Observations have been already hinted at and held forth from this
Chapter, there are two more; which being clear of themselves from the words,
and contributing much to the clearing of two concerning Truths, in these days
not a little controverted; we may insist a little more in speaking to them, as
the place gives ground. The one, is, concerning the nature, the other, is,
concerning the extent of the merit of Christ's death.

The first Observation, is, That Christ's death and sufferings are properly a
price and satisfaction for sin, and were purposly offered unto the Justice of
God as such. So that when the Majesty of God (to say so) was wronged by the sin
of man, and when (at least, by the necessity flowing from the established Law
and Curse) there behoved to be a satisfaction to Justice, before any sinner
could be freed from the sentence, Then our Lord Jesus did offer Himself to
suffer in the room of the Elect for the satisfying of Justice; which
accordingly was afterward performed by Him, and, upon that account, accepted by
God. The scope of this Doctrine, is, to show, first, That not only Christ's
death and sufferings were for the confirmation of the Doct^^ne He preached: Nor
yet, in the second place, only to give thereby a pattern of obedience to us:
for, these two may be, and are in the death and sufferings of many Martyrs; and
to attribute no more to the death of Christ, is blasphemous: Nor, in the third
place, only to procure to Himself this prerogative of forgiving sinners their
sins freely: for, Christ, being God, had power with the Father to forgive sins
before His becoming Man: and even this pretended end, does imply Christ's death
to be a price for making of a purchase, seeing it supponeth, that He, by
honoring God, and doing what was pleasant to Him, did procure this privilege
to forgive others freely; which certainly does imply, that these sufferings of
His had a meritorious and satisfying virtue before God. But these ends of the
Soci^ians, being such as destroy the Godhead and personality of our Lord
Jesus* as the second Person of the Trinity; and being purposly molded for the
supporting of that blasphemy* We need not stand much upon the disproving of
them; but, we say, beyond these our Lord Jesus His death was purposly intended
by Him, and actually accepted by JEHOVAH as a proper price and satisfaction.

To clear this a little, when we speak of satisfaction, these things shortly
are intended. First, That as ^ man had made himself liable to the curse for
provoking of God, and (to speak after the manner of men, as most of all this
must be understood) thereby had wronged the Majesty of God, by daring to
disobey Him and to s^ight His Authority; so there is in Christ's taking on of
that debt, and humbling of Himself to suffer for the same, a
proportionablnesse, and an equivalencie for the vindicating of the Glory of the
Holiness, Justice, and Sovereignty of God, and to make these shine more, than
if the sinners had been actually put-at for satisfying in their own persons:
for, that the Fathers fellow* equal, and only b^gotten Son should humble
Himself and become Man, and in that nature suffer; and that the Majesty of God
should make His Sword awake against Him, and smi^e Him, etc. does much more
abunda^tly declare and set forth the Justice of God, that will prosecute His
threatenings, and His Sovereignty and Authority, in that He is obeyed and
submitted unto, by such an excellent Person, as His only begotten Son, than if
either man had not sinned, or he who is but a wretched creature should have
been casten into Hell: for* by this, Justice had never been satisfied, nor had
the Authority of God been manifested by such a glorious instan^e as the
obedience of the Man Christ Jesus. So that we are to conceive of satisfaction,
in this matter, as that word uses to be understood amongst men, that is, when
an injured, or wronged person, is appeased and satisfied in reference to the
party that has done him injury, by the interveening recompense and
satisfaction of some other, purposly, by such an equiv^lent compensation,
intending the same. Secondly, When we speak of satisfaction in this case, it
does respect Gods purpose and intention in designing the death and sufferings
of the Mediator for this very end in the Covenant of Redemption: so that when
there was no imaginable satisfaction to be expected from creatures, whereby
there might be a vindication of Gods Justice, that so way might be made to
pardon Elect sinners; for this very end, a Body was designed and prepared for
the Mediator; and, as it is, Is^. 53.6. The Lord laid upon Him the iniquities
of us all, and in His counsel and decree, did appoint Him, who knew no sin, to
become sin for others, and thereby as a Cautioner to be liable to their debt.
Thirdly, This also is intended, that the Mediator, in His accepting of the
offer, and in laying down of His life, did purposly intend thus to satisfy:
for, when Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings, etc. could not please God, nor
satisfy Him in this respect, Then did the Son willingly undertake with delight
to do Gods will, as it is, Psalm. 40.6, 7, etc. And it is on this ground, that
Christ is called the Ca^tioner, Heb. 7.22. because He undertook the satisfying
for our debt; and upon this ground, was there access in Justice to exact it of
Him, though He Himself knew no sin. For which, see Is^. 53.7, and 10. ^
C^rinth. 5.21. In the fourth place, this is included, That by the Lord JEHOVAH,
the offended party, this death and willing suffering of our blessed Lord Jesus,
was actually accepted, as satisfactory and well-pleasing to Him, in the room
and stead of these who had offended; so that thereby He, in the order agreed
upon, does lay by quarrels at the offending party, as men do discharge the
principal Creditor the debt, when the Cautioner has satisfied in his name.
Hence the Lord pronounces often, that in His beloved Son He is well pleased,
and that He has found a ransom, Job 33. verse. 24. and from this it is, that
His death is called a Propitiation, as being acceptable to God, when other
Sacrifices could not be. That in these respects, Christ's death is truly a
satisfaction for sin, may from this Text thus be made out:

First, If by Christ's death we be redeemed, and if the effect flowing from His
death be a Redemption, Then is His death (under which all His sufferings are
comprehended) a proper price and satisfaction for sin; But the former is true.
Therefore, etc. There is a double strength in this Argument to make out the
Connection, first, in the word Redemption: Which, (as we show in the exposition)
beside other things, does imply, 1. That sinners by sin are sold and mor-gaged,
and the Law, and Curse have obtained a right over them. 2. That, at least, in
respect of that established Law and Curse ( that day thou eatest, thou shall
die) there was no dissolving of that right, but by some interveening
satisfaction: otherwise the Lord, who pronounced it, might be thought not to be
just and true in His threatenings. 3. This is employed, that when men and
creatures could give no price, our Lord Jesus did actually undertake, and
accordingly did pay, Therefore it is a Redemption, because it is a freedom that
was bought; and He is a Redeemer, because He did buy it, and satisfy for it:
and this expression, being borrowed from the manner of men, will infer no
less, as is said. The second part of the strength of the Argument, is in this,
That this Redemption is attributed to His death, and blood, Thou have redeemed
us by Thy blood; and these, put together, make it exceeding strong: for, the
very price of the Redemption is thereby clearly held forth. So, if it be asked,
Why is Christ called a Redeemer? Answ. Because He redeemed us. If again it be
said, Wherewith did He redeem us, or, With what price? It is answered, with His
blood; And indeed there can be no other reason why so frequently our Redemption
is attributed to His death, but because His death cometh-in in a peculiar
respect thereunto; so that when we (as once Isaac was to his father) were lying
obnoxious to the stroke of Gods Justice, He offered Himself in our room (as
there was a Ram provided in the place of Isaac) that thereby we might escape,
as it is, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13, 14. He redeemed us from the curse, being
Himself made a curse for us; which must be understood, to be in our stead.

Secondly, (which is almost one with the last branch of the former) It is clear
by this, that all the good that comes to the redeemed, is still reckoned as
the effect and purchase of Christ's suffering; which must respect the merit and
efficacy of His blood, as by way of satisfaction procuring the same. And in
this respect, it may be said singularly of the Mediator, the second Person of
the Godhead, that He has procured this Redemption, otherwise than can be said
of the first and third Person of the blessed Trinity. Therefore also we are
said to be loved by him, and washen by his own blood, Chap. 1.5. But of this
Argument was spoken in the former.

Thirdly, This is brought as the Song of all the redeemed, and as that which
will agree to all of them, when the Congregation of the firstborn shall be
brought together: Now, what other influence can the blood of Christ have upon
these who were redeemed by Him, from the foundation of the world, and before
His death, when the example thereof could have no effect, or upon young ones,
upon whom His sufferings can have no moral influence by opening or confirming
to them Doctrinally the way to Heaven? and yet, both these may well be capable
of the efficacy thereof, as it is considered as a satisfaction: now,
considering that all the redeemed, are equally, and in the same respects,
obliged to Christ's death for their life, and for that cause do jointly concur
in the same Song of praise; we must either say, that none such as have been
formerly instanced, are saved; or, we must say, that they are all saved without
any respect to His sufferings: both which, are false and absurd: or, lastly, we
must acquiesce in this, That by Christ's sufferings, as by a satisfaction, this
was procured to them; and therefore consequently, that His death is to be
considered as such, seeing no otherwise it can have influence on their
Redemption. And there being but one Redemption, and one way by which it is
procured, to wit, Christ's death; and one Song, comprehending the
acknowledgement of all the redeemed; and seeing to some, it must be a
satisfaction: Therefore it must be esteemed to be so, in reference to all
others also, who are, or shall be partakers thereof.

Fourthly, This fruit of His death, to wit, Redemption, is peculiar to some of
all Kindreds, and Nations, and is not common to all. It must therefore be
considered as flowing from His death, as a satisfaction meritoriously procuring
the same: otherwise, these effects, which may follow upon His confirming His
Doctrine by His death, giving an example to others, etc are common
indifferently to all that are bearers of the Gospel: for, in these respects He
is so, and does so to all. This therefore, being peculiar to some, (as the next
Doctrine will further clear) must be understood as qualified by the Covenant of
Redemption to be for the satisfying in the room of such and such, and not of
others: which consideration does plainly bring it to the notion of a
satisfaction.

Fifthly, There is a special emphasis and significancy in this, that Thou have
redeemed us by Thy blood, etc. which does respect the excellency of the Person
who did l^y down His blood for making of this purcha^e. It is Thou, who art the
first and last, who was dead, and is alive, and lives for ever, who art the
Son of God; yea, who art God, Act. 20.28. a^ was more fully cleared, Chap. 1.4.
for, Thou and The, relate to the Person described by such titles in the former
part of this Prophecy. This does give ground for this Argument, If the
purchase made by the blood of Jesus Christ be such as could be made by none,
but by the blood of Him who was, and is God, Then His death and suff^rings for
that end, must be a satisfaction, and by their merit and efficacy procure the
Redemption purchased; But the former is true. Therefore, etc. The reasons of
the consequence, are, because, First, all the other ends of suffering may be in
the sufferings of a mere man. Secondly, There were not need of such an
excellent price, if the merit and worth thereof did not concur, by way of
satisfaction, for obtaining of this Redemption. Thirdly, This respect to the
excellency of the Person, shows where-from mainly their Redemption does flow,
to wit, that the Person dying, was of such worth; and that therefore His death
and sufferings are accounted of great price before God. And lastly, Th^re is
here a clear opposition, Thou have redeemed us by Thy blood, tha^ is, Thou, who
art God, have condescended to lay down Thy life, and sh^d Thy blood for us who
were of little worth: which does import, that His sufferings were estimated in
the stead of what should have been other ways exacted from them.

These Arguments will be the more clear, if we consider that opposition which
i^ made by the Apostle, Romans 5. betwixt our blessed Lord Jesus, the second
Adam, and the first Adam, of whom men have their sinful being: for, in that
comparison and opposition, Christ is not only made the Author of life to these
that are by Faith His seed, as the first Adam was the author of death to these
that descend from him; but also and especially in this, that as by the
disobedience and transgression of Adam, death was brought upon his Posterity,
as being procured by the guilt and demerite (to speak so) of that offense; So
by the obedience, Righteousness and sufferings of the other, life and freedom
from the dominion of sin is purchased, and that by way of merit and
satisfaction equivalent to the former offense. For, as by Adams fall, the
Holiness and Justice of God were wronged, So by the obedience of the second
Adam, they were wonderfully made to shine. And this being the Apostles scope,
to compare these two Adams together, both in respect of the opposite effects
that flow from them to their seed, and in respect of the opposite means by
which these are procured, This which is asserted must necessarily follow.

It is also observable, and does exceedingly confirm, the truth la^d down, and
discover the horridness of the opposite blasphemy, that the denying of
Chri^ts death to be a satisfaction, and the denying of His blessed Godhead,
are so knit together, that the asserting of the one, does infer the other.
Therefore these wretched S^cinians, who deny the eternal Godhead, and the
personality of the second person of the God^head, must also deny the merit and
excellency of His obedience in His death, without which it could not be a
satisfaction. But, on the contrary, the redeemed, who have the right thoughts
of Christ's Godhead, have also this impression of His death, that it is a
satisfaction laid down in their name; upon both which grounds, they praise in
this Song, to wit, that so excellent a Person should redeem them by so
excellent a price as the blood of God: and this does demonstrate their
engagement to Him, that when (upon supposition of the threatened curse, at
least) there was no other that could undertake their debt, or satisfy for
them, but He who was God, That even then He, who was the Son of God, did
undertake the same. We are persuaded, that all who ever shall share in this
Song, shall acknowledge both these truths, and heartily bless the Son of God
for making satisfaction by His blood. And considering that the Abbettors of
this blasphemy do by this deny the Godhead of our blessed Lords Person, and
altogether make void the efficacy of His Sacrifice and Priestly office, so that
neither His Person nor His Offices are acknowledged by them, which yet are the
two great and solid foundations of Christianity, Therefore they are not worthy
to be disputed with, nor accounted Christians; but rather to be joined with,
and reckoned among, Heathens, or the followers of Mahomet and the receivers of
His Alcaron. For which cause, Christians would guard against this most horrid
Error, as being most blasphemous against the Mediator, and most destructive to
their own Salvation; for, by these grounds, they can neither have a Redeemer,
nor a Redemption. It is reported of Socinus, (the great Patron of this
blasphemy, by a Learned man, to wit, Cameron, who writes that he had it from
one of his disciples) that he privately denied the world to be made of nothing,
lest thereby he should be necessitated to acknowledge the infiniteness of Gods
power; which afterward was more publicly avowed and contended-for by some of
his followers. What horrible t^ings are there, that men's corruptions will not
conceive and foster? and what hieght or depth will not the devil drive men to,
where he gets liberty? These things have ever been abhorred as most
detestable, even as to the very mentioning of them; yet this horrid blasphemy
wants not its Patrons in this springtime of Error: And therefore men ought
to walk the more circumspectly in reference to the same.

Concerning the extent of the merit of Christ's death, or, if it may be
accounted a satisfaction for all men.
THe second Doctrine that we propose from the words, is, That though the death
and sufferings of Christ, be properly a satisfaction to the Justice of God for
sin; yet is not this intended by Christ, nor accepted of by God as a price and
satisfaction for the sins of all men, and for the p^ocuring of Redemption to
them, but only for some peculiarly chosen of God, and by His decree of Election
separated from others.

It is true, that Chr^sts death, being considered abstractly and materially in
it self, in respect of the Person who died, and in respect of the manner of His
performing this obedience with so much cheerfulness, reverence, etc. may be,
and by Divines is said to be, of an infinite value; So that if it had been so
intended and transacted in the Covenant of Redemption, it might have been in
the former respects accounted, and accepted as a price for many more; yea, for
all: because, such suffering, performed by such a Person, is equivalent unto,
and, in respect of His excellency who su^fers, beyond the e^ternall sufferings
of all mere creatures. But Christ's death, being considered formally, as a price
and satisfaction, with respect to the transaction that is made in the Covenant
of Redemption, it must be qualified and understood with respect to the Lords
proposing of the terms, the Mediators condescending thereto, and H^s intention
in undertaking and executing the same, as also with respect to the Lords
accepting of the same as such. Therefore it is not to be enquired here, what
Christ's death is in it self abstractly? nor what it might have been, if the
Sovereign Lord had so thought good? but it is to be enquired, if the Lords
purpose in giving of His Son to die, and the sons in obeying the same, was, to
have that death, and these sufferings laid down as a price and satisfaction for
all? We say, that in that respect, it was neither intended by the Son, nor
accepted by God as a satisfaction for all, but allanerly for such as He had
chosen, and by His purpose had separated to Himself out of all kindreds,
tongues and nations: which by several Arguments may be strongly concluded from
this place.

Arg. 1. Christ's death and sufferings were not intended as a price and
satisfaction to buy or redeem any, but such as were proposed by God to the
Mediator in the Covenant of Redempti^n to be redeemed by Him; But all and every
one were not so proposed. Therefore Christ's death and sufferings were not
intended as a price and satisfaction to redeem all and every one. The major of
this Argument, does not only appear, at the first, to be very reasonable, but
does necessarily flow even from the emphasis of this word redeeming: Which does
suppose, First, That man, being under a kindly relation to God, did by sin fall
from the same. Secondly, It supponeth, that man, by sin, is made obnoxious to
Gods curse, and also that he is unable to extricat or expede himself therefrom.
Thirdly, It supponeth the Lords condescending to think of the redeeming of some
from that curs^; and for that end, to propose and accept of such a
satisfaction, for such person^, and on such terms as himself should propose, or
had proposed: and therefore any Redemption does first presuppose the Lords
condescending to admit of such a bargain in the general; and it being an act
of His Soveraignity, there can be no other rule but His good-pleasure, whereby
either the persons to be redeemed, or the terms upon which, or the time when,
such a satisfaction is to be made for such persons etc. are to be regulated: we
must therefore look to his proposing of the same as the foundation whereby all
that follows is to be squared* for, this phrase redeeming, being borrowed
from the manner of men, does hold forth the Lord upon the one side, as the
party offended, making offer to accept of such a satisfaction, for such
offenders; and on the other side, it represents the Mediator as the buyer and
Redeemer, accepting of such an offer in all the circumstances thereof, to wit,
to engage to be a Redeemer to such and such persons, to consent to lay down
such and such a satisfaction and price for their Redemption, and to perform the
same in the time and manner condescended upon by the Lord. And it is the
conceiving of this great transaction of the Elects Redemption under this form,
to wit, as having such an offer upon the one side, and such a^ acceptance upon
the other, that makes it get the name of a Covenant in Scripture: because ^o,
it is represented as a mutual bargain, in the manner as bargains use to be
transacted amongst men: which yet is done for the helping of us to understand
this mystery, and is not beyond this scope to be extended. From all which, it
does appear, that the Fathers proposal (to say so) or H^s intention and
purpose, must regulate this whole bussinesse of Redemption; and therefore must
the extent of Christ's death, as it is a satisfaction, be understood according
to the same. Hence, the Lord Christ, does so frequently assert, that he came
not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him, and to finish his
work, and to give eternal life to as many as God had given to him, and such
like. Whereby it is evident, that the Lord has particularly ordered the work
of Redemption according to His good pleasure in the respects formerly
mentioned; and that the Mediators death and sufferings are to be looked upon as
regulated and qualified in respect of their eff^cts, according to what has
been proposed to Him. This first Proposition, we suppose, is now clear, and may
be yet f^rther confirmed: for, it cannot be said, that God intended to have any
redeemed but these whom He did propose to the Mediator: Again, it cannot be
said, that any were by Him intended to be redeemed, whom He did not thus
propose in the Covenant of Redemption, and give unto the Mediator for that end:
and, in the last place, it must be sa^d, that all whom He d^d propose in that
bargain of Redemption, were designed by Him actually to be redeemed: otherwise
many absurd conclusions (reflecting upon the Lords serious manner of proceeding
in that business, and upon His wise manner of contriving the same, as also
upon His effectual way of bringing about what He has intended) will follow;
which without horror cannot be imagined. Therefore it will follow, that the
Sons actual bearing the iniquities of such as are redeemed, and the Fathers
proposing of such and such to Him for that end, must be of equal extent.

Now as to the minor proposition of the Argument, It is certain, that all and
every one were not proposed (much less all indifferently) by the Lord JEHOVAH
to the Mediator, to be bought or redeemed by Him; And may be made to appear
thus, 1. Because the Lord did never intend that all should be glorified and
actually partake of Redemption, He having decreed the glorifying of His Justice
on some, as the manifesting of His mercy upon others; and therefore it cannot
be said that the Lord did intend such to be redeemed by the Son, or that He
did, for that end, propose them to Him.

If it be said, that though He did not intend their Salvation, as He did intend
the Salvation and Redemption of the Elect, Yet may it be said, that He did
intend their Redemption conditionally, and so propose them to the Mediator to
be redeemed on these terms, that i^, if they should Believe. Ans. Of this we
may afterward speak a word; Yet here, we say, 1. That this does attribute to
the only wise God a most derogating intention to His own glory: for, it cannot
be denied but He foreknew the event, and that such a conditional intention
would not be sufficient to through the same: and to say, that He intended what
He knew would never come to pass, or to apply such means as He knew could not
be effectual to the end, cannot but with horror be thought upon. 2. We say,
that the Scripture does only mention one kind of proposing and giving to
Christ, which is to be given absolutely to Him to be redeemed; and the
opposition betwixt: this giving of some to Christ, and the not giving of
others, is not as if it were betwixt two givings of diverse kinds, to wit, one
conditional, and another absolute; but it is such an opposition as is betwixt
giving, and not giving, or passing by; and therefore that former twofold
giving, or proposing to Christ, cannot be admitted. 3. We say, if there be such
a conditional proposing of the reprobate to Christ to be redeemed, it will not
be easy to conceive the terms of the Covenant; for, there is but one Covenant
mentioned, wherein (to say so) the bargain with the Mediator is concluded: this
will infer two, to wit, one, absolute in reference to the Elect; an other,
conditional in reference to the reprobate. Again, it will be difficult to
determine whether Christ were to pay so much for them as for the Elect; for, it
seems not just that He should pay as much for these who are but conditionally
redeemed, (and for whom He does not purchase the condition, and whom He has
not intended to make partakers of the benefits) as for these who are absolutely
redeemed, to whom the condition is purchased, and for whom the benefits are
intended. On the other side, it will be diffic^lt to say, that a less price is
required for this conditional Redemption; because so, it were no Redemption at
all: for, if the Redemption must be at such a price, then what is less cannot
procure the same. Further, there is but one Covenant of Redemption mentioned in
Scripture; and the Elect, or, these who were given to Christ and proposed to
Him, are still mentioned as the object about which that bargain is transacted:
we cannot therefore think of a conditional proposal, except we can see a
distinct bargain and Covenant concerning the same; which yet will be no
Covenant of Redemption. But we may touch this afterward. Secondly, That all
were not proposed to Christ, or, given to Him, will thus appear, because by
these titles, to wit, these that thou have given me, etc. such are
contradistinguished from others, as, from these who are not given to Christ:
neither can there be any other reason why these are designed by such a name,
but that in Gods purpose they were designed peculiarly to be redeemed, and
accordingly were committed to the Mediator, and undertaken-for by Him in the
Covenant of Redemption. Now, it cannot be said, that any other were proposed by
God to the Mediator, but such as were thus given to Him; and seeing it is clear,
that all were not thus given to Him, (for such are expressly distinguished from
the passed-by world, Ioh. 6.17.) Therefore all cannot be said to be proposed by
God to the Mediator; and so consequently (which is the Conlusion of the main
Argument,) His sufferings and death cannot be said to be intended as a price
and satisfaction for the redeeming of all and every one; Nor, without the
intention of the blessed Parties contracting, can they be be said to be a price
for any: for, the price must needs relate to what is proposed to be redeemed or
bought, this being the series, the Mediator did redeem these for whom He
engaged and whose debt He did undertake; Again, He did undertake for these, and
for these only, who were proposed and given by the Lord to Him for that end;
But these were not all men, but some few that were peculiarly given to Him, as
separated from others: Therefore, from the first to the last, it will follow,
that not all men, but some few, peculiarly chosen by God, and given to Christ,
were redeemed by His death, and have these sufferings, intended by the Mediator
and accepted-of by the Lord JEHOVAH, as a price and satisfaction for their sins.

Arg. 2. Secondly, It may be thus concluded, If these that are redeemed by
Christ's blood be not all of every Tongue, Kindred, and Nation; but some out of
every Tongue, Kindred, and Nation, etc. Then all are not redeemed: for, these
are opposite in this respect, to wit, a whole Nation, or every person of a
Nation, and some of them only: But the redeemed are not all of every Nation,
etc. but some out of all Tongues, Kindreds, and Nations, etc. as was cleared,
verse. 9. Therefore all are not redemeed. And what can be the reason of this
expression here, Thou have redeemed us out of every Tongue, Kindred, etc. If it
be not to distinguish these few redeemed ones of these Nations, from the great
number of the unredeemed in the same; and thereby to set out the peculiaritie
of Gods love to them whom He redeemeth, who has designed this benefit to them,
when He has passed by others to whom He was no less obliged, or rather to
whom He is no more disobliged in respect of any thing in men? Also, by this
expression, there is a clear difference put between the song of the redeemed
(which is grounded upon Christ's death) and the song of a Visible Church, which
does arise from a Visible Church-relation: for, Chap. 11.17, 18, etc. the whole
Nations become the Lords in that respect, and they praise Him upon that ground;
but the song of the redeemed, is of some out of every Tongue, Kindred and
Nation, etc. which does expressly insinuate, that Redemption by Christ's blood,
is not of equal extent with the Visible Church, but is peculiar to the Elect
therein: and therefore much less can it be of equal extent with the whole
World.

Thirdly, If this Redemption of Christ's, and His laying down of His life for
any, be the evidence of His most special and peculiar love, Then it cannot be
extended to all; because His peculiar love does not extend it self to all
indifferently: for, if so, then it would not be peculiar but common; and
therefore the effect thereof cannot be of more general extent: But the former
is clear in this place, to wit, that Redemption by Christ's death, is a fruit
and evidence of His most peculiar love. Therefore, etc. That this is a special
and peculiar favor, appears, first, from their being so affected in this
song as having this mercy peculiarly to praise Him for, to wit, that He had
redeemed them by His blood, which others had not. And secondly, that they
mention this as a favor, beyond which there cannot be a greater, and which
does singularly engage them to Him beyond all other favors that have been
bestowed upon them. Thirdly, The very expressions of their song bear forth
their sense of the peculiarnesse of this mercy, as, Thou have redeemed us out
of every Tongue, Kindred, and Nation, that shows His taking notice of them
singularly beyond others; and that He did this by His blood, shows this to be
an expressing of His love to them in a most wonderful and singular manner.
Fourthly, If this mercy were not peculiar to them, then it might be said that
one person were no more obliged to praise for this Redemption, and to be
affected therewith, than another; and how inconsistent that will be with the
scope, in this place, and with the present frame and conviction of these that
praise, may be easily discerned, seeing their scope is to hold out themselves to
be peculiarly obliged to be thankful for this mercy beyond all others? Lastly,
That this is a peculiar mercy, even the greatest that our Lord Jesus does
bestow upon any, appears from other Scriptures, as, Ioh. 15.13. Greater love
has no man than this, to lay down his life for his friend, etc. and Romans 5.8,
9, 10. God commends His love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us, etc. All which show, that the love of God cannot more shine
to one in any thing than in this, that Christ has died for him; and therefore
it cannot be intended for any, but such as He does peculiarly love, and whom He
has designed to be partakers of the most eminent and special effects thereof.

Fourthly, If all who are redeemed by Christ's blood, be made Kings and Priests
unto God, and be effectually called and made to reign upon earth, etc. and if
the connection be certain between these, so that they who may claim to the one,
may also claim to the other, Then Christ's death is not a satisfaction for all,
but for some; because, in experience it is clear, that all are not made Kings
and Priests unto God, etc. But the former is true, to wit, all who are redeemed
by Christ's blood, are made Kings and Priests, etc. Therefore, etc. The truth of
this minor, or, of the certainty of the connection between being redeemed by
Christ's death, and being made Kings and Priests to God, is clear in the Text:
for, all; who say in the 9. verse. Thou have redeemed us by Thy blood, say in
the 10. and have made us Kings and Priests unto God, etc. which expressly
imports, that the one part of the song is of equal extent with the other. And
if it were not so, then this song might be divided, and some might say, Thou
have redeemed us, but we are not made Kings and Priests unto God; which would
look most unlike the language of a redeemed sinner, and weaken exceedingly the
consolation of the redeemed, who could not be so comforted in Christ's laying
down His life for them, as they are holden forth to be in this song, if it were
possible that the parts thereof could be divided. Also, it would mar the beauty
of the inconceivable grace, and peculiar love that shines in this ground of
their praise, and no way rouse the redeemed sinner to praise, because Christ
had laid down His life for him, if it might be said, that Thou have redeemed me
by Thy blood, yet am I not sure if I shall be made a King and a Priest unto
God, etc.

The force of this Argument, may be conceived these two ways, 1. thus, If
Christ's death, as it is a satisfaction, has ever the Justification and
Glorification of these for whom it is a satisfaction, following upon it, Then
Christ's death cannot be a satisfaction for all; But the former is true, to wit,
Christ's death has ever Justification and Salvation following upon it, to these
for whom it is a satisfaction: Therefore, etc. That Justification and Salvation
ever follow thereupon, appears, 1. from the Text; these only, and all these
who are redeemed by His blood, are also made Kings and Priests, and have also
saving effects following thereupon, as was said. 2. It is clear from the nature
of the Covenant: for, if Christ's undertaking to satisfy for some, in whose
name He did become surety, did make Him in Justice liable to their debt and to
the payment thereof, so as He could not be conceived to be the Cautioner
according to the terms of the Covenant, but also He behooved to have the
imputation of their sin, actually following thereupon; so, on the other side,
His satisfaction cannot but be equally effectual for the procuring of actual
freedom to these whose room He sustained in the laying down of that
satisfaction. Again, this effect, to wit, the Justification of these for whom
He undertook, is (to speak so) the recompense and satisfaction which is by the
Lord engaged-for and made sure to Him for His sufferings, and the travel of
His soul, according to that word, Isa. 53.11. He shall see of the travel of His
soul, and shall be satisfied: and if it be so, then there must be a necessary
connection between Christ's suffering in the stead of any, and their obtaining of
Justification; otherwise it might be said, that the Mediator for that part of
the travel of His soul, did want the promised and engaged for satisfaction.
And as we cannot conceive but both sides of that Covenant of Redemption, must
be fulfilled, and the Mediator cannot but be satisfied in His design; so, we
cannot but conceive the necessity of their Justification and Salvation whose
iniquities Christ has born. This is also further clear in the following words,
to wit, by His knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many; for He shall
bear their iniquities. Where these three things are clear, 1. What it is that
Christ accounts satisfaction for the travel of His soul: that is, to have
many justified. 2. What the ground is that procures this Justification: that
is, His bearing of their iniquity: for, this is the reason of the former, many
shall be justified, because, Christ shall pay for them, and bear their sin. And
if this connection were not certain, and peremptory between these two, Then this
consequence and reasoning would be utterly brangled and made void, if it might
be said that Christ did bear the iniquity of any, who yet should not be
justified. 3. It is clear also from that place, what these many are, that shall
be justified; to wit, those iniquities Christ does bear: for, He shall justify
many, because He shall bear their iniquities; where, the many that shall be
justified, in the first words, and these whose iniquities Christ does bear, in
the last words, are of equal extent: and this relative, their iniquity, does
expressly relate to the many spoken of before. Which words do strongly confirm
what is said, to wit, that there is an inseparable connection between Christ's
bearing the iniquity of any, and their obtaining of Justification; for, the
Prophet does not only make them of equal extent, but he does also draw the
necessity and certainty of the Justification and Salvation of many, as a
consequent from this antecedent, that Christ has born their iniquities. And
is, in a word, this, Christ has born the iniquity of many, Therefore it cannot
be but these many must be justified: which reasoning, being the reasoning of
the holy Ghost, must be sure; and therefore none can be said to be redeemed, or
to have their iniquities born by Christ, but such as come actually to obtain
Justification. Lastly, The necessity of this connection between Christ dying for
any, and their obtaining of actual Justification and Salvation, may thus be
made out, If the Lord bestow the greater benefit upon any. Then the lesser
cannot but be expected from Him also; But the giving of His Son to death for
any, is a greater mercy than actual Justification and Salvation: Therefore He
cannot but bestow the last on these upon whom He has bestowed the first. Both
parts of the Argument will be confirmed from Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. and Chap. 8.
verse. 32. In the one place, the Apostle reasons thus, While we were yet
sinners, God commended His love to us, in giving Christ to die for us:
therefore having obtained such a mercy, we may much more look to be saved from
wrath through Him. And to deny the consequence in the former Argument, would
enervat this reasoning of the Apostle. In the other place, it is He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, How shall He not wish Him
also freely give us all things? Where the Apostle does not only show, that all
things do follow where Christ is bestowed; but also He does it in such a
manner, as does show the absurdity and unreasonablenesse of thinking the
contrary, to wit, that it can be possible that God will bestow so excellent a
gift as His Son to be delivered up for any, and yet withhold any good thing
from such.

A second way, by which we may conceive the force of the former Argument, is
this, (which also is a new Argument of it self) That which would weaken the
redeemeds consolation and enervat the grounds of their praise, contrary to the
strain and scope of this Song, ought not to be admitted in the Doctrine of
Redemption; But to say, that all are redeemed by Christ's death, yet so, that
the greater part of them shall never be justified, nor partake of life through
Him, etc. does exceedingly weaken the redeemeds consolation, and enervat the
grounds of their praise, contrary to the scope of this Song: Therefore, that
Doctrine of universal Redemption, is not to be admitted, as being derogatory to
the solid consolation of the redeemed, what ever be pretended. That it
derogateth to their consolation, appears thus, If the Justification,
Salvation, etc. of the redeemed be not necessarily and peremptorily knit unto
Christ's laying down of His life for them, Then were even their Justification
and Salvation uncertain, and so none of them could heartily praise for the
same, or comfort themselves therein; much less could all do this: both which,
are expressly contrary to the words and scope of this Song. Again, if no
redeemed Person, Believer, or Child of God, can so comfort themselves by
drawing conclusions from this Doctrine, Christ has died for all, yet, all
shall not be saved, as they may be comforted and have their hearts cheered to
praise from this, That Christ has not redeemed all, nor has died for them,
yet all for whom He died, and whom He redeemed, shall be justified and saved,
Then must the former Doctrine be exceedingly derogatory to the people of God
their consolation; But the former is true: Therefore, etc. That this Doctrine
of such an universal Redemption, does not yield such comfortable conclusions
to the Believer, as the other, will appear by comparing them together: for, the
great consolation of the Believer, is, upon solid grounds, to conclude an
unchangeable interest in God; But the latter, and not the former, will yield
this. For, this is solid and comfortable reasoning, These that are redeemed,
are made Kings and Priests to God, and shall reign with Him, etc. because,
there is an indissoluble and peremptory connection between these; But, may one
assume, I am redeemed, Therefore, etc. If this assumption be questioned, to
wit, whether I be redeemed or not? because Redemption is not universal, Then it
may thus proceed; All these that are Spiritually Kings and Priests, and being
made subject to Christ, are freed from the dominion of their corruption, and
admitted with boldness to offer themselves and their service to God by Christ
Jesus, etc. these are redeemed, and shall certainly obtain Salvation; But the
conscience, upon self-examination, where there is ground for it, may assume, It
is so with me; Therefore I am redeemed and shall obtain Salvation, etc. This is
a comfortable and solid conclusion, and cannot fail where the promises are well
grounded, because of the necessary connection that is between Redemption,
Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation, So that one of them, being
evidenced, does infer all: and Spiritually to reign in some measure over the
world, and a body of death, and Spiritually to perform worship unto God, etc.
being infallible evidences of Sanctification, and fruits of this Redemption,
they give good ground for a conscience to make application of the former
general truth: whereas, on the contrary, if we will loose this connection, and
say, that all are redeemed, or Christ has died for them, and yet few will be
saved, It cannot but ever leave the soul at an uncertainty under this most
comfortless conclusion, Although I be redeemed, yet I may perish; because, many
for whom Christ has died, are never actually freed from the wrath of God; and
thereby the soul should be still left in a comfortless condition, which is
most unlike the nature of this Redemption which Christ has purchased, and most
disagreeable to the consolation which is allowed to the redeemed by God, and
wherein they comfort themselves in this Song. We conclude then, that it is more
comfortable to a Believer to reason from this Universal, all that are redeemed,
and are Kings and Priests unto God, shall be saved, where the consequent and
antecedent, are of equal extent; than to say, all are redeemed, and yet few
shall or none may be saved. And this being the way of the Lord, it cannot but
be most comfortable to His People; and it is a vain thing for man to imagine by
his carnal reasonings to mould a more comfortable Doctrine: for though, at
first, it look more plausible-like to flesh, to say, that all are redeemed,
than to say, but some; yet indeed it does not prove so: for even, upon
supposition that that ground were laid, no man could gather any solid
consolation therefrom, but upon condition of his receiving of Christ, and
resting upon Him by Faith: Now, Faith in Christ, being supponed, this ground,
few are redeemed, but all these who are redeemed shall be saved, does yield
more solid consolation than the former; because, it carries with it a
certainty of Salvation to such: whereas the other ground, pretending to bear
forth a possibility of Salvation to all, or, a salvability, does indeed make it
certain to none.

If any shall say, that this is true indeed upon supposition that one be by
Faith in Christ; Then it cannot be denied, but so to conclude, is more
comfortable: but supposing one not to be a Believer, Is it not then a
comfortless Doctrine to say, that all are not redeemed? etc. because it
leaves this stumbling block before the person, that he knows not whether he
ought to believe or not, because he knows not whether he be redeemed or not:
and this thought may also follow him, if he be not redeemed, can his believing
be useful to him? Answ. There are several mistakes in this Objection,
Therefore we shall answer several ways thereunto: And first, we say, that even
upon supposition that one does not believe in Christ, this Doctrine asserted is
more comfortable than the other: because, first, he has no less warrant to
believe in Christ and rest on Him, than if the other Doctrine were supposed:
for, it is not Christ's dying for any that warranteth him to believe, or is the
object of his Faith; but it is Gods call, requiring faith of him, and Gods
offer and promise knitting life to the performance of that condition of
believing called-for. These are contained in Gods revealed Will, which is the
rule of our practice, and the ground of our Faith. And according to this
Doctrine, a hearer of the Gospel has these grounds for his warrant; and there
can no other be given, even upon the contrary supposition. Secondly, If he be
brought to yield to His call, to receive His offer, and to trust himself to His
promise, he has then more solid ground of consolation (because of the certain
connection that is betwixt Faith and Salvation) than he can have by the other
Doctrine; which by the interwoven Errors concerning Free Will, the falling away
of such as sometime have been true Believers, etc. is wholly brangled. And so,
supposing him not yet to have closed with Christ, he has the more effectual
motives to engage him thereunto; because, by so doing, all is made sure. 2. We
answer, this Doctrine of particular Redemption, (to call it so) does never make
Salvation impossible to any that will receive Christ and rest on Him: but, on
the contrary, though it deny that all men are redeemed, or shall be saved; yet
does it assert this Universal, that all whosoever shall believe, are redeemed
and shall be saved; which certainly does make the expectation of life through
faith in Christ, to be the more certain; and does lay the more solid ground for
a tossed sinner to cast himself upon, when it says, there was never a sinner
of any rank or quality that did believe, or shall believe in Jesus Christ, but
he shall be saved: from which he may conclude, Then if I can, or shall believe
in Christ, I also shall be saved: which conclusion, will not follow from the
other Doctrine. And seeing this is the very express letter of the Gospel,
whosoever believes shall be saved, there is no ground left to question the
same, without manifest reflecting upon the faithfulness of God. 3. We answer,
If any thing follow from this ground, all are not redeemed, it is this,
Therefore all shall not be saved; or, Therefore all will not believe: both
which are true. And it does only make Salvation impossible to him who does not
believe in Christ: for, to such it says, if thou believe not, thou shall not
be saved; neither in such a case have thou ground to think thy self redeemed:
and what absurdity is in these? yea, upon the grounds of the other Doctrine,
there is none without Faith that can promise themselves life, or comfort
themselves in their pretended universal Redemption, more than upon the grounds
which we have laid down: therefore it can never be said, that believing in
Christ, is useless according to this Doctrine: yea, it is asserted to be
always useful and profitable, whereas, by the opposite grounds, it may be
often without these comfortable effects following thereupon. In the fourth
place, we Answer, That this Objection (as much more in this controversy) does
flow from a mistake of the true nature of justifying Faith; for, it supponeth
it, to be the hearts receiving of, and closing with this as a truth, that
Christ has died for me in particular, and that His death was particularly
intended for me. This is the more dangerous, because it has been entertained
by many, and has been the occasion of mistake, even to some great men, who
have laid this for a ground, (as Cameron does on this subject) Christus mortuus
est pro te, si tu id factum credas, that is, Christ has died for thee, if thou
believe it so to be: now, according to that ground, it is impossible but to
miscarry, both in reference to this Doctrine, the Doctrine of Justification,
and several other most concerning-truths. It is to be adverted then, that when
we are called to believe in Christ, we are not called instantly to believe that
Christ has offered up Himself as a satisfaction for us in particular, but we
are to conceive it in this order, First, We are called to believe the truth of
the Gospel, and the way of Salvation laid down therein, to wit, that there is
no name under Heaven by which a sinner can be saved but by the Name of Jesus,
and that yet all who believe in Him, shall be justified and saved, etc. Thus we
may apply that word, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must first believe that
He is, etc. for, if this general truth be not acknowledged, saving Faith
wants the discovery of a sufficient and fit object to rest itself upon.
Secondly, We are then called to receive this Christ, offered to us in the
Gospel, and by Faith to be take ourselves to Him so discovered, and there, as
on a solid foundation, to rest for the obtaining of Justification and life by
the virtue of His satisfaction, according to the offer that is made in the
Gospel. This is the main act of saving Faith, whereby a sinner comes to be
entitled to Christ, and to the benefits of His death. Whereupon, thirdly,
follows (our accepting of the forsaid offer being supposed) a warrant to look
upon Christ as ours, upon the benefits purchased by Him as belonging to us; and
upon ourselves, as actually redeemed by Him; none of which, before that, could
have been warrantably concluded: but this being supposed, there is good ground
for it; because a sinner by receiving of Christ, comes to have interest in
Him, and so consequently in all that is His: for, Christ and His benefits are
not separated; and therefore except there be ground to bear out this title to
Christ Himself, there is no warrant to believe that any of His benefits do
belong to us. Now, according to this forsaid order, no hearer is ever called to
believe what is false, Because these three are ever true, to wit, First, That
life is certain through Faith in Christ and no other ways. Secondly, that one
who is called to believe on Him, ought to obey, and that Gods call is a good
ground for that obedience. Thirdly, This is also a truth, that one who has
yielded, may look upon himself as accepted of God, and redeemed by Christ
Jesus, because, in the method forsaid, there is warrant to believe all these.
But, if any will invert the order, and at first persuade himself that the
benefits of Christ's purchase do belong to him, as being particularly redeemed
by His death, before he actually rest on him by Faith; this will prove but
strong presumption, and never give title to Christ or any thing that is His;
but, on the contrary, greatly provoke the Lord; because in all the Word of God,
there is no promise of Justification, Life, or Salvation, or any benefit of
Christ's Redemption made to any person, but to him that believes: and to do
otherwise, is, as if a woman that were wooed for marriage should fancy her
self to have title and right to all the privileges of such a man's wife, before
the marriage were actually consummated, or before she had given her formal
consent thereunto. And so according to these grounds, we see, that all hearers
are not simply and instantly called to believe that Christ did die for them;
But, first, to receive Him as their Savior, and then to draw such a
conclusion, which upon the performance of that condition, can never fail. From
this also, we may see the fallacy and weakness of that much tossed vain
Objection, to wit, That which every one is obliged to believe, that must be
truth: But every one is obliged to believe that Christ did die for him in
particular. Therefore, that Christ did die for every one in particular must be
a truth. This Argument, I say, depends only upon the former mistake of Faith:
and this being denied, that all men are instantly called to believe that Christ
died for them in particular, when they are called to believe in Him for
obtaining of life, The strength of it will evanish: because, supposing that
many in the Visible Church (which experience does put out of question) do never
believe in Christ, or by Faith rest on Him for the obtaining of life: Then it
will follow, that many, even in the Visible Church, are never obliged to
believe that Christ has died for them in particular; because, none has
warrant to make that application, but such as have first betaken themselves by
Faith unto Christ: whereby the assumption of that Argument is palpably false;
for, it must be so assumed, Every man that hears the Gospel, and has
received Christ, ought to believe that He has died for him: and so the
conclusion will be, That Christ has died for all that believe in Him, which is
true; or, it must be, That every one that hears the Gospel is obliged to
receive Christ and rest upon Him, and upon that condition may expect life;
which will make nothing to the intended purpose.

This occasion gives ground to insist a little further in clearing the extent
of the merit of Christ's death in respect of the effects thereof: and though it
be neither possible for us to make every thing fully clear, nor pertinent to
our purpose, long to insist on the same; yet, the former grounds being laid, we
may enquire shortly in some things, and answer to them with a particular
respect to this place. First, It may be enquired, What is the proper effect of
Christ's satisfaction, and that which is purchased thereby to sinners? Secondly,
If this purchase extend to the procuring of Faith and the first Grace, as it
does to the procuring of Pardon and Justification? Thirdly, If it may be said,
that any benefit, in any respect, does redound to any Reprobate from Christ's
death, as the proper effect of that purchase. And, fourthly, If there may be an
Uuniversal conditional Redemption admitted, as consistent with the former
grounds; yet so, as the effect thereof is made sure to the Elect, and to them
only?

To the first, to wit, What is the native, proper and immediate effect of
Christ's purchase unto the redeemed? We Answer, That we conceive it to be not
only the procuring of Salvation to be possible to them, so that now, by the
interveening of this satisfaction, there is a way for the just God to pardon
men's sins without wronging of His Justice, which without this could not have
been: and so some say, that by Christ's death God is made placabilis, or, (to
say so) put in a capacity to be pleased, or made placable; but is not actually
appeased, or placatus, which is the assertion of the Arminians. Nor yet is it
only to make reconciliation with God, upon the condition of believing and Faith
in Christ, possible, that is, by this intervening satisfaction to give a ground
for Faith to rest upon, with hope of obtaining Salvation thereby, which
otherwise would not have been profitable, had not this satisfaction of Christ's
procured a new Covenant to be made upon that condition. Thus, according to
some, Christ by His death, has procured an object to be held forth to all to
be by faith rested upon; and has established this general, that all who should
believe on Him, should be saved, and that Faith alone should have Salvation
annexed to it, in whatsoever person it should be found: but such do deny, that
actually and absolutely He has redeemed any, or procured Faith, Justification
and Salvation to them; But we say further, that the immediate and proper fruit
and effect of Christ's purchase to these for whom He suffered, is actual
Redemption, and the benefits following thereupon, to be applied in due order
and manner, and not the possibility thereof only. First, This is clear from the
9. verse. of this Chapter, where they acknowledge and praise for this, that
Redemption and Justification, etc. are not only made possible unto them, but
that absolutely they are purchased by Christ's death for them, and that they are
actually redeemed to God by His blood. Secondly, This does clear it, that by
His blood He is said to make them Kings and Priests unto God: which cannot be
understood of the possibility only of any privilege, but must take-in the
absolute purchase and the actual conferring thereof in due order and time.
Hence, Revel. 1.5. washing from our sins in His blood, is mentioned as the
proper effect of His purchase: and Justification and Salvation are frequently
derived from Christ's blood as from their immediate meritorious cause,
particularly in that place, Isa. 53.11. whereof was spoken a little before. And
if there were no more but a possibility of Salvation flowing from Christ's
death, then Christ might never have seen His seed, or never had satisfaction
for the travel of His soul. And if by Christ's death only, Faith and Salvation
should be knit together, and so Faith made thereby to have an object proposed
to it, and that indifferently in respect of all; Then it will follow, that the
grounds of the redeemeds Song would not be, Thou have redeemed us by Thy blood,
and made us Kings and Priests, etc. neither could these be accounted the
immediate effects of His purchase, but that He has given them a ground to
believe upon, and made Salvation certain upon condition of believing: which
would not be so cheerful a Song to the redeemed, neither would it warrant them
to say, Thou have redeemed us, in a peculiar sense, seeing these effects are
common to others: also many might have ground to bless for these mercies,
beside these who are made Kings and Priests. All which, are most inconsistent
with the strain and scope of this place.

It is true, if we will consider the way and method how these benefits are
applied to the redeemed, or, the order by which they come to be possessed of
them, that instantly upon Christ's suffering, all cannot be said to be actually
justified, nor glorified, more than they can be said all to have really
existed; because, the Lord, in His Covenant, has particularly concluded, when,
and by what means, such persons, and no other should be brought to believe in
Christ, and actually to be justified, even as well as when they should have a
being, or at what time their life should be brought to an end, and they
actually be glorified; yet, if we consider the things purchased, in respect of
the bargain, we will find that they were absolutely and actually bought unto
such persons, and satisfied-for by the Mediator, so as not only, in His
intention, He aimed to make their Justification and Salvation possible, but
really and simply to make it sure, and to procure it to them; yet so, as in due
time and method it is to be applied. And we conceive, that it is a dangerous
assertion to say, that Peter before his believing, had no more interest any way
in Christ's death than Judas: which yet follows upon the last opinion that was
casten, and is acknowledged by the Authors thereof. See Cameron part. 3. page
583. Indeed, if we will consider Peter's own estate, as considered in its self,
without respect to the Covenant of Redemption; and if we consider any actual
claim, which he might lay to Christ's death in that condition for his own peace
and comfort, there was no difference: but if we will consider Christ's
sufferings as in the bargain of Redemption before the Lord, the procuring of
Peter's Justification and Glorification was really undertaken-for by the
Mediator, and his debt satisfied-for by His suffering in his name, so as it
could not fail in reference to him, more than if he had actually had a being,
and had been justified and glorified when that transaction was closed; none of
all which can be said of Judas, whose name was never in the Covenant of
Redemption, as Peter's was.

The second thing moved, was, to consider, if Faith and other saving Graces be
fruits of Christ's purchase, so as by His satisfaction He did not only really
intend the purchasing of pardon upon condition of believing, but also the
purchasing of Regeneration, Faith, etc. that so the Elect might come to the
obtaining of pardon? Arminius, and the Patrons of Free Will, do deny Faith to
be a fruit of Christ's purchase. So does Cameron and some others, but with this
difference, that these last do assert, that the gift of believing does not flow
from man's free will or any sufficient grace bestowed upon all; but from Gods
Sovereign good-wil, thinking meet to bestow that gift upon some whom He has
Elected and not upon others: and this, they say, is a mere fruit of His
Sovereign good will, without respect to the merit of Christ's death, even as His
decree of election was. The reason of the denying of this, we conceive to be,
their making of the fruit and effect of Christ's death to be common to all; and
it being clear in experience, that all men have not Faith, it cannot be
consistent with the former ground to account it the fruit of Christ's purchase:
for, what He has purchased, cannot but be brought to pass, (as elsewhere
Cameron asserteth) and so according to their first ground, Faith would be
common to all men. And to say, that Christ has purchased Faith conditionally,
as He has purchased life and Salvation unto all, were absurd: because there is
a clear condition, upon which men may expect life, to wit, believing; but there
can be no such condition conceived, upon which Faith may be said to be
purchased. But to answer what was moved, we say, That Conversion, Regeneration,
Faith, Repentance, etc. are no less the fruit of Christ's purchase than pardon
and Justificatio^, etc. because, first, by His purchase, we are made Kings and
Priests unto God: And wherein do these privileges consist but in the having,
and exercising of these inward saving graces of the Spirit, whereby the Elect
are made in a spiritual sense Kings and Priests? Secondly, It can not be well
understood how Justification and Glorification may be said to be purchased by
Him, if all the steps, by which these are necessarily brought about, be not in
the same manner procured. Thirdly, We are said to be blessed with all spiritual
blessings in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.3. which must thus be understood, to wit,
that by His merit we have these communicated to us: and Is not Faith and saving
Grace to be accounted amongst spiritual blessings? Fourthly, He is made to us
of God, not only Righteousness, but also Wisdom, Sanctification, and
Redemption, 1 Corinthians. 1, 30.31. and certainly under these expressions, all
saving graces needful to the working out of our Salvation are comprehended.
And the end of this, is, that whosoever glories, may glory alone in Him, as
having all in Him, and nothing but by Him. Neither would there be such occasion
of glorying in Him, if these were not purchased by Him. Fifthly, The
considering of the Covenant of Redemption, will also fully clear this; for, no
question, that must be a fruit of Christ's purchase, which the Lord has
promised to the Mediator, as a satisfaction to Him for His sufferings: Now,
this is clear, that it is not only promised to Christ, that many through Faith
in Him shall be justified; but that certainly He shall see His seed and the
fruit of the travel of His soul, Isa. 53.10, 11. That His people shall be
willing in the day of His power, Psalm. 110.3. That these whom the Father has
given Him, shall come unto Him, Ioh. 6.37. and that they shall all be taught of
God, etc. and What else can these special promises import but this, to wit,
that the Son, the Mediator, for laying down of His life, shall have many given
Him, and actually by the Spirit drawn to Him, and made to believe in Him and to
acknowledge Him as the Author of their eternal Salvation, without which, that
promise of seeing His seed could never be accomplished? Yea, must not all the
promises of the Covenant have one rise, and be derived through one meritorious
cause? Now, these promises of Sanctification, such as, to take away the stony
heart, to give a new heart, to cleanse us from all our idols, and wash us with
clean water, etc. are in one bundle with the promises of His pardoning our
iniquity and remembering our sins no more, as is clear in Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, etc.
and Ier. 31.33, 34, etc. And seeing it cannot be denied but the last promises
are grounded upon Christ's satisfaction, Must not the first be so also?
especially considering, that without Him there is no access for binding up a
Covenant betwixt God and sinners. Neither can it be denied but Faith is a part
of that new heart, and a special fruit of that Spirit which He promised to
pour out upon His People. Sixthly, In Tit. 2.14. our being separated to be a
peculiar people to Christ and zealous of good works, etc. is expressly asserted
to be His design in laying down of His life for His People. Also, Tit. 3. verse.
5, and 6. the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost (which
must take-in all particular Graces) are said to be shed on us abundantly
through Christ Jesus; which cannot otherwise be understood, but that we have
these by the interveening procurement of Christ's satisfaction. Lastly, all that
we pray for, we pray for it in Christ's name, as having obtained access to seek
the same through His purchase: Now, it cannot be denied but Faith, Holiness,
and increase therein, may be prayed-for: and therefore these must be understood
to be procured by Him also.

The third Question was, If it may be said, that the Reprobates, or any
Reprobate, do enjoy any common mercy by virtue of Christ's purchase and
Redemption? Or, if any mercy bestowed upon any Reprobate, or enjoyed by them,
may be said to be the proper fruit of Christ's purchase, or properly to be
purchased by His death to them? In answer to this, we shall lay down these
Assertions, which being granted, there will be no great hazard to the main
matter.

Assert. 1. There is no saving nor eternal mercy procured to any Reprobate by
Christ's death: and so according to the Scripture Language, it cannot be said
that Christ has redeemed, satisfied for them, or born their iniquities in
their room before the justice of God, thereby to procure any such mercy to
them: because, first, to be given to Christ, to be redeemed, and to be
justified, are ever of equal extent in Scripture, and necessarily knit together
with His bearing their iniquity. Secondly, The proper and native fruits of
Christ's death, are not divided; but they all go together: So that for whom He
satisfied and to whom He purchased any thing in one respect, He did so in all.
Therefore we will find Him praying for these who were given Him, and for whose
^ake He did sanctify Himself, Ioh. 17. even when He does exclud the reprobate
world who were not of this number, from these His prayers. Thirdly, The proper
fruit of Christ's purchase, is that which is satisfaction to Himself for the
travel of His soul, etc. but no mercy, which is common to a Reprobate can
satisfy Him: for, His satisfaction consists in peculiar saving mercies, such
as actually to see His seed, to have many justified, etc. which mercies cannot
be said to be purchased to any Reprobate: and so it cannot be said, that any
saving or eternal mercy is purchased to them; for, if they were purchased to
them, then necessarily they were to be bestowed unto them; and if so, they
could not be called Reprobates. We take this for granted then, that no saving
thing is purchased to them, and that Christ cannot in any proper sense be
called their Redeemer, nor to have sustained their place and persons before the
Justice of God.

Assert. 2. We say, that yet, many Reprobates do here in time enjoy many
things, which they had never enjoyed, had not Christ suffered. Of these,
Christ's death may well be called the cause ( sine qua non) or, without which
these had not been enjoyed: such are the preaching of the Gospel, and the glad
tidings of the conditional offer of life which is made in it; yea, it may be,
that the keeping off of many temporal judgments and eternal also for a time,
does flow from this: whereby (as it were by the Gardeners intercession, Luke
13.) the cutting down of many a barren tree is for a time suspended, that
thereby the glory of Grace may be the more manifested, the honor of the
Mediator the more highly advanced, and in the close, the glory of spotless
Justice made the more clearly to shine, because of their greater
inexcusablnesse. This cannot be denied to follow upon Christ Jesus His
sufferings, in so far as they necessarily follow upon the agreement wherein
they were transacted, and upon the promises made to Him in the Covenant of
Redemption; unto all which, His sufferings are presupposed as the stipulation
upon His side: Now, it being certain that there are some Elect ones given to
Him by that Covenant in all ages of the world, and that He has a visible
Church and Ordinances granted to Him for the ingathering of them, which is so
and so to be Administrated, to wit, by gathering under Ordinances both sheep
and goats, and such like; It must necessarily follow, upon the supposition of
this transaction in these terms, that the world must continue for so many ages,
that the Gospel should be preached in such and such places, and at such and
such times, that such and such lights should shine for holding forth clearly
the truth of the Gospel; yea, that such and such common gifts should be
bestowed upon many Reprobates for the adorning of this visible Church, the
honor of the Head thereof, the furtherance of the edification of the Elect,
and many other things necessary for the attaining of the ends foresaid. And
according to the former supposition, these cannot be denied to be decreed in
the Counsel of God, and contained in the Covenant of Redemption, largely taken;
because accidentally (to speak so) and by reason of the manner of
administration concluded, they conduce to the honor of the Mediator, and to
the furthering of His design, which is to have the pleasure of the Lord
prospering in his hand.

Asser. 3. Although these former Assertions be true; yet we say, that the
saving blessings that are purchased to the redeemed by Christ's death, may be,
and are far otherwise to be, conceived, as the proper effects and fruits of
Christ's purchase to them, than any common mercy can be which follows
thereupon to any Reprobate. For first, The purchasing of the Elect, and of
saving Grace and Salvation to them, and what may tend to their good, was
intended by the Mediator in a subordination to the glorifying of His Grace in
them; and so His Glory and their good, are jointly intended in the same: this
cannot be said of the other; for, though the things, which flow from His death
be good in themselves, and though it cannot be denied but that therein also He
intends His own Glory; yet it cannot be said, that these things are purchased
by Him as advantageous to them, in respect of any fruit that should flow
therefrom unto them: because, the effect shows, that in the end they have no
advantage by them: and therefore it cannot be said, that He intended them as
advantageous to them. I know some Learned men do think, that some Reprobates,
by the power of common restraining Grace, and the force of Ordinance, are kept
from falling in many gross evils, which otherwise they might have fallen
into; and so in the end are kept from the greater degree of punishment, which
they might have been liable to: I grant that it may be said, that some civil
and formal hypocrites will be punished with a more gentle degree of wrath (to
speak so) than others, or than themselves would have been punished with, had
they not been by such common Grace restrained; yet, this must be understood
comparatively with respect to the case as it now stands, that is, a civil
hypocrite, living under the Gospel, with many common moral induements, and
giving much outward countenance to Ordinances, etc. shall be more gently dealt
with in the day of Judgment, than if he had not come that length in a common
reformation, under the means: yet, I suppose, it cannot be said, that such a
person shall have less punishment than if Christ had never died, or he had
never had any knowledge of the Gospel, or any common gifts of the Spirit, but
had lived in more profanity without the same: for, although the sins of a civil
moral hypocrite, be less in themselves than the gross profanity of a blind
heathen; yet, considering the circumstances that do aggrege the same, they will
be found to be of a more bloody dye before God. Hence, so often in Scripture,
the sin of refusing Christ in the most civil hypocrites, is aggreged beyond the
sins of Sodom and Gomorrah, Tire and Sidon, etc. Neither does this flow
causally from the Gospels being revealed to such persons, but from their
abusing and slighting of the same. What ever mercies therefore of this kind are
bestowed upon any Reprobate, they are bestowed upon them for the honor of the
Mediator, and the good of the Elect; and so, as such, must be said to have been
purchased by Christ's death. Secondly, Whatever Christ has procured to the
Elect, He has procured it by satisfying Justice for them, and by sustaining in
His own Person the curse that was due to them: so that the Lords forbearing of
them, His making offer of the Gospel to them, etc. are not only consequents,
following upon the Mediators death and the Covenant of Redemption, but are
properly purchased fruits thereof: and so the Gospel is preached to them, they
are called unto a Church State, etc. because Christ Jesus has satisfied
Justice in their name for the quarrel which the holy God had against them, and
has purchased peace and every thing needful for their Salvation; so that now,
the Lord cannot but be kindly to them, and bestow these mercies on them
according to the order and terms laid down in the Covenant; but, on the
otherside, it cannot be said, that our Lord Jesus did so purchase to the
Reprobate any of these mercies (which are indeed so in themselves) that are
bestowed upon them, or that He satisfied in their room, or in their name paid
any debt, or that the Lord is upon that account (as it were) engaged to be
friendly to them, and bestow these things on them, as was observed to be in the
case of the Elect; because, in no respect is Christ their Cautioner as having
undertaken for them. These mercies then which come to them, are rather to be
accounted consequents following upon Christ's purchase, than proper effects
thereof as to them; Yet necessarily they follow, that what properly has been
purchased by Christ to the Elect, may, according to the order laid down, be
accomplished. This will be somewhat clear by considering, Matthew. 24.22. where
it is said, except these days should be shortened, there should no flesh be
saved: yet, for the Elects sake they shall be shortened: the mercy promised
there, to wit, the shortening of those troublesome days, in a temporal mercy,
and common to many Reprobate as well as Elect, during that time; yet, in
respect of the Elect, it may be accounted a fruit of Christ's purchase and of
Gods Covenant-love; because otherwise, these whom Christ had redeemed might be
in hazard; against which, the Covenant has fully provided. But, on the other
side, as to the Reprobate, it is but a consequent of His death unto them, and
bestowed upon them not for themselves, but for the good of the Elect amongst
them, for whose sake it is said expressly, that these days shall be shortened.
And so it is to be conceived, as supponing it to be conditioned to Christ
simply, that such a tribulation shall not continue, because the performing of
the articles of the Covenant does require the same; in that case consequently
the Reprobate, living in that time and place, are sharers of that outward
deliverance; yet considering it as a Covenanted mercy and a proper fruit of
Christ's purchase, it does agree to the Elect only, for whose good it was
Covenanted; and to them it may well be called a purchased mercy. It is true
there does no consequence follow upon Christ's death, but what was foreseen and
intended by Him to follow thereupon; yet it cannot be said, that all these
consequents were intended as proper fruits of His purchase to the Reprobate, as
the mercies are that come unto the Elect: but we must acknowledge a difference
between a consequent and a proper effect; otherwise we might say, that the
greater inexcusablnesse and condemnation of many Reprobates, are proper fruits
of Christ's purchase, because these do follow thereupon, and had not followed
had He not died. And we might say, that the suspending of the shuting up of the
devil in hell in his everlasting torments, were a fruit of Christ's purchase;
because, supposing Christ to have a Church, and such work for devils, in the
exercising thereof, while it is on earth; and that Christ is to judge the
devils at the last day, and (as a part of His glory) to pass the final
sentence in reference to them, etc. It must necessarily follow upon these
suppositions, that the devils last judgment, and absolute shutting up in the
pit, must be suspended for such a long time; yet there is none that will esteem
this to be a proper fruit of Christ's purchase, though it be a necessary
consequent depending upon the same. And if any more be pleaded-for, because the
offer of the Gospel is made to many Reprobates, this may be said, that Christ's
having of a visible Church and Gospel preached therein, is properly purchased
by Him, that being necessary for the end proposed; yet, if we consider the
preaching of the Gospel, in reference to such a person, as suppose to Judas,
or, how it comes that he is a Minister thereof, We conceive it is hard to say,
that it was purchased by Christ's death as a mercy to him, as if Christ had
intended by His sufferings to satisfy Gods Justice in less or in more upon
his account. And if it cannot be said, that any satisfaction is made to God in
his name, How can it be said that properly any thing is purchased by Christ's
sufferings to him? for, this is certain, that it is Christ's death, as it is a
satisfaction and price offered in the name of any, that does procure any good
to them. Beside, Christ's bearing of the sins of any, and their obtaining of
Justification, are still linked together, as was formerly said: and therefore,
seeing no Reprobate is justified, it cannot be said, that Christ has born their
sins, and consequently, upon that account, has procured any thing to them.
This difference may be thus illustrated, as, suppose one having intended out of
a number of slaves to relieve so many, should therefore covenant a price for
them and actually pay the same, having withal this included in the bargain,
that so many other slaves should be appointed to wait on Him till these
ransomed ones were safely transported, and for that end that they should be for
a time freed from some common drudgeries that other slaves are lying under, and
be someway fitted in their apparel and otherwise as might become His honor,
and further Him in the gathering together, shipping and transporting of these
whom actually He had bought: yet still He neither minds the relieving of
these, nor does for that end pay in the least measure their ransom, but only
has this articled to Him as conducing to the good of the main bargain. In that
case, it cannot be said that He had properly bought these whom He minded never
to transport, or that any price, laid down in the principal bargain, was laid
in their name; yet, it cannot be denied but that many advantages do follow upon
that bargain to such beyond others; which yet, in the end, by reason of their
own miscarriages, might turn to their greater hurt: as suppose, they should
refuse to obey Him, or, to put on the cloths bestowed upon them, but should
abandon him and renounce their present liberty and not wait on to the end, etc.
and so procure themselves justly to be deprived of any favor, and to be
punished for their ingratitude, So may it be said in the present case: yet we
shall not much contend for words, as whether such a thing should be called a
consequent or an effect? providing Christ be not said to have sustained the
room of, or by being made sin, to have satisfied in less or more for any whom
He does not actually redeem and own for His.

The fourth Question, is, If Christ Jesus, the only absolute Redeemer of the
Elect alone, may not yet be said to have redeemed all men conditionally, and in
the laying down of His life, to have intended the purchasing of life to all,
upon this condition, if they should believe in Him? This conditional
Redemption is diversely expressed by Learned men, who in their Writings do abhor
the grosseness of the Socianian and Arminian Doctrines concerning Redemption.
Some say, that Christ died absolutely for none, but conditionally for all, that
is, that He purchased life for all, upon condition that they should believe
that He had died for them; and that God by His decree of Election has decreed
to give Faith to some and not to others, whereby Christ's death becomes
effectual to them, and not to others: which difference does yet flow from
nothing in Christ's death. They say also, that Christ, by His death, procured
freedom to all from the curse of the Law, so that that is removed from all,
except any, by not believing that Christ has died for them, shall make
themselves liable to that curse, as Cameron asserteth, page 584. This opinion
does not lay the weight of men's making themselves to differ upon themselves,
but it does acknowledge the freedom, soveraignity and power of Grace, as also
the impotencie and corruption of nature; yet we conceive it is dangerous, and
does directly contradict what has been asserted from the Text. For, 1. it
denies any, even the Elect, to be absolutely redeemed: which, though true in
some sense, to wit, in respect of the method and manner of the application of
the purchased Redemption; yet can it not be said to be true in respect of the
purchase and bargain it self, or in respect of the parties bargaining in this
purchase: because, Christ did not buy pardon of sin and Salvation to sinners
abstractly, upon condition that they should believe; but did particularly and
absolutely purchase the pardon of sin and Salvation to such and such as were
proposed to Him. And this He did, not by buying Salvation to the Elect upon
condition they should believe, without making both the condition, to wit,
Faith, and Salvation sure unto them; but He absolutely redeemed Peter, John,
and other Elect persons, by purchasing Salvation and every thing needful for
the making of it sure unto them, although in due manner these be to be
communicated according to the terms of the Covenant. 2. It does deny Faith to
be a fruit of Christ's purchase; which is contrary to what was formerly said. 3.
This does assert the Reprobate by Christ's death to be freed from the curse of
the Law, In the day that thou eatest, etc. which is not to be understood as if
upon condition of believing they were to be freed from it, if so they did
fulfill that condition; for, that is not controverted: but it must be
understood of some freedom from the curse of the Law that redoundeth actually
to the Reprobate from Christ's death. And it does suppone them to have attained
some freedom thereby, which their after unbelief and ingratitude do make void
unto them. And so they have not this freedom from the curse offered to them
upon condition of their believing, but they have it, if by their unbelief they
do not mar their right to it. Now this, so understood, will infer, that Christ
was made a curse in the room of all men, which is contrary to what is said:
for, they cannot be thought to be freed any way from under the curse, except by
His sustaining it for them. And His bearing of the curse in the stead of any,
or His taking on their iniquity, has ever their freedom following upon it, for
whom He did the same, as was formerly marked. Again, there are many of mankind
(suppose young Children, dying before any actual sin) who cannot be liable to
any other curse, but the curse of the Law; yet cannot all these (even such as
are without the visible Church and the promises) be said peremptorily and
absolutely to be saved. Beside, this will infer that either the Reprobate shall
not have the breach of the first Covenant imputed to them, or that they shall
have that debt imputed to them, which Christ Himself did pay in their name:
which is inconsistent with the Scriptures formerly mentioned. 4. This does make
Christ's death, considered as to Him, and in it self, to be equally laid down
for Peter and Judas, which the Authors of this opinion will abhor: yet, does it
necessarily follow thereupon; for, supposing Christ to die absolutely for none,
but conditionally for all, there is in that respect no more regard had to Peter
than to Judas: for, He died conditionally for Judas, and He did no more for
Peter; and so Salvation, upon the condition of believing, is made equally
possible to both. And though, in Gods purpose, Peter has Faith decreed for
him, whereby he comes to be absolutely justified; in which respect, there is a
great difference betwixt Peter, and Judas, for whom there is no such thing
purposed; yet considering, that this faith which makes the difference,
according to the former opinion, is no proper effect of Christ's purchase, but
of Gods absolute Soveraignity, as Election is, It cannot be said, that because
thereof there is any inequality in reference to Elect and Reprobate in respect
of Christ's death. It is true their acknowledging faith to be Gods sovereign and
peculiar gift, does not make the difference flow from Peter himself; yet it
cannot be said, that it does proceed from any thing in Christ's purchase, in
respect of His sustaining the person of the one more than of the other. 5. This
does also infer that Christ has paid for such as shall again be brought to
reckon for their own debt; yea, for the same debt which He has paid: now, in
Scripture, these two are ever put together, to wit, Christ's bearing the
iniquity of any or paying of their debt, and these persons being absolved from
that charge in whose name he had paid. This is so sure, that the one does
still infer the other, as was formerly marked, as Isai. 53. He was wounded for
our transgressions: whereupon it follows, by his stripes, we (to wit, we for
whose transgressions He was wounded) are healed: and again, verse. 11. He shall
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquity, that is, these whose iniquity
He shall bear, and whose debt He shall pay, they shall be certainly justified
and absolved from the same. So is it, 2 Cor. 5.21. He became sin for us, that
is, took on Him to answer for our debt, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in Him, which shows, that His end in becoming sin for
any, was, to have them actually freed from the same. The like is, Gal. 3.13,
14. He redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, etc.
that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, etc. where actual
redemption from the curse, and obtaining of the blessing, are made of equal
extent with Christ's suffering of the curse in the room of any: and so is it in
many other Scriptures. And to say, that such for whom He paid, were again to be
brought to reckoning themselves, does directly contradict the scope of these
places.

If any should say, that these Scriptures do not deny but such may be brought
to reckon for their own sin, for whom Christ did only conditionally pay the
debt; and the condition not being fulfilled by them, there is no absurdity that
they themselves should be again called to reckon for the same: as also
considering, that the Lords acceptance of such a price for them, was only upon
the fulfilling of the condition of believing, wherein they have failed. To this
we answer, First, that according to the former grounds notwithstanding of
Christ's death, payment might be exacted again, even from the Elect, if the Lord
Himself did not graciously and freely enable them to fulfill the condition,
because they are but conditionally redeemed also, and have not Faith purchased
to them by Christ's death more than the other. But because some may shift this,
we answer Secondly, That such a conditional payment is not spoken of in
Scripture, neither do these places of Scripture speak of some whose iniquity
Christ has born, who shall thereby have freedom from being called to a
reckoning; but they do speak absolutely of all for whom Christ has suffered,
and in whose name He has paid any thing to God: for, all of them give ground
for this connection, Christ has born their sin, was made a curse for them, etc.
Therefore, they shall be justified and freed from the curse, etc. And this
reasoning will not hold, except this universal proposition be presupposed, to
wit, that all whose sins Christ has born, whose debt He has undertaken, and
in whose name He has paid any price to the Justice of God, etc. shall be
justified, absolved from their debt, and not brought to a reckoning for the
same. Now, it must either be assumed, that Christ has paid a price in the name
of many Reprobates, and has born their sin before the Justice of God; and it
is evident how false the conclusion will be, Therefore the minor must be false,
seeing the major is true; Or, we must subsume thus, But none of the Reprobates
shall ever be justified or absolved from their own debt, Therefore it will
follow, that for none of these did Christ become a curse or satisfy the
Justice of God: which is a truth. If it be yet said, that His suffering in
their name, was but conditional; and so it cannot be said simply, that He paid
their debt, but upon such and such conditions only; and so He did not bare
their iniquity, but upon condition that they should believe. To this we answer,
First, This is almost one with the former objection, and may be again refelled,
thus; either that conditional bearing of their iniquity, was a paying something
in their name, or, it was not: If it was a paying in their name, and a laying
out of any price by the Mediator, Then the consequence from the former
Scriptures will still be urgent what ever the condition be; because, they
assert, that all for whom Christ has laid out His sufferings, and in whose
room He has sustained any part of the curse, etc. shall be partakers of
Justification and Life. And what ever the condition be, this conditional
Redemption supposes a price actually to have been laid down. If it be said,
that actually Christ did lay down nothing for them, and in their name, when He
suffered, but upon condition that it should be imputed to them when they should
actually believe, Then it must be said that Christ has paid for none till they
believe, because it is His purpose and Covenant with the Father that does make
His sufferings to be accounted a price for any: and if so, then Faith cannot be
said to be purchased contrary to what was formerly said. Beside, if none can be
said to be redeemed but a Believer, Then it cannot be said, that Christ has
paid any thing in the name of any Reprobate, seeing he has paid only for them
who shall believe, which no Reprobate can do. Further, though the imputation of
Christ's laid-down price be conditional; yet the paying of it is absolute: for,
He (according to this opinion) did really lay it down; and if such should after
believe, there were need of paying no more in their name. Yea, what is actually
laid down, is supposed to be equivalent to their Redemption, and with what is
laid down for the Elect: otherwise, the price would not be proportioned to the
supposed end, to wit, Redemption, and so it would be nothing.

That we may follow this conditional Redemption a little, It is otherwise in
some things expressed by some others, thus, to wit, that Christ in some sense
is a ransom for all, and yet not in that special manner as for His people: He
has brought others under the conditional Gospel Covenant, but them under the
absolute: He has according to the tenor of this Covenant procured Salvation to
all, if they will believe; but He has procured for His chosen, even this
condition of believing. Thus Learned Baxter, in His Saints Rest, Part, 1. page
153. which may be yet variously understood as to one branch thereof: for,
though he does there speak of all to be conditionally redeemed, and elsewhere
often hints this, yet by several expressions of his, it would seem to be
restricted, at least, in a special manner to the visible Church: because, he
says these all, are by His death brought under the conditional
Gospel Covenant, which elsewhere, (to wit, in the Appendix to his Aphorisms,
page 241. in the last Edition) is acknowledged to be that which is revealed and
offered in the Church. And in that part of his Saints Rest, page 156. it is
said, not to be offered to all; and that expression is used by him, that the
conditional Covenant is made with all, at least, with the Church. Also others
have many hints to this purpose, and the Learned Tuisse does cite this saying
out of Verstius, lib. pre. page 195. Et sane nisi pro voca^is saltem omnibus,
mortuus esset Christus, tum fraestr^ ^i omnes credere ^uberentur. Therefore it
will be meet to touch a little this conditional Redemption, as it may relate
to all men indifferently, and more particularly, as it may relate to the
visible Church; and because of the nearness of the matter and grounds thereof,
both may be done as we go on. Although this opinion, as thus expressed, may
seem more plausible; yet we conceive, that it will neither be found agreeable
to the former grounds, nor to the Text, nor to reason, nor yet any way more
conducing to remove, or prevent these difficulties which are supposed to follow
upon the Doctrine of particular Redemption, as it was formerly explained: for,
first, what we urged from these Scriptures that speak but of one absolute
Redemption, and do ever knit Justification and life with Christ's bearing the
iniquity of any, or satisfying in their room, will also be binding here against
this conditional Redemption. For, if any way Christ has born their iniquity,
Then they must be justified: otherwise, the former connection, which is so
strongly urged in the Scripture, will fail: or, if he has not born their
iniquity nor paid any thing in their name, Then it cannot be said, that He has
any way died for them or redeemed them. Secondly, The Text will confirm this,
for, in it, all men are divided in these two ranks, to wit, the past-by body of
Nations and Kingdoms, etc. and these few that are redeemed out of these
Tongues, Nations, etc. But this conditional Redemption can agree to neither
member: Therefore, it cannot be admitted. It cannot be applied to the redeemed
who praise; for, they are all absolutely redeemed and made Kings and Priests to
God, etc. nor will it agree to the past-by multitude of the un-redeemed that
are contradistinguished from the former; because, First, The place does assert
the actual enjoyment of friendship with God, (and, being made Kings and
Priests, etc.) to be the proper fruit of Christ's blood and purchase, and not
the having of these things made possible upon a condition, as was formerly laid
down. Secondly, Because that past-by multitude, is expressly contradistinguished
from the redeemed, and these who partake of the benefits of Christ's purchase:
and therefore the one being called the redeemed, the others may be called
non-redeemed: and they are distinguished from, and opposed to the other here,
not by any distinction simply founded upon the effect of Christ's death, to wit,
that the one are made Kings and Priests, and the other not; but it looks to
the meritorious cause procuring these effects, and making them certain to the
one, and leaving others without all title thereunto, to wit, Christ's death; and
so it is to be understood, we are redeemed by thy blood, that is, Thou have
paid the price of our Redemption in our name by Thy blood, which has not been
done in respect of the multitude of these same Nations, whereof we are a part.
Thirdly, There is but one Class of the redeemed, and these are absolutely
Redeemed; so there is but one Class distinguished from these, and these must
be such who are no ways redeemed: for, what must be said of the one as to
Redemption by Christ's blood, must be denied of the other; for thus not to be
amongst the redeemed, is indeed to be un-redeemed. This will strongly militate
against any who should restrict this conditional Redemption to the visible
Church: for, that would make, upon the one side, two Classes of such as are
redeemed, to wit, some absolutely and some conditionally to be such, whereas
the Text does acknowledge but one: and it would also constitute two Classes of
the un-redeemed, to wit, some that are without the visible Church and
conditional Covenant, and some that are within; whereas it is clear, that
these within the Church, who belong not to Christ, are equally
contradistinguished from the redeemed with others that are without.

In the third place, This opinion will not be found consistent with reasons
drawn from the Scripture, as, 1. It cannot be denied but Christ's satisfaction
and intercession must be of equal extent, seeing they are both parts of His
Priestly Office; and it is His satisfaction that regulateth (to say so) His
intercession: Now, it is clear in Scripture, that Christ's intercession is
qualified by Gods Decree of Election, therefore He prays, ( Ioh. 17. For
these whom God has given Him: whereby it is not only implied, that He does not
pray for the world which were not given Him, but expressly He does exclude them,
I pray not for the world, says He, verse. 9. Therefore, it must be supposed,
that He did no way die for the world, seeing He does not pray for them, because
He did not satisfy for them; and He did not satisfy for them, because they
were not given unto Him. And we can no more say that there is a conditional
satisfying for, and redeeming of, all, than we can say, that there is a
conditional praying for all; and we cannot say, that there is a conditional
intercession for all, seeing He does so expressly, and absolutely exclude the
Reprobate world from His Prayers; and upon that implied ground, because God did
not own them as His, and had not given them to the Mediator to be owned and
redeemed by Him, Therefore He does solemnly disown them.

If it be said, that, in that place, our Lord Jesus does only pray for these
who did actually believe? The very contrary will be found in the Text: for, (
Ioh. 17.20.) He intercedeth for all who should after believe; and through the
Chapter, for all these whom God had given Him. Beside, it were hard to say,
that our Lord Jesus did comprehend all that were unrenewed under the title
World; for so, many unrenewed Elect would have been excluded. Seeing therefore
Christ excludes the Reprobate world from His intercession, even when He
includes many unrenewed Elect then lying in profanity and nature, The former
Argument does bind the more strongly. From which also we may remove a second
exception, to wit, that by World there are understood such as Christ foresaw
should reject the Gospel and continue members of this world, notwithstanding of
His death and call, or such as did for that time violently reject the same. To
this we say, that if Christ meaned by World, present contemners and rejecters,
then would many Elect be excluded, as is said. Again, if he understood such as
He foresaw would continue in opposition and unbelief to to the end, Can it be
reasonably thought that He would immediately offer Himself in their room upon
condition of their believing in Him, whom He did not only foresee to continue
in unbelief and never to perform that condition; but also whom He had instantly
in express terms excluded from His prayers and intercession as having nothing
to do with them? and so according to the former ground, to wit, that His
intercession and satisfaction are of equal extent, they cannot be understood
any way to come in under either of them.

If it be said, that His intercession respects only the efficacy of His
death; and therefore must be bounded with the Elect: This will say, that this
satisfaction also must respect that only, seeing they are of equal extent.
Again, why prays He only in reference to the efficacy? It is because He has
ground to own no more as Gods or His; and that will say, that He will not
satisfy for them either. Lastly, He boundeth His dying and praying in these
words, ( verse. 19. of the forcited Chapter,) for their aches sanctify I my
self, to wit, for their sakes for whom He prayed; in their room al^anerly did
He devote Himself to be a Sacrifice.

Secondly, In the first ground, laid down, we said, That Christ's satisfaction,
as to the object thereof, was to be regulated by the Fathers proposal to Him;
so that He died and satisfied for such, and such only as was proposed to Him.
It being cleared there, that all were not proposed; therefore there is no
warrant to say, that Christ in any respect, did be^^ the iniquity of any other.
Neither can there be any end of His undertaking to pay for more than was
proposed to Him; neither can it be thought, that any other was proposed to
Christ, but such as were given to Him absolutely to be redeemed; because there
is no word in Scripture that speaks of proposing any to Christ to be bought,
but the Elect, who, for that cause, are peculiarly named by this title, those
that were Christ's own, and given to Him, etc. If any should say, that they were
conditionally given and proposed (which indeed must be supposed in this
conditional Redemption) Then (beside what was said) it may be asked, If the
Father, by proposing such, did intend their Redemption, and their obtaining of
any benefit by Christ's death? If He did, Why is it not effectual? If He did
not, To what end was such a proposal made by the only wise God? Again, we may
conceive this conditional proposal to be thus upon the Fathers side, I do
propose and give such and such persons to Thee that are not Elected, to be
redeemed, and to partake of The Redemption, providing they shall believe, and I
will absolutely exact the price from Thee, which yet is not to be imputed to
them till they believe; and yet they cannot believe except God give the same
freely, according to the first opinion; or, till Christ purchase the same,
according to the second: yet (might He say) neither do I mind to give it to
them, nor mind I to propose it to be bought by Thee for their use. This
certainly would not lo^^ like the Wisdom, Sovereignty and Grace that do shine
in the bargain of Redemption: yet, such a conditional proposal must be
supposed as in these terms. And so they are proposed to the Mediator to be
redeemed by Him, when yet the necessary mids, and supposed condition of their
Redemption is never so much as proposed to be purchased, but the contrary is
included; And so at the most, the Father proposes but one part of their
Redemption to the Market, to wit, the end without the mids: and therefore
consequently, the Mediator must undertake for paying for the end, when He has
not the mids by which it is attained, made (to speak so) redeemable, because it
is never offered to the market: and what wise man would make such a bargain?

Thirdly, It seems not consistent with reason and equity to say, that such as
are by Gods Sovereign decree absolutely reprobated, and decerned to be made to
reckon for their own sins; and yet to say, that our blessed Lord Jesus should
have that debt imputed to Him, and thereby conditionally to purchase for them a
freedom from that curse which is already determined to be executed justly upon
them: for, the decree of Reprobation must be, even in order of nature, as soon
as the decree of Election. Now, it being clear, that the Work of Redemption
does presuppose Election to have preceded; so that in the order of nature, and
according to our uptaking of things, we must conceive Gods absolute Electing of
some to Eternal life, to be prior to the Covenant of Redemption, because these
who are given to Christ in that Covenant, are said to be Gods own by virtue of
that decree before that, Ioh. 17.6. which will infer that Gods absolute decree
of Reprobation must be so also, seeing the decree of Election does necessarily
infer the decree of Reprobation; for, where there is an Election of some, there
is a pretirition of others. And therefore, we must say, that Christ
conditionally had proposed to Him, and did conditionally pay according to that
proposal, the debt of many, that by a prior decree were absolutely reprobated.
And as to the last opinion hinted, there being but one decree of Reprobation,
It will follow that either all these must be under a conditional Redemption,
which yet cannot be said so confidently, as to such who are without the
conditional Covenant; or, all must be excluded therefrom.

Fourthly, From the grounds of this opinion, it may be thus argued, If Christ
redeemed any Reprobate conditionally, Then the performing of this condition is
either in their own power, or it is a singular gift of God procured by Christ's
death. The first they will not assert who own this opinion, as was formerly
observed: Therefore it must be something that can no otherwise be procured but
by Christ's purchase. And according to what is said, it is not purchased to any
Reprobate, though it be necessary for their obtaining of any benefit of Christ's
purchase, Therefore it cannot be said, that they are redeemed. For, at most, it
says that they are redeemed upon a condition, which they can never possibly
perform; and this will infer, That they are not redeemed at all: for, a
peremptory exclusive conditional offer, where the condition is impossible, and
known to be so to the offerer, is equipollent to an absolute refusal, as,
suppose one would offer to relieve another from bondage, or, to pay their debt
for them, upon condition, and no otherwise, that such a person should at once
drink up the whole sea: that offer so circumstantiated, could not be looked
upon otherwise but as an absolute refusal. Again, if He has not purchased
Faith to them, Then there is no saving Grace purchased to them. And if neither
Faith nor any saving Grace be purchased to them, It will be hard to say, that
Christ has died for such, for whom no saving Grace is purchased.

Fifthly, We say further, If all men be conditionally redeemed, Then we must
say that all the midses necessarily concurring in the Work of Redemption for
making of it complete, must be conditionally purchased also: for, as by the
acknowledged ground, that is called absolute Redemption, wherein Faith and all
the midses are absolutely purchased, So it will follow, that in this
conditional Redemption all these midses must be conditionally purchased: for,
the end and midses are in one bargain; where the one is purchased, the other is
purchased; so where the one is absolutely purchased, the other is so also: and
therefore where the one is conditionally purchased, the other must be so also:
but it cannot be said, that the midses, to wit, Faith, Regeneration, and other
Graces, are conditionally purchased, because this will be the sense thereof,
that Christ has purchased Faith in Himself to such persons upon condition that
they should believe in Him: which, I suppose, none will affirm. It will follow
therefore that they cannot be said to be conditionally redeemed, even as to the
end.

Sixthly, If any conditional Redemption be supposed to be, or, if Christ be
said to have paid the debt of all even conditionally, Then this must be looked
upon as a singular effect of Gods Grace, and a special evidence of the
excellent freeness thereof for provoking the hearts of all such to praise for
the same: now, such a mould of conditional Redemption as is proposed, does no
way look like Grace, nor tends to the engaging of such as are so redeemed to
bless and magnify God: Therefore it is not to be admitted. That it does not
look like Grace, will easily appear by considering, 1. that Grace is every way
Grace, else it is no way Grace (according to an ancient saying of Augustine)
that is, it is Grace in the end, and Grace in respect of the midses also. But
here, whatever may be said of the end, sure there is no Grace in respect of the
midses, seeing no necessary and effectual mids for attaining of the end, is
provided for in this supposed bargain of conditional Redemption: Therefore, it
can neither be said to look like a bargain of Grace, nor yet to tend to the
commendation thereof. 2. We may consider, that as to the effect or end, this
bargain does not make the same free unto these that are comprehended under it:
for, it leaves them to perform a condition for obtaining of the end, and that
in their own strength without furnishing them for the performance of it, even
though they be of themselves in an incapacity to perform the same: and how
unlike this is to a Covenant of Grace, may easily be gathered. 3. This
conditional Redemption, does neither make the effect, supposed to be
purchased, certain, nor possible: certain, it cannot be, seeing it never comes
to pass: possible it is not, seeing it depends upon a condition, which (as it
is circumstantiated) is simply impossible; yea, and is supponed to be so in the
Covenant of Redemption: for, we must look upon this condition, in respect of
its possibility, not only with regard to men, as men endued with natural
faculties; but we must look upon it with respect to men as they are in their
corruption incapacitated to do any thing that is spiritually good, such as this
act of believing is. Now, in the Covenant of Redemption, it is supposed, not
only that Faith is necessary; but also that man is corrupt, sold under sin; and
so cannot of himself (except it be given him) believe: and yet, in this same
Covenant, It is agreed, that Faith be purchased and bestowed upon some, because
of the former reasons; and even then, such who a^e supposed conditionally to be
redeemed, are past-by, and deliberately no such thing is capitulated-for
concerning them. Therefore the effect must, notwithstanding of this, be still
impossible. And if so, Can it be said to be of Grace, which is so clouded in
the terms thereof, and does neither make any good possible to these who are
comprehended in the same, nor give through occasion to glorify Grace as
shining in the freedom, comfortablnesse and refreshfulnesse thereof? and in
effect, it seems rather to obscure Grace, than to manifest the same: and
therefore ought not to be pressed in the Church. For, a conditional
transaction in this mould, would be, as if one should be said to have paid the
Turks for so many slaves, to be sent home to him in such and such Ships, as
himself only could send for them; and that this purchase should be valid, as to
these slaves, upon condition allanerly that they should return in such and such
Ships unto him; and yet in the mean time he never intend to send these Ships
for them, but in the same bargain conclude that Ships should be sent only for
such and such others; would not these slaves necessarily continue under their
bondage? and, would this so be accounted a Redemption amongst men, or yet a
wise conditional bargain? and is that to be attributed to the only wise and
gracious God and our blessed Lord Jesus, which is, upon the matter, the same?
to wit, that our Lord Jesus should pay the debt of so many, upon condition that
they should believe in Him, by such Faith as He only can procure unto them; and
withal, that in the same Covenant it should be expressly capitulated, that our
Lord Jesus His sufferings should be accepted for procuring of Faith to some
others allanerly, and to none else; whereby these, supposed to be conditionally
redeemed, are absolutely excluded upon the matter? This conditional Redemption
therefore is not to be contended-for.

Lastly, Besides these, this opinion will infer many absurdities and
intricacies not easily extricable, as, First, If Christ Jesus has died for all
conditionally, Then it will follow, that either He died equally for all, or one
way for some, and another way for others: to say, He died equally for all, is
absurd, and acknowledged to be so by the Asserters of this opinion: and of this
we spoke in the former part of this Question. If it be said, that He did in a
different manner die for the Elect, and for these that are not actually
redeemed, Then it may be enquired, wherein this difference does consist? for,
it must either be in the matter, or price (to say so) that is given, to wit,
that He gave more for those whom He absolutely redeemed, than for these whom He
only did conditionally purchase; or, it must be in His intention in the laying
down of His life, and in the Fathers will in ordering of the same, to wit, that
it was not Christ's intention, nor the Fathers will to bestow Faith upon such
and actually to redeem them; and so to have His death accepted as a
satisfaction for them, as He had condescended in respect of others: If the
first be said, to wit, that Christ has given more for the one nor for the
other; Then it will follow, that Christ has not satisfied for these who are
said to be conditionally redeemed, because He has not paid sufficiently for
them. Beside, it will not be found in Scripture, that Christ has paid a part
of the debt of any, where He has not paid it all. If it be said, that the
price, materially considered, was equal, Then it will follow, that Christ
suffered as much wrath and curse materially for Judas, as He did for Peter:
which will not look like the peculiarity of that love that appears in Christ's
suffering for any; nor yet sound well to the thankful heart of a redeemed one,
as if Christ had paid no more for him than for Judas. If it be said, that the
difference is in Gods purpose, and Christ's intention, who did design these
sufferings to purchase Faith to the one, and so to make their Redemption
effectual; which was not purposed in reference to the other. To this we say,
1. If the price laid down be equal in reference to all, Then it would seem just
that Judas should have no less fruit thereby than Peter, seeing no less was
paid for him; But, 2. we say, That this Answer does confirm our Arguments for,
if it was not the purpose of the Father and the Mediator, that the fruits of
Christ's death should be effectual to such and such, Then Christ's death cannot
be called a satisfaction for such; because His death is regulated in its extent
according to that purpose, and is a satisfaction for none, but such for whom it
was purposed to be made effectual: for, to make it a satisfaction for any, not
only is it necessary that there should be a sufficient price, but also that it
should be intended to be paid and accepted, as such, for such and such persons:
Therefore, seeing it was not intended for them as such, they cannot any way be
said to be redeemed by Christ's death, seeing still the purpose and intention of
the Parties contracting, is wanting, without which it can neither be a
Satisfaction, nor a Redemption. If it be said, that there was an intention to
make a conditional Redemption. Answ. This being understood as contradistinct
from the absolute Redemption, as necessarily it must be, its as much as to say,
that the Father and Son in the Covenant of Redemption did intend for such and
such persons, in stead of a conditional Redemption, a non-redemption, or,
ineffectuall Redemption; and so it comes to this, that their Redemption was
never intended at all.

A second absurdity, is, that this seems to imply a contradiction, to wit,
that the Reprobate, whom God has passed-by, are redeemed by Christ's death;
yea, that the unredeemed are redeemed: For, if the redeemed be distinguished
from others in this place, Then these to whom they are opposed must be
unredeemed. Neither can it be said, that the opposition is not ad idem, because
the one are absolutely redeemed, and the other conditionally; for, upon the
matter, the denying of an absolute and effectual Redemption, is the denying of
any Redemption at all. Again, as to the first part, if any say, that though
Christ died for all men, yet did He die for no Reprobate as a Rep^bate: which
some of late (even walking under the name of Orthodox) do assert, because it is
absurd to say, that Christ died for any Reprobate. We Answer, In Christ's
Redemption, the Elect are considered as Elect; for, them He redeemeth
absolutely: Therefore, on the contrary, He must consider others as Reprobates,
or at least as not Elected; And can any be considered as not Elected, but he
must also be considered as a Reprobate, seeing there is not a mids? Therefore,
either Christ must be said to redeem all men, without respect either to
Election or Reprobation, which is false, because the Elect are in all the
business of Redemption considered as such; or, He must be said to die for the
Reprobates as Reprobates, which is the absurdity they would shift: or, it must
be said, that in the laying down of His life, He had no respect to them under
any consideration: which is the truth. For, the decree of Reprobation, being in
order of nature, and according to our conception, prior to the decree and
Covenant of Redemption, as was said, such as are contained therein, cannot but
be looked upon under that consideration. And, by the way, it would not seem
inconsiderable as to our purpose, to think, that before this transaction of
Redemption were concluded (to speak according to our uptaking of first and last
in Gods purposes) He should determine concerning the ultimat estate of all men
by His decrees of Election and Reprobation, and when marches are rid, and
bounds (never to be changed) set, then to come to the transaction of
Redemption. Which certainly must suppose, that He intended not to confound the
difference He had made by that after-covenant, but thereby to provide a mean
for making the decree of Election effectual; which mids was necessary for
this, but not necessary as for the other.

A third absurdity, is, that this does extend Christ's death further and makes
it more common than the Scripture does: for, in Scripture, Christ is said to
die for His People, Matt^. 1.21. for His Sheep, Ioh. 10.11, 15. to gather the
sons of God, Ioh. 11.52. for His own, Ioh. 17. verse. 6. with 19. and such like.
And in this place, it is said to be for some of all Kindreds, Tongues, and
Nations, and not for all indifferently. Now, according to this opinion, Christ
may be said not only to die for His Sheep, but for all and every Man, etc.
There are two special Objections against this, The first, is, That although
Christ be said to die for His Sheep, and to have redeemed some out of every
Nation, etc. yet says a late Learned Abettor of this opinion (to wit, Dallaeus
in his Apology,) that it will not follow; because He died for these, Therefore
He died for no other; more than it will follow from Paul's word, Gal. 2.20. He
loved me, and gave Himself for me, Therefore He did love and gave Himself for
no other. It is sad, that Learned men should so please themselves, to shift
Arguments: for certainly, a clear difference may be observed between Pual's
saying, Christ gave His life for me, and between Christ's saying, I laid down My
life for My sheep: this does expressly hold forth Christ's differencing of these
for whom He was to die, and His contradistinguishing of them from others who
were not of His Sheep, nor given to Him; and therefore for them He was not to
lay down His life: whereas that word of Paul's, is not spoken to
contradistinguish him from any other Believer, but to comfort himself in the
application of that truth to himself, that Christ who died for His Sheep, did
also lay down His life for him as one of them. Again, when Christ speaks of
His People, of His Sheep, and of His Own in this case, He does particularly (to
say so) consider them as a species or kind of people by themselves, and
differenced, in the respect mentioned, from others, as the scope clears: but
when Paul speaks of himself in the application forsaid, will any think that
he speaks of himself as differenced from all, and not rather as one
individual of the species foresaid? Therefore although we may conclude thus,
God has made man a reasonable creature according to His own Image, Therefore
no other creature is such, because, by this qualification, man; or that species
(to say so) is differenced from all other creatures on earth; yet, it will not
follow, Peter is a reasonable creature according to Gods Image, Therefore no
other man is so: because Peter is but an individual^ person under the same
species with others. Just so is it here, Christ's Sheep, Own, People, etc.
denote a species, as it were, differenced by such relations from others,
whereas Paul is but an individual Believer comprehended under the same.

A second Objection, is, That many other Scriptures do assert Christ to be
given, and to have laid down His life for the World: Therefore it cannot be
absurd to say, that in some sense Christ has redeemed all: and particularly
that place, Ioh. 3.16. is urged (for our scope suffers us not to digress to
more) to wit, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son; that
whosoever should believe in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
In reference to which place, we say, 1. That the scope is not to show, that
Christ was given for all the World, taken distributively, that is, for every
person that should be in the World, because it is only brought-in here to
confirm this general sum of the Gospel which is laid down, verse. 15. That
whosoever believes in Christ, should not perish but have eternal life. Now,
verse. 16. is brought-in as a confirmation of this; for (says He) God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son, for this very end, That whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. Where Gods end in
giving of His Son, is mentioned to be a ground of quietness to all that should
believe, and will bear that Universal well, whosoever believes are redeemed,
and may expect the benefits of Christ's Redemption; because the justifying and
saving of such, was the end for which God sent His Son: and to extend the place
any further, will not be consistent with the scope thereof. If it be said, that
Gods respect and love to the world indefinitly, is mentioned here; Be it so,
yet that will not infer, that because He had respect to the world, That
therefore He intended that Christ should die for all and every individual
person in the world; but, it will only infer this much at most, as if we said,
in common speech, such a Christian King, or potent man had such a respect to
Christians, or to men of such a Nation, as to send such a great sum to redeem
so many of them as he particularly condescended upon, from the bondage of the
Turks: it may well be said, that such a great man had respect to Christians or
to such a Nation, because he purposed to redeem many of them when he took no
thought of others; yet it cannot be said, that he intended the redeeming of
all, either absolutely or conditionally, seeing he did appoint the price given,
to be paid for such and such as himself thought meet to redeem, and not for
others: Just so is it here in this case, at the most; and so Gods respect to
the world, may be opposite to His passing-by of all the fallen Angels. Again,
secondly, we say, that if World, in this place, be to be understood of
particular persons, and an universality of them, It must be understood of the
Elect World, as in the Verse following is clear, where Gods purpose of sending
His Son, is expressed to be, that the world through Him might be saved. Now,
there can no other universality be thought to be intended, to be saved by God
(as was formerly cleared) but the universality (to speak so,) or, the World, of
the Elect. Neither will the reading be absurd, to understand it thus, That God
so loved the Elect World, that He gave His only begotten Son to death for them,
that by their believing on Him they should not perish, but have eternal life.
And so this place will be interpreted by the parallel thereof. 1 Ioh. 4.9. In
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him: for, us and we, in
the one place, are equipollent to world and whosoever will believe, in the
other. That thus it is to be understood, appears in this, that even according
to the grounds of this opinion there can none be expected to believe but the
Elect; and in the Text, there are none profited by this fruit of Christ's love
to the world, but the Believers: Therefore this love, which gives this gift,
must be said to respect the Elect only, especially considering, that it is in a
matter which is the evidence of Gods most special love, as was formerly said.
Only, it is expressed in this general, whosoever shall believe, etc. because
the extending of it, in this indefinit expression, does sure best with the
proposed mould of the offer of the Gospel, which is not to invite men to
believe, because they are particularly elected, or redeemed; but to invite men
to believe, because God has promised to save such as believe, and because He
does by the outward Ministry call hearers thereunto. And this is the more to
be observed, because Christ here, as a good Minister of the Gospel, is
preaching to Nicodemus, and laying before him the sum of the Gospel, and that
which must be the object of his faith; and therefore it was necessary that He
should take that way of preaching these truths to him, so that as upon the one
side, He does hold forth Gods peculiar respect to the Elect World; so, upon the
other, He does hold forth Gods acceptance of all whosoever shall believe, that
the peculiarity of the Redemption may not stumble any in their approaching to
Christ, who have the offer of the Gospel made unto them: for, the Word says in
sum, a Believer cannot fail of Salvation, seeing God had that respect to His
Elect, as to give His only begotten Son to purchase this unto them: and this is
to be preached in these indefinit terms, and cannot but be true, seeing it is
the revealed will of God.

A fourth difficulty following this opinion, is, That it will be hard to
conceive how Christ could conditionally die and lay down His life for the
redeeming of many who were actually already condemned in Hell: yet, this
Universal conditional Redemption will infer this, otherwise the Reprobates,
who lived before Christ's death, were not so much obliged to Him as these who
did succeed. If it be said, that although Christ actually died in time, yet the
transaction was eternal before any man lived in the world. This will not remove
the difficulty, because, though it was transacted before time; yet, no
question, it was so regulated as it might be performed in time. Now, can it be
supposed that the transaction was in these terms, that the Mediator should die
and lay down a price for so many Elect, who by the virtue of His death were to
be brought to Glory before His sufferings; and that also He should pay so much
in the name of so many Reprobates, who for their own sins were to be actually
damned at the time of payment? And whatever be said of the transaction, yet
when it came to Christ's suffering, it must either be said, that these were
scored out, so as Christ did not bear their iniquity, or die for them in any
respect; or, it must be said, that before Gods Justice, Christ did bear the
iniquity, and pay in the name of such as were actually in Hell, suffering for
their own sins at that same instant of time.

Fifthly, It may be asked, what does become of all infants, whether in the
Visible Church, or without it, who die in their infancy? According to the
former grounds, it will be hard to determine: for, none can say, upon the one
side, that they are all absolutely redeemed and saved, there being no warrant
in Scripture for this; on the other side, to say, that Christ died for them,
upon condition that they should believe in Him, cannot be well understood: for,
though some of them be within the conditional Covenant made with the Church,
and therefore cannot be more rigidly constructed of than these at age; yet are
they not in a capacity to perform acts of Faith, and to fulfill that condition:
and this incapacity does not merely flow from men's corruption, as it does in
men at age; but is natural to young ones, as not to understand, speak, or
walk, are: now, it were unreasonable to say, that such children who die in
their infancy, were redeemed by Christ, upon condition that they should
understand, speak, walk, etc. or, of a child dying in such a condition (suppose
it be one not absolutely redeemed) It cannot be said, that that child was
redeemed upon this condition, that it had walked, spoken, etc. when as yet it
was not (possibly) of one hours age. Again, can it be said of children within
the Visible Church, which are not absolutely redeemed, that it is
indeterminable whether Christ did die conditionally for them, or not, at least
till they come to such an age as they themselves may act Faith? Neither can it
be said here, that He redeemed Reprobate children in the Church conditionally,
as He did absolutely redeem these that are Elect, although even these cannot
act Faith: for, He purchases to the Elect saving Grace in the seed thereof,
and a new nature to be communicated to them, whereof the youngest children are
capable, seeing therein they are merely passive: But, in that conditional
Redemption, there is nothing purchased to any but upon condition that they
receive Christ offered and believe in Him; which does suppose an activenesse,
and acting to be in these to whom the offer is made: of which, children are not
capable. And if this condition could be supposed only to infer something
wherein children might be merely passive, Then this will be the meaning
thereof, to wit, that Christ redeemed such children upon condition that He
Himself should confer such and such things on them, in receiving of which, they
could only be passive: which would not look like a conditional Covenant; for,
the performing of the condition will be on Christ's side, and not upon theirs:
and so it would be absolute as in the case of the Elect children. Neither will
it remove this difficulty, to say, that children are partakers of the fathers
privileges, and are to be reckoned accordingly: for, this cannot be said of
saving privileges, so as if no Elect parent could have a Reprobate child; or,
no Reprobate parent, an Elect child dying at such an age; because these things
belong unto the Sovereignty of God, and He is not so to be bounded in respect
of all particular children. Beside, experience in the Word gives ground to us
to call it in question. It must then be understood only of federall
privileges, and that in respect of the external administration of the
Covenant: and this will say nothing to the difficulty; because the doubt is
still, what to say of children that are within the conditional Covenant in
respect of their parents, that are within the Visible Church; yet, supposing
them to die instantly, or in their nonage, they cannot be said to be
conditionally redeemed, because of the reasons foresaid.

Sixthly, If the Reprobate be conditionally redeemed, Then that Redemption of
theirs is either transacted in the same Covenant with the absolute Redemption
of the Elect, or not: they cannot be said to be comprehended within the same
Covenant, because all such as are comprehended in it, are contradistinguished
from others, as being the Lords chosen, and such as are given to Christ, etc.
Again, this Covenant of Redemption includes the means with the end; for, it is
orderd in all things and sure; which cannot be said of this conditional
Covenant: Therefore they cannot be comprehended in one. And it would not sound
well, to say, that the Elects Redemption, and that of the Reprobates, were
contained in one Covenant. Nor can it be said, that it is a distinct bargain
beside the Covenant of Redemption: Because, 1. That were indeed to grant that
it is no Redemption, seeing it is not comprehended in the Covenant of
Redemption. 2. The bussinesse of Christ's death, is only transacted in that
Covenant, where the Redemption of the Elect is absolutely concluded; because it
is the great mids designed for making of that effectual: therefore ought it,
as to the extent of its merit, to be proportioned to the object of that
Covenant, seeing by His undertaking therein alanerly, He becomes liable to
death. 3. This would infer two Covenants of Redemption, whereas the Scripture
does but speak of one. And although some speak of a conditional Covenant with
the visible Church; yet, neither can that be said to be made with all men, and
so none without the visible Church should be redeemed; neither can that be
called a Covenant of Redemption, distinct from that which is made in reference
to the Elect; because nothing can be counted a Covenant of Redemption, even a
conditional Covenant, but that wherein God and the Mediator are parties; for,
no other can determine absolutely or conditionally upon the bussinesse of
Redemption. Beside, what is revealed to the visible Church, and has the form
of a conditional Covenant, does but flow from this, as the administration,
application, or execution thereof: and therefore cannot be thought to contain
any new article concerning the extent or fruit of Christ's death, but must be
regulated by the former, and is not to be looked upon as a distinct Covenant in
it self.

The last thing which we have to say, is, that this mould of a conditional
Redemption of all men, does not bring with it any more solid way to satisfy or
remove the difficulties that are pretended to follow the former. And indeed the
way of grace being a mystery and depth which is unsearchable, and the giving of
Christ unto death being the most mysterious part of all this mystery; what
wonder is it that carnal reason cannot reach the grounds of the Lords
sovereign proceeding therein? and what presumption may it be thought to be to
endeavor such a mould of this, as may mar the mysteriousnesse thereof, and
satisfy reason in all its proud Objections? Yet, we say, this will not do it:
for, First, it does not prove any way more conduceable for the glorifying of
grace in respect of these who are conditionally redeemed, as was formerly
shown, but rather the contrary. Nor does it conduce any more to the quieting
and comforting of wakened Consciences, (whereof also something was spoken) nor
does it any way tend to make Reprobate sinners more inexcusable, as if thereby
the justice of God were more clearly vindicated: for, by this Doctrine, He did
not redeem them absolutely, neither did purchase Faith unto them, without
which, even according to this conditional Covenant, they cannot be saved; and
yet they can no more obtain Faith of themselves except by His purchase, than
they can by themselves satisfy Divine Justice, had He not by His death
interposed. Now may not carnal reason still cavil here, and say, that though
Christ has died and purchased them conditionally, yet seeing He has not
purchased Faith to them, their Salvation is no less impossible, than if there
had been no such conditional Redemption at all. Neither can it be ever
instanced, that this mere conditional Redemption did profit any person as to
life, or any saving good, more than if it had not been at all: and so the
matter upon which the pretended cavil does rise, is but altered, but no way
removed.

Secondly, Seeing the asserters of this conditional Redemption do admit of an
absolute Election unto life as we do, (at least, for ought I know) then they
will have the same cavils to meet with: for, the connection betwixt Election,
Faith, and Salvation, is no less peremptor, (so that none can believe and be
saved, but an Elect*) than the connection is betwixt Christ's dying for one and
his obtaining of Salvation; yea, the connection is no less peremptory, and
reciprocal (to say so) betwixt absolute Redemption and life, and betwixt mere
conditional Redemption and Damnation (to speak of a connection simply without
respect to any causality) and that according to their grounds, than there is
betwixt Redemption and life, and non-redemption and death, according to the
grounds which we maintain: yet, I suppose, that none will account this absolute
Election of some few, when others are past-by, to be any spot upon the
sovereign and free grace of God; or yet any ground of excuse to such as are not
thus Elected by Him: and yet without this, (as to the event,) it is certain,
that they can never believe nor attain unto Salvation; yea, supposing that
Election were grounded upon foreseen Faith, and supposing Reprobation to be
grounded upon foreseen sin, and impenitency therein; yet, now both these
Decrees being peremptorily and irrevocably past, this is certain, that no other
will or shall be saved but such as are so Elected: and so that all others, to
whom the offer of the Gospel comes, shall necessarily perish, or, the former
Decree must be cancelled, which is impossible; and this is true, although it be
past (as they say) voluntate consequente, Now when the offer of the Gospel
comes, may not carnal minds raise the same cavil, and say, seeing the Lord
foreknew that such and such would not believe, and for that cause did determine
to glorify His Justice upon them; to what end then is this offer made to such,
who are now by a Decree excluded from the same, what ever be the ground
thereof? and indeed there is no end of cavilling, if men will give way unto the
same: for, flesh will ask, even in reference to this, why does he then find
fault? and who has resisted his will? for certainly if He had pleased, He
might have made it otherwise; and seeing He pleased not to do so, Therefore it
could not be otherwise, as the Apostle has it, Romans 9.19. unto which he gives
no other answer, but, Nay, O man, who art thou that repli^st against God? shall
the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? has
not the potter power over the clay? etc. in which also we must acquiesce:
otherwise no such mould of a conditional Redemption will give satisfaction.

Thirdly, It can no more warrant the application of the fruits of Christ's
purchase to any, so as to comfort them in this conditional Redemption, more
than if there were no such thing at all: for, if the sinner believe, the
Doctrine of particular Redemption does warrant any to make application of
Christ's purchase: if they believe not, this Doctrine of conditional Redemption
gives no more warrant to make application for the comfort of any than if it
were not at all.

Fourthly, Neither does it warrant a person with any greater boldness to take
hold of Christ, or to close with the offer of the Gospel made unto him: because
that person, who is jealouse to close with Christ, upon this ground, because he
knows not whether he be redeemed by Him or not, seeing all are not redeeme^,
may be no less jealous upon this account, because he knows not if by His
death he has procured Faith to him, or not, and so if he be absolutely
redeemed; for, this is no less necessary for his peace and confidence than the
former, and yet will be as difficult to be known to any that will needs search
into what is secret, and not rest upon the revealed offer of God as the
sufficient ground and object of their Faith. And if only by actual believing,
and no otherwise, they may be assured that Faith is purchased unto them; by the
same ground also, may they be cleared, that they are redeemed by Christ; yea,
and Elected also: because there is an equal peremptory connection betwixt Faith
and all these.

Fifthly, Neither does this way and the grounds thereof give Ministers any more
solid ground to make the offer of the Gospel indefinitely in their public
Preaching: for, by the truth formerly laid down, we can assure Hearers that
whosoever believes shall partake of life and of the benefits of Christ's
Redemption; and by virtue of the general Call and Warrant which we have in the
Gospel, we may invite them to believe in Christ, require Faith of them; and,
upon condition thereof, assure them of pardon, etc. because the nature of the
administration of the Covenant of Redemption is such in plain terms; to wit,
that whosoever believes shall be saved. Also, the nature of our Commission to
preach this Gospel, does fully import the same, as it is summed, Mark 16.15,
16. for* Ministers warrant to Preach and offer Salvation, is not to Preach and
offer the same to the Elect only, whom the Lord has kept secret from them; but
it is to Preach and make offer of this Gospel, to these unto whom the Lord
shall send them, and whom He shall gather into a visible Church State, Yet,
this is done for the Elects sake among such, whom God has thought fit to
gather out among others by this Preaching of the Gospel, without signifiing to
the Minister who is Elect, and whom He has designed to believe: therefore it
is suitable to this manner of administration, that the Gospel be preached
indefinitly in respect of its call, and that indifferently, as to these who
Preach; that so while the call does reach all particularly, the Elect may
withal be gripped with the same. And, upon the grounds of this conditional
Redemption, others can do no more, but publish the offer of the Gospel
indefinitly, and assure any who shall believe in Christ, that they shall
thereby obtain life and pardon. It is true^, we cannot say that Christ has
died and satisfied for them all to whom we Preach; yet that does not lessen our
warrant to call Hearers indifferently on the terms of believing; because,
though Christ's Redemption be the ground which has procured this Gospel to be
Preached even in these terms, as from that forecited place, Ioh. 3.16. may be
gathered: and though it be that which boundeth the Lords making of Preaching
effectual; yet our Commission is bounded according to the express terms in
which it has pleased the Lord to draw up the same unto us: because the
transaction of Redemption, as it relates to the names of the redeemed, is a
secret betwixt God and the Mediator, Therefore the Book of Life is never opened
until the day of Judgment, Rev. 20. But a Ministers Commission in his
Treating with sinners in the visible Church, is a thing which He has thought
good to reveal: and therefore has done it so, as the former secret may not be
revealed, and yet the end be made effectual, to wit, the effectual calling,
and in-gathering of so many Elect. And upon the other side, these who may
require Faith of all, and plead it of them, upon this ground, that they are
conditionally redeemed; yet they cannot say to their Hearers, that Christ has
by His death procured Faith to them all, and so they leave them still at a
loss, except they betake them to the external indefinit call, which does
warrant Ministers to require Faith of all Hearers indifferently, and that
without disputing whether Christ has redeemed all or not; or whether by His
Redemption He has procured Faith to them all or not: because, Faith is a duty,
and is called-for warrantably by virtue of that call, as is said; and this we
do in so far acknowledge. And so in sum, their warrant to Preach the Gospel in
definitely, and ours, is found to be of the same extent, and to be founded upon
the same general call; Therefore there needs not be much contending for a
different Doctrine, or (as some call it) a different method to derive this
warrant from, which does so natively flow from the received truth. And though
the Scripture does sometimes use this motive indifferently to the members of
the visible Church, to stir them up to glorify God, to wit, that they are
bought with a price, as 1 Cor. 6.20. Yet will not that infer an universal or
conditional Redemption of them all, more than these places immediately going
before, ( verse. 15 and 19 where it is said, that they are members of Christ,
and temples of the holy Ghost,) will infer an universal or conditional
regeneration of them all: the first whereof, is false; the second, is absurd:
for so it would be upon the matter, that they were renewed, sanctified, and had
the Spirit dwelling in them, upon condition that it were so; seeing,
Regeneration, the Spirit, and Faith (which is a fruit of the Spirit) cannot be
separated. The like phrases also are, Chap. 3. of the same Epistle, verse.
16.17, etc. Beside, will any think that when the Apostle says, ye are bought
with a price, etc. that he does only intend that conditional Redemption which
can never be effectual, but he must be unde^stood as having respect to that
great mercy in its most peculiar respect; because he does speak of it to the
Elect as well as others, and that as having with it the greatest obligation
that can be?

Lastly, It cannot be thought that this mould of a conditional Redemption so
qualified, can be more acceptable to these who plead for an indifferent or
equal universal Redemption: because this does not any whit remove their
objections, whereby they plead for nature against the soveraignity of God; nor
answer their cavills, whereby they reflect upon the Justice of God, for
condemning men who cannot possibly (according to the case they are in) be
saved. Therefore there is still ground for them to plead man's excusablenesse,
seeing his salvation, even according to these grounds* is still impossible, as
has been formerly cleared. Neither, I suppose, will it be instanced, that any
holding the Socinian, Arminian, or Lutheran principles in these things, have
been brought to judge more favorably of that way, than of the other: But on
the contrary, may be strengthened, or rather stumbled by this, to continue in
their former errors, as finding many orthodox Divines in part to yield,
because of the supposed strength of their Arguments; and from such concessions
they have some ground given to make their conclusions the more strong: for,
this conditional Redemption does allege, that there is need to vindicate Gods
Justice, and to declare man's inexcusablenesse, and to have clearer grounds of
dealing with men for bringing them to Faith, etc. than can be consistent with
the principles that are ordinarily maintained by the Orthodox in that point;
and seeing by the length which this conditional Redemption does go, such ends
are not attained, (as has been formerly hinted) Therefore it will follow that
even more than that is necessary, and so that there can be no halting till it
be their length. Also it must stumble and strengthen them not a little, to find
orthodox Divines taking up and mannageing their Arguments, and by their
weapons, beating down the Answers which hitherto have been made thereto, and to
see them also enervating the Arguments which have been brought against them by
homologating of their Answers. Sure Cameron (the Author of this method) went as
far in several points to alley the heat of Arminians and others against this
Doctrine, as any; yet, Episcopius in his dealing with him, does load his way
with no less absurdities, nor does any whit inveigh less bitterly against him
than against others whom he dealt with; yea, in some respect he does insist
more, as alleging his way to be more inconsistent with reason and with it
self, than the way of others; because still, Cameron did assert the
absoluteness of Election, the efficacy of Grace in Conversion, and the
impossibility of frustrating the same (when God does apply it to effectuate
Conversion,) or to convert themselves without it, though he endeavored to
maintain these things upon grounds different from what are commonly made use
of. We conclude then, That these who are redeemed, are peculiarly obliged to
Christ more than any other; and yet that no other has any just ground to
quarrel with Him; this being certain, that though the reasons of His proceeding
may sometimes be unknown to us, yet can they never be unjust. And there is no
question, but these who dispute most against His way, now, shall in the day of
Judgment have their mouths stopped, when their Consciences shall convincingly
bear witness of the justice of all the Lords proceeding in this work of
Redemption, and even in their own condemnation. But, who can search in these
depths? O, the depths of the riches both of the Knowledge and Wisdom of God! O,
how unsearchable are His ways, and His judgments past finding out! To Him be
praise for ever. Amen.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. ANd I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard, as it
were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts, saying, Come, and see.


THis Chapter begins that part of this Book which is properly and mainly
prophetical. We heard of the preparation to it in the former two Chapters;
serving not only to stir up John, but all that should hear or read, to observe
the things that should be revealed. Follows now the first prophecy to be
spoken of, which is manifested to the Church by our Lords opening the seals of
the Book: But it will be needful to premit some generals, before we enter on
particulars. 1. Touching our way of proceeding. 2. Concerning the object, and
scope of the prophesies. 3. Concerning the series and order of them. 4. Some
generals observable about them, for the better understanding of them.

1. For our way of proceeding, we say, 1. That this being an obscure place, and
interpretations being many and different, we must have liberty sometimes to
propone these that be most probable; that out of them we may take what is
safest, seeing among three expositions (when a fourth cannot be given) the
overthrowing of two, is an establishing of the third. 2. There must be more use
made of humane History, and citing of men's names than ordinary, seeing the
resolving of a prophecy is in an History: and there is no Scripture-story
posterior to this. Use then must be made of others, as in the expounding of
Daniel is needful. 3. We intend not to be particular, or peremptory in
astricting or limiting applications to times, cases, or persons; seeing the same
expression may be more comprehensive than only to take in one event, or look to
one party or person, it may take in others also; it may therefore suit as well
with the scope to comprehend both, when the things included do not overturn one
another. 4. Neither will it be meet, where consistent and subordinate senses
offer, to adhere to one of them, when it may be as safe to take-in both.

2. For the object and scope of this prophecy, we conceive it to be mainly to
set out what concerns the Church; and occasionally to touch any other thing
as may serve to that end; for, it is sent for the behove of our Lord Jesus His
Servants, to arm them against trials, to keep them from being offended with
them, and to comfort them under them; beside, that God is not in this whole
Book (as in the former vision) looked on as in His Government simply, but in
reference to His Church chiefly: so it is His Churches sufferings, battles,
victories, and others as they are enemies to her, or fighting with her, that
are spoken to. 2. Because the Church was especially within the bounds of the
Roman Empire, that then did almost command the world, and because they were
most manifestly friends or enemies to her; and the effairs of that Empire being
of most concernment to the Church, there is mention made sometimes more
especially of it. 3. Antichrist being the great, and lasting enemy, and most
dangerous to Gods People, and yet pretending to be no enemy; the holy Ghost
therefore insisteth most in that particular, (describing, discovering, and
pointing him out in his rise, his followers or Church, his reign and ruin)
that Believers may be especially guarded against him, and that Christ's Church
and People may be discerned from Antichrist's Church, people, or followers. 4.
It is not purposed particularly to hold forth every dispensation in the Church,
or all changes befalling it, or happening to it, but the special and main ones,
most needful and useful to be known, and understood by the Church; therefore
whileas other prophesies are more general, this concerning Antichrist, is
specially, particularly and at length insisted on, as if the Lord intended
especially by this prophecy to meet with him.

3. For the series of the Story, this is certain, the state of the Militant
Church is holden forth from that time to the end of the World, but how it is,
there is difference. There are three opinions specially in this, 1. Some would
carry on the Story in an even line by an uninterrupted series, knitting every
Chapter at the back of another; as if the Chapters kept the order of time,
till it come to the end: But this will no ways consist with the matter
contained in these Chapters, especially Chap. 12.13, 14. which certainly is
contemporary with and expl^catory of the former visions, and so are Chap.
17.18. 2. Some make all these visions to begin and end together, as if in each
of them were a fu^l prophecy, extending from the beginning of this Revelation
to the end of the World. But this will not hold in the principal prophesies,
as will appear. 3. Some divide it in two Books; the first, closed, Chap. 5. The
second, opened, Chap. 10. and that these two have two prophesies beginning
alike, and ending at the end of the World. But it is certain that that Book, (
Chap. 5.) contains all; for, it contains the seven seals; they contain the
seven trumpets; the seventh trumpet is not blown till Chap. 11. and certainly
it contains the vials, which are the last woes and plagues. 4. We may add a
fourth opinion as a kind of midst, that is, that neither is there a continued
series amongst all the prophesies, nor yet are all the visions, or the three
principal prophesies contemporary; but that the three principal prophesies,
to wit, of the Ieals, trumpets and vials, continue the series from the
beginning to the end, and are not contemporary, properly; but that the
explicatory visions, though they be not contemporary one with another, yet are
they contemporary with these, or some part of these pri^cipall prophesies, That
is, 1. The seals preceed. 2. The trumpets succeed. 3. After follow the vials,
and that immediately, and these carry it on till the end.

If we consider the matter contained in this Revelation, it may not unfitly be
divided in two parts, each of them giving a view of the whole from the
beginning to the end; with this difference, that what is more shortly and
obscurely pointed at in the one, is more largely and plainly insisted on in the
other: for, (from Chap. 6. to the end of the 11. inclusively) there is a view
given of affairs concerning the Gospel Church unto the end. And suchlike,
(from Chap. 12. initio, to the end of this Book,) a review is given of the same
extent, to wit, from the first spreading and rise of the Gospel, unto the end
of the World: wherein what was more shortly hinted at concerning Antichrist,
his rise, and ruin, by the fifth and seventh trumpets, Chap. 9. and 11. is
more largely and fully insisted on, from Chap. 13. and forward: So that, upon
the matter, this division seems not impertinent. Yet, considering the native
form in which these prophesies and visions are delivered, and the special
periods of the Militant Church, which are by special events remarkable, and of
which the holy Ghost takes particular notice by beginning, and breaking off
purposes at them, by continuing one form of expression (to wit, by the same
types of seals, trumpets, or vials) until such a period run out, and then
altering, and proposing the succeeding matter in a different form, and under
different types, as altering from seals to trumpets; and then again, when a new
period comes, altering to vials. Considering these things, we conceive, that
the dividing of this Book in principal and expository prohesies, and
subdividing each of these again in three, will conduce most for a distinct and
clear uptaking of the matters revealed, and suit best with the form wherein it
is delivered; and by which also of it self it is divided, as will more fully
appear in our proceeding. And so the order and series of the prophesies of this
Book, are thus to be conceived,

The whole Revelation, as prophetical, is contained in that Book sealed with
seven seals, Chap. 5. The six first seals, being opened, deduce the story to
one period, to wit, to the end of the Heathen persecution, and the quieting of
the Church from that. The seventh seal bringeth-in the trumpets, Chap. 8. and
9. which contain the story of the Churches trouble by intestine enemies, until
Antichrist be at his height. The seventh Chapter contains no other matter,
but is cast in betwixt the first principal prophecy and the second, to make
way for the more clear passing from the one to the other; and especially to
prepare for, and help to understand the prophecy of the trumpets. Chap. 10,
and 11. contain a consolation for the Church in reference to that sad
condition. Then in Chap. 12, 13, and 14. is inserted an explicatory prophecy
belonging to that same time, and conduceing both for clearing the two
prophesies preceding, and also that of the vials following. Then comes the
third principal prophecy of the vials, which has its preparation, Chap. 15.
its execution, Chap. 16. and is enlarged and explained in the two last
explicatory prophesies, Chap. 17, 18, etc. unto the end of the Book.

Concerning these three principal prophesies, to wit, 1. Of seals, Chap. 6. 2.
Of trumpets, Chap. 8, 9. 3. Of vials, Chap. 16. Observe,

1. They have all Prefaces, or preparations, before them with songs for
up-stirring of the Reader at the entry. Chap. 4. and 5. are preparatory to the
prophecy of the seals, Chap. 6. Chap. 7. is preparatory to the trumpets which
follow, Chap. 8. and 9. Chap. 15. to the vials, which are comprehended, Chap.
16.

Obs. 2. that all of them have their consolation and explication intermixed
with them, or added, relating unto them, Thus the consolation of the Church,
against the persecution, intimated by the second, third, and fourth seals, is
added in that same Chapter by the fifth and sixth seals: and the explication
which is contemporary with it, is in Chap. 12. viz. the first part of it. The
consolation laid down in reference to the trumpets, is, Chap. 10, 11. And the
explication of them, (for, both the difficulty, and consolation, are expounded)
is, Chap. 12. last part, with Chap. 13, 14. The vials are of themselves
consolatory, being against the Churches enemies; yet are they particularly
explained, and insisted-on from Chap. 17. to the end.

Obs. 3. That each of these prophesies have something inserted in them, which
as a key may serve both for the understanding of the meaning of them, and
timeing of the thing contained in them. This key, is especially to be found in
the consolatory part of each principal prophecy, it being not one of the
least consolations to understand them. 4. It is to be observed, That every one
of them is linked in, with, and to another, so as the last seems to infer a
new period; as the seventh seal brings the trumpets, the seventh trumpet
brings the vials, the seventh vial again seems to look to an intervall
after the beasts destruction before the day of Judgment, and to relate to that
vision, Chap. 20, or, at least, to a chief part thereof; so that looking to the
principal prophesies in themselves, there are but three periods of the Militant
Church; but as the seventh vial contains somewhat new, and singularily
different from the former, there are four. Thus, the Churches estate is either
suffering; and that, 1. under Heathen persecuters: this relates to the seals,
and is the first period. Or, 2. it is torn and wasted under Heretics and
Antichrist: this is holden forth by the trumpets, and is the second. Or, 3. it
is aspiring to an outgate from these in a more wrestling and fighting way,
gaining ground against Antichrist, from his begun fall to his ruin, by
degrees: which is held forth by the first six vials, and that is the third. Or,
4. it is more quiet after his ruin: which takes in that intervall and
Kingdom; Chap. 20. I mean that eminent part thereof that falls under the
seventh vial, and that is the fourth. In sum the whole state of the Militant
Church, may be divided in two, 1. in a condition, more suffering; Or, 2. more
prosperous. Each of which again, may be sub-divided. Her suffering condition,
in two, 1. under Heathens; 2. under Antichrist. Her prosperous condition again,
may be considedred, as it is begun and fighting, or more quiet, after her
eminent enemy Antichrist is down: which, in all, make four periods. But
because this last of the Churches quiet condition, seems not to be of such
continuance as any of the former, it is not set down by distinct types, as they
are; and therefore the whole estate of the Church runs most in three periods
according to the principal prophesies of seals, trumpets, and vials. By period
in this discourse, understand one continued way of dispensation unto the
Church, till by some new interveening change it be broken-off, as, the
alteration from Heathen persecuters and Heathen persecution from without, unto
intestine persecutions and troubles from within, and the like. That this series
may be clear (which we will find agreeable to the nature of, and matter
contained in, these prophesies, to History, in what is past, and to reason
drawn from solid grounds in the Book it self;) we shall lay down these
following propositions, to make out, that these three principal prophesies are
not contemporary to each other, and do not deduce the state of the
Gospel Church severally from her beginning to the end of the World; and also to
make out, that these explicatory prophesies do not belong to any distinct time,
different from the former, but are to be understood as contemporary with them,
or some part of them.

Propos. 1. These principal prophesies, are not contemporary one with another,
in this respect, as if each of them did hold forth a view of the whole
Gospel Church from the beginning to the end of the World, as may appear, 1. by
the genuine order that is amongst the seals, trumpets, and vials. The trumpets
are comprehended under the seventh seal: and therefore cannot be contemporary
with the former six, except we say the last were contemporary with the first;
which is absurd: for, the second is not so contemporary with the first, nor the
third with the second. Likewise, the vials are comprehended under the seventh
trumpet, as will be clear, Chap. 11. when the seventh trumpet is expounded: and
therefore cannot be contemporary with the former six trumpets, upon the
foregoing reason. This argument presses the more strongly; because, if there
be order of time amongst the events, comprehended under the first six seals, so
that the following seal comprehends matter, in time succeeding the former,
Then must the seventh seal contain matter, succeeding in time to the sixth, as
the sixth did to the fifth: But the former is true, There is order amongst the
first six seals, to wit, the white horse comes by the first, bloody
persecution follows in the second, and so forth one succeeds another, as
will be clear by the exposition of them: And therefore the seventh must succeed
the sixth, except we overturn the whole order of the rest, which seems, for
weighty and remarkable reasons, to be so particularly mentioned by the holy
Ghost.

The same Argument also will bind the more strongly by considering the order
that is amongst the vials, and trumpets among themselves: for, if one trumpet,
or vial (accordingly as they are designed, 1, 2, etc.) be in time preceding or
succeeding to another, in respect of the matter contained in them, Then that
same order must be between the seventh seal, and the trumpets comprehended
under it; and the seventh trumpet, which has the seven vials following upon it
(for that same reason which distinguishes the second from the first, and the
sixth from the fifth) will hold also in distinguishing the seventh from the
sixth preceding, But it will be clear that the trumpets have order amongst
themselves (as appears Chap. 8. last verse, by the three woes of the last
trumpets successive one to another) and so also in the matter of the vials, as
will appear, Chap. 16. And therefore we conclude, that the trumpets which are
contained under the seventh seal, cannot be contemporary with the six former
seals, nor can the vials which fall in under the seventh trumpet, be
contemporary with the six first trumpets, much less with the seals.

2. It may be made out, by the different matter contained in these principal
prophesies, that they cannot be contemporary one with another, but must be
successive to one another: for, the seals hold forth predominant persecution by
Heathens, the trumpets hold forth the tyranny of Antichrist unto its height,
which is inconsistent with the former; the vials bring judgment on all the
Churches enemies, which is inconsistent with both: which argument will be more
clear hereafter.

3. It may be thus made out. It neither of these prophesies begin at one time,
nor end at one time; but one of them succeed to another. Then they are not
contemporary, but successive one to another: But the first is true. Ergo. 1.
They have not one beginning: the vials, Chap. 16. the first of them is poured
on them that have the mark of the beast; which beast, was not risen during the
seals, and was persecuting under the trumpets, as appears, Chap. 11.
Therefore the beginning of the vials does not contemporate either with the
seals, or trumpets. Again, the trumpets suppose a Church, unto which they give
warning, as appears by the Lords sealing, and preparing His own ( Chap. 7.)
ere the trumpets blow, Chap. 8. And therefore the first trumpet cannot
contemporate with the first seal, wherein the preaching of the Gospel, for the
begetting of a Church, is held forth, as will appear in the expounding of them.
2. It may be made out, that the close of these three prophesies do not
contemporate together: for, it is certain that the vials bring the last
judgment, as they are called ( Chap. 15.) the last plagues, or (which is all
one) the last woe, Chap. 11. and therefore they must be conceived to succeed the
seals, and trumpets, which contain, in this respect, the first plagues; for,
first and last cannot contemporate one with another. 3. Neither the six first
seals, nor the six first trumpets (for, the seventh contains a different
period from the preceding, as is said) reach in their events unto the end of
the world; for, the seventh seal (as is said) follows the sixth, and so the
seventh trumpet follows the former six: and yet, neither the seventh seal,
nor the seventh trumpet, can be said to be after the day of judgment, which
that would infer.

Yet concerning this, take these advertisements, 1. That when we name an order
or series betwixt trumpets, and seals, or amongst themselves, we mean not, as
if what is mentioned under one seal, were fully past and ended before another
were opened, and so betwixt the seals and trumpets, etc. No, that is not
meaned; for, the white horse in the first seal, and the red horse in the
second, are still riding, as we will see ( Chap. 19.) in the time that
belongs to the vials; but it looks especially to the rise(...) these, as
the white horse goes before the red, and the red before the black, and the
seals before the trumpets, and so forth, although the event, signified by the
white horse, may continue after the red is come; and so in other events. Also,
It looks to these events mentioned as in an eminent degree; as for example,
when we say the seals hold forth open persecution, and the trumpets error, the
meaning is, they ^old out these to be at a height more than ordinary, and to be
the predominant state or evil of the Church, during that time respectively. 2.
We would be advertised, that one of those may well agree, and be applied to
another time and occasion by proportion and analogy, bot not simply: As for
instance, The white horse comes first out under the first seal, and ere long
the red horse follows. This may hold Doctrinally in the general from it,
That where ever the Gospel comes, ere long the devil stirs up men to
persecute it: or, wher^ever Christ sends the Gospel, it holds forth that
His carand is there to conquer; yet, looking on the words as they are
prophetical, they hold forth the first spreading of the Gospel, and the
conquest and persecutions that followed it: Otherwise, there were no difference
betwixt this Book which is prophetical, and any other which is Doctrinall;
seeing the general dispensations which befall the Church, might be gathered
from both alike; neither would it make for Christ's scope, which is to show unto
His servants things to come, for arming of them against them.

Prep. 2. The first two prophesies hold forth the troubles of the Church; that
of the vials, the ruin of her enemies. 1. That the seals (at least, second,
third, and fourth) hold forth sad things to the Church, appears, 1. From the
fifth seal, Chap. 6. in which mention is made of many Martyrs killed for the
testimony of Jesus, which must be under the former seals. 2. In that they
desire revenge on their persecuters for their blood; whereby it appears, that
till that time they had been born down by persecuters as unrevenged, which
could not be, if the former seals contained judgment on the world.

2. That the trumpets hold forth a torn and wasted condition of the Church, and
God by them giving the alarm thereof, is evident, 1. By the Prophets
prophesying in sackcloth, Chap. 11. and the beasts prevailing against the
Saints, Chap. 13. which contemporateth with the trumpets. And 2. By this, that
when the seventh trumpet sounds ( Chap. 11.17.) it is said, that God has taken
to Him His great power, and reigned, as if under the former six His power had
lain by, because His Church was under affliction. 3. That the vials bring
judgment on the enemies, appears 1. From the Song, Chap. 11. when the
seventh trumpet sounds, and Chap. 16.^, and 6. it is the shedding of their
blood who had shed the blood of His Servants; and it is on the beast his
followers and throne, in the Chapters following. And though now and then God
took order with particular persecurers; yet such a remarkable change as that,
will not agree with a standing persecution, or (to speak so) with a state of
persecution, such as was under the former two.

Pr^p. 3. Though both the seals and trumpets hold out troubles to the Church;
yet do they hold forth different troubles, not only in time, but in nature and
from different enemies. The seals hold forth bloody cruelty from Heathens; the
trumpets, deceitful heresies and troubles from false Christians: which may be
thus gathered, 1. Concerning the seals, they are bloody to the Church, as
appears from the fifth seal, where they cry for vengeance against the
shedders of their blood. 2. That under the seals the Saints are merely passive,
and patient, in bearing out their cause with sufferings toward their enemies,
and prayers toward God: But under the trumpets, it is different, 1. God gives
them warning, that they should be active in preparing for that storm. 2. That
they are represented as striving, not only in suffering, and prayer, as to
outward enemies, but ( Chap. 11.) by prop^^cying, which agrees better to the
vindicating of truth against false Brethren, than toward these who are
altogether without. 3. The enemies are diversely described; under the trumpets,
come the false Prophet and the locusts, in a secret manner carrying on their
design. 4. The effects are different; the seals, shed blood, and take away the
lives of all Professors: by the trumpets again, the clea^ water^ of life are
imbittered, and Truth corrupted, Stars made to fall from Heaven, and especially
the Prophets persecuted, and insulted over, Chap. 11. 5. It is clear from Gods
preparing His own against the trumpets ( Chap. 7.) more than against the seals,
Chap. 6. Of which difference, this is the reason, that Christ will not keep His
people from killing swords, but will guard them from soul-murthering errors,
as by Chap. 7. compared with Chap. 9. and 4. is clear. 6. It is most clear; by
comparing the explicatory prophesies ( Chap. 12. and 13.) which are
contemporary to these of the seals and trumpets; from which may be gathered,
not only that the Church has troubles during that time; but also, that these
troubles are to be distinguished either as they proceed from the Dragon, who
waits to devour the Child, Chap. 12. which contemporates with the seals; or,
as they proceed from the beast, Chap. 13. which has horns like the Lamb, but
indeed speaks like the Dragon, and succeeds him in his seat, which
contemporateth with the trumpets.

From which we may conclude, 1. That the first period of the Militant Church,
to wit, that which belongs to the seals, is to be fixed at the close of the
great persecution by Heathens, and her meeting with new storms from within, by
the devils raising up false Teachers, and corrupt Doctrines, with great Patrons
to them, both Civil and Ecclesiastic, which is a trial of another nature, and
yet of as great concernment to her. Therefore, least being free of the former,
she should now think her self free of all, the Lord sounds a trumpet, and
gives her the alarm of this storm: which time will fall about the three
hundred year of our Lord, or thereby, when, at first, the Church enjoyed peace
by public Authority under Const^^tine, which peace was immediately marred by
the Arrian heresy, and others following it, unto which the trumpets gave
warning.

This would not be understood as if the Church wanted heresies under the seals,
or persecution under the trumpets: No, the contrary is clear; But this we mean,
1. That under the seals, persecution by blood, had its height, and was more
constant: under the trumpets again, heresies and corrupt Doctrine, had their
height, and were for the time respectively predominant in the Church. 2. We
mean, that under the seals, persecution was still growing till the change came,
as the last persecution by Dioclesian was the greatest; and that under the
trumpets, error and declining grew, till Antichrist came to his height; so that
though there may be error under the seals, yet error came not to its height
then, and was not the predominant evil which troubled the Church as under the
trumpets. 3. Although there may be persecution under the trumpets; Yet thus do
they differ, 1. In respect of the persecuters; in the one, open enemies to
Christ; and in the other, covered enemies to Christ. 2. They differ in respect
of the grounds they go upon, and the manner how they prosecute their designs
according to their respective principles.

2. Again we may conclude. The period between the trumpets and the vials, is to
be fixed at the Lords beginning to pursue Antichrist, and to make the obscured
light of the Gospel to break out, to the diminishing of Antichrists tyranny;
which will fall to be about the one thousand five hundred year of our Lord, or
somewhat ther^after: for, the first vial, brings judgment on his (that is,
the beasts) worshippers; which judgment is carried on by one vial after
another ( Chap. 16.) till he himself be cast in the lake. 2. The sixth trumpet
ends before the last woe, when the seventh is to sound: and ( Chap. 10.) it
is certified by him that swears, that the time of his reigning in a
predominant and uncontrolled way shall be continued no longer than the seventh
Angel begin to sound; at which time, the vials begin to be poured forth on him.
3. It is clear by the Song, Chap. 11. after the sounding of the seventh trumpet
wherein God is praised for avenging of the blood of His Servants, and beginning
to reign in Antichrists overthrow before the eyes of the World; which overthrow
is carried on by degrees under the seven vials, and God is praised for it at
the beginning, it becomes then so certain, though in one instant it be not
perfected.

3. We conclude, that the sixth vial ends at Antichrists casting in the pit,
Chap. 19. at the end; the seventh, at the utter overthrow of all the enemies of
the Church, and the consummation of all things, yet so as God does several
ways, and at several times plague his enemies before this, but their final
and full overthrow goes along with this.

For these prophesies, which we call explicatory prophesies, they are also
three: The first, is in Chap. 12, 13, 14. describing Antichrists rise, reign,
and begun ruin; and by the party to whom he succeeds, to wit, the Dragon,
Chap. 12. The second, is, Chap. 17, 18, and 19. holding out a particular
explication of his ruin, especially by the fifth and sixth vials. The third,
is, Chap. 20, 21, and 22. relating unto the happy estate of the Church here
and hereafter, especially under the seventh vial, as at Chap. 20 will be
cleared.

That these three must be for time contemporary unto, and for the matter
(though in more obscure types) comprehended under the principal prophesies, or
some part of them, (which was the second thing proposed concerning this series
to be cleared) may appear, 1. If these principal prophesies be linked so
together that the one of them immediately infers the other, and yet so, that
all of them together do contain a view of the Churches affairs from the
beginning unto the end, Then all these explicatory prophesies must contemporate
with some of the former, and the matter contained in them must be of that same
nature with, and relate unto, the former: But the first is clear from the
Propositions formerly laid down. 2. It will be clear by considering the matter
of both. The same thing is in the 12. Chap. that we had Chap. 6. And so the 13.
Chap. agrees with the trumpets, even as the Chap. 17, 18, etc. answer unto the
vials; with this difference, The principal prophesies show the events more
shortly and darkly; the explicatory, more fully and clearly. The first shows
the events, what is done; the second shows the manner how, and the
instruments by whom, and circumstances relating unto them. 3. That the 12.
Chap. contemporateth with the seals; the 13 and 14. with the trumpets; the 17
and 18, etc. with the vials, may thus be made out, 1. The ruin of Antichrist (
Chap. 17, 18, etc.) is evidently and undeniably contemporary with the vials,
Chap. 16. which begins and perfecteth that ruin. 2. The rise of Antichrist
and his reign ( Chap. 13.) does immediately go before his ruin, and so
precedeth the vials immediately; and therefore must contemporate with the
trumpets, which do also immediately go before the vials. 3. The Dragons
pursuing the Church, ( Chap. 12) is immediately antecedent to the beasts rise,
Chap. 13. and so must contemporate with the seals, that immediately go before
the trumpets, which contemporate with the beasts rise, according to that
certain rule, quae convenient uni tertio, convenient inter se, that is, if the
seals belong to the time that goes immediately before the trumpets, and the
persecution of the Dragon ( Chap. 12.) belong to that time also, Then they must
belong to one and the self same time, and so in the rest. Or thus, to the same
purpose, The seals contain the Churches infancy and first trialls, and the 12.
Chap. undeniably does the same; Therefore they are contemporary together. The
beast ( Chap. 13.) succeeds the Dragon, as the trumpets do the seals, which
proves again that the beast, Chap. 13. and the trumpets are contemporary; so
also must the vials which succeed the trumpets be contemporary with that
reviving state of the Church, Chap. 14. which immediately depends upon the
beasts height, Chap. 13. And this seems to be native to the form of the
types, the holy Ghost minding to set out things successive one to another by
one manner of expression in seven types; and when He stops, or digresseth to
set down what is further needful, for preparation unto, consolation against,
amplification, or explication of things, contained in these, He takes himself
to an other manner of expression; as after the trumpets, Chap. 9. until the
16. and again, when He returns to the series of the Story to follow on where
He left, He takes up His former way of setting forth events by sevens, as He
does in the 16. Chapter. And no other reason can be given why He interupteth
that manner of expression, and returns to it again, but to help us to know
what part of this prophecy to subjoyn to another, and what part of it to take
as an explicatory repetition of something already said. This we judged
necessary to premise in the entry, that we may the more clearly proceed
according to the mould proposed, From which in general we may Observe,

1. How various the case and state of Christ's Church is here on earth,
sometimes better, sometimes worse, but most ordinarily under the cross, there
being two prophesies holding forth their suffering, and but one their victory;
God in His wisdom has so mixed the conditions of His Church here with
prosperity and adversity, that the one is ever set over against the other, to
the end that man should find out nothing after Him, Eccles. 7.14.

Obs. 2. That the best condition of Gods Church, and the worst part of the
enemies condition, comes last. The Church has a foul morning, and a fair
evening; the enemies have a fair morning-blink like Sodom, Genesis 19. but ere
long, wrath is poured out of vials upon them.

Obs. 3. That our Lord has wisely ordered, and circumstantiated the case of
His Church unto the end of the world, whether in their afflicted or prosperous
condition, whether from enemies without or within. Our Lord knows them all,
and has given us a little touch of them; and though we cannot know all the
particulars, yet that He not only knows them, but has ordered, measured, and
timed all of them with all their circumstances, and so far revealed the same to
us, should be ground enough of comfort, patience and submission to us.

Concerning Learned Mede his Synchronisms, or, a particular consideration of
the same.
LEarned Mede in his accurate Clavis to this Book, does say down several
Synchronisms, which he divides in two parts: and because the right
contemporating of the several prophesies, does much conduce to the
understanding thereof, we shall (before we proceed) lay down his Synchronisms
in order as he has them; and then show wherein we agree with them, and wherein
we differ from them, according to the former series.

His first Synchronism, Part. 1. does contemporate these four (that is, makes
them to belong to one time, having the same beginning and close) to wit, First,
The woman her being in the wilderness, Chap. 12. Secondly, The seven headed
beast after the healing of its wound, Chap. 13. Thirdly, The treading of the
outter Court by the Gentiles. And, fourthly, The Prophets prophesying in
sackcloth, Chap. 11. All which are for the same space of one thousand two
hundred sixty days, Chap. 12, 6. forty two months, Chap. 11, 2. three days
and an half, Chap. 11. verse. 9, 11. and time, times, and half a time, Chap.
12.14. This is a truth, and a necessarily follows upon the exposition of
these places.

His second Synchronism, is, of the two horned beast, or false prophet, with
the ten horned beast, or that which is called the Image of the beast, Cap. 13.
To speak properly, these cannot be said to be contemporary, because that
supposes them to relate to diverse things: we do therefore say, that that two
horned beast or false prophet, and the ten horned beast, or Image of the beast,
do set forth the same object, to wit, the former seven headed beast after the
healing of its wound: and so, upon the matter, it is but the same Synchronism
with the former, all these types tending to set forth and describe the same
Antichrist and his Kingdom, although under several considerations, because no
one type does sufficiently describe him. This will be clear afterward from the
exposition of the 13, and 17. Chapters.

The third Synchronism, is, of the great whore, mystical Babylon, Chap. 17. v.
1. and the seven headed, and ten horned beast that carries her, v. 3. Of this
we give the same judgment as of the former, That these do describe the same
Antichristian Church, considered diversely in respect of its head and body, as
the exposition of that Chapter will clear; and therefore they are to be
understood, not as expressing different events that fall together, but as
describing the same one thing under different considerations.

The fourth Synchronism, is, of the hundred forty four thousand sealed
virgins, Chap. 7. verse. 4. and Chap. 14. verse. 1, 3, 4. with that Babylonish
whore and beast formerly mentioned: this we acknowledge to be truth, and it is
made out, Chap. 7. Lect. 1.

His fifth, is but a consectary, drawn from the former four: whereby they are
all in their events found to be contemporary one with another; which, according
to the former qualifications, is to be admitted.

The sixth does contemporate the measuring of the inner court, ( Chap. 11.1.)
with the Dragons watching of the woman, and fighting with Michael, Chap. 12.
This we do not agree unto; because, this measuring of the inner Court or
Temple, is contemporary with the leaving out of the outter Court, as will
appear from the exposition thereof, Chap. 11. But from the former grounds, the
leaving out, and treading underfoot the outter Court, does succeed to the
woman's bringing forth her child, chap. 12. and does contemporate with the
Prophets prophesying in sackcloth, Chap. 11. Therefore this measuring of the
inner Court, cannot be contemporary with the Dragons watching of the woman, but
must succeed the same. Neither will the grounds given prove, that this
measuring of the inner Court does preceed in time the treading of the outter
Court: not the first ground, to wit, that the building of the inner Court of
the Temple was, in respect of order and situation, before the building of the
outter Court: Because, first, that is both obscure and uncertain. And,
secondly, the scope of that measuring and allusion to the Temple ( Chap. 11.)
is not to show any successive different estate of the Church; but to describe
her state during the same time, by distributing of her members in two sorts;
even as the Temple of old, after it was completely built, was divided into two
Courts, the greatest whereof, was common to the multitude, and the least and
inner Court peculiar to the Priests, who were but a few in comparison of the
other, as will be clear from the place; and there is no respect had to the
order of its building in respect of time, or priority, at all. The second
ground, is built upon this mistake, that the 11. Chap. does deduce the whole
series of the prophecy from the beginning thereof to the end, as being the
first new prophecy of the opened Book, Chap. 10. supposed by him to be another
from that, mentioned Chap. 5. This will be clear to be a mistaken ground, Chap.
10. and is contrary to what was formerly hinted in the division laid down.

The seventh Synchronism, is of the seven vials, Chap. 16. with the decaying
state of the beast and Babylon: which of it self is clear.

In the second part, he does add other seven Synchronisms, the first whereof,
is of the seventh seal, in as far as it respects the first six trumpets with
the ten horned beast, and all these other prophesies mentioned to be
contemporary with the first four Synchronisms in the first part; so that they
and the first six trumpets belong to the same time. This, in the general, we
acknowledge to be truth; yet in the application we do exceedingly differ,
although we do both grant that the first trumpet does succeed immediately to
the sixth seal, and that the sixth trumpet does close with the expiring of the
1260. days of the Churches wilderness condition: yea, although we make no
great question concerning the duration of that time, to wit, that it does
signify so many years, for days, or near thereby; yet do we differ in the
fixing of the beginning and close thereof: for, he does not fix the beginning
of these days until Popery and the Antichristian Kingdom be as an height, and
so closes them with his full ruin; at least, with the first six vials: We
again, do begin the trumpets and these 1260. days immediately after the
public authorizing of the Christian Religion in the world, and closes them at
Antichrist his height, and the beginning of his ruin: of which we have spoken,
Chap. 11. Lect. 4. and it must be so, considering the grounds formerly laid:
for, if the first trumpet contemporate with the seventh seal, and the seventh
seal immediately succeed to the sixth, and the six first seals be contemporary
with Michael his war with the Dragon, Chap. 12. and if that war did end at
Constantine his advancement to the throne of the Empire (which the same Author
does expound to be the woman's delivery, and the child his taking to Heaven,
Chap. 12.) it will follow upon these grounds, that the trumpets, and these
1260. days, must be begun at that time of Christianity its being publicly
authorized in Constantine his time: and if it were not so, there will be a
great intervall between the woman's delivery, and her flying; or, between the
sixth seal, and the seventh seal; which the series of this prophecy will not
admit. From which it will follow, that these days must expire with Antichrists
height and begun fall. Otherwise also, there would be no proportion between
the number of days and years, that is, so many years to be understood, as
days are mentioned (which he himself does grant.) And that ruin of the Roman
Hierarchy mentioned before the blowing of the seventh trumpet, Chap. 11. is
not a total ruin of that dominion, as himself seems to acknowledge, page
(miki) 20. but the turn and beginning thereof, as afterward, and, Chap. 11.
Lect. 4. will be clear.

The second Synchronism, is, of the measuring of the inner court, and Michael
his fighting with the Dragon for the child, with the first six seals. For the
last part thereof, to wit, that Michael his war with the Dragon and the first
six seals, do contemporate (if the close thereof be well understood) we
acknowledge; but have already showed, that the measuring of the inner Court can
contemporate with none of them.

The third Synchronism, to wit, of all the vials with the sixth trumpet, cannot
be admitted, because it is inconsistent with the series formerly laid down, and
would quite confound the distinction that is between the principal and
explicatory prophesies. This is a main difference and has many others
following upon it: we shall therefore endeavor (beside what is already said,
and what may be subjoyned, Chap. 11. Lect. 5. and Chap. 15.) to make out this,
that the vials do not contemporate with the sixth trumpet, but do succeed the
same, and belong to the seventh trumpet, and contemporate with it, as the seven
trumpet did belong to the seventh seal, or were comprehended under the same.
Which we demonstrate thus, 1. If the title, nature, effects, object, and time
of the seven vials, and of the seventh trumpet be the same, Then must the seven
vials and the seventh trumpet be contemporary, expressing the same events: for,
there can be no distinction gathered between them, if they be the same in all
the former respects; and there can be no greater identity than to be one in all
these: yea, particularly one in respect of the ruin of the Churches enemies,
and her freedom; But the former is true. Ergo, etc. The title is one; the
seventh trumpet is called a woe, and a great woe; the seven vials, are called
plagues of God, as if they were the former woe, divided into so many great
plagues. Secondly, That their nature is the same, may be read out of their
names which do express it. Thirdly, Their object is the same: the seventh
trumpet brings destruction upon those that destroyed the earth, and
particularly those who slew the Prophets, and Servants of God, Chap. 11. verse.
18. which can be no other but the judgment on the beast, and his Kingdom, who
persecuted the Prophets, verse. 7. and is threatened for that cause, Chap. 13.
verse. 10. and Chap. 17. The vials again, are poured out on the same object, to
wit, on the men that worship the beast upon his throne, great Babylon, etc.
Chap. 16. Fourthly, That they belong to the same time, must also be clear;
because the seventh trumpet is the last woe, the seven plagues are the last
plagues, which does make them relate to one time. And if they were not wholly
contemporary, they both could not be called the last: for, if not so, then the
last woe, to wit, the seventh trumpet, would be posterior to the first six
vials. And we conceive that the first of these vials is comprehended under the
title, last plagues, as well as the seventh; because it also falls in within
the compass of the last woe, to wit, the seventh trumpet. And if these four
considerations prove them not to be the same, we know not what will prove it;
or, for what end such coincident expressions are chosen by the Spirit of God.
Beside, these seven vials must be called the last plagues, either because they
do contemporate with all the three last woes, which cannot be alleged, or,
with the last two only, which also cannot be pleaded-for by him, seeing, at
most, they begin at the close of the second woe, as is alleged* or, It must be
because they do contemporate with the seventh only, which is the thing we have
said: and so they are said to be the last plagues, upon the same account, that
the seventh trumpet is called the last woe, to wit, because both had woes and
plagues, and the same woes and plagues preceding them, and none succeeding; and
therefore as the sixth trumpet must go before the last woe, so must it go before
the last plagues, and so none of these vials can contemporate with it, seeing
they are called last with respect to it and as following upon the same.

To clear and confirm it further, we may consider their periods more
particularly, and we will find that they arise and close alike, and therefore
that wholly they must be contemporary: First, that they expire together, to
wit, at the end of the world, is not questioned; and they could not both be
called the last, if it were not so: This then will prove them in part to
contemporate. Secondly, In reference to their rise, we say, either the seventh
trumpet does contemporate only with the seventh vial, or with all the seven;
or, with some of them, and not with all; But neither the first nor the last can
be said: For, 1. All the vials contain matter of one kind, as is already
cleared, Therefore there is no reason to divide them, as if one part of them,
to wit, the first six, did belong to one woe, to wit, the second woe or sixth
trumpet, and others of them to another woe, to wit, the seventh trumpet: there
is no reason for this division, especially considering that the last woe is of
the same nature as the seven vials are; but the second woe, to wit, the sixth
trumpet, is not of the same nature with the last, as the exposition thereof
will clear: for which cause, they are divided in distinct woes: The vials
therefore being of one nature, cannot agree to woes that are so different in
all the former respects. Secondly, That there is some observable march and
bound betwixt the second and third woe, cannot be denied; for, it is especially
marked in all the three last woes, one woe is past and another comes, etc. and
the exposition will make it out: But if we will apply some vials to the second
woe, and others to the third, there will be no such remarkable change to fix the
difference betwixt these two woes; because all the vials are but steps and
degrees of plagues of the same kind, or rather of one plague, and that on the
same object, to wit, Antichrist, etc. But these three woes do express
judgments of different kinds, and upon different objects. And it is
observeable, that that Learned Author, otherwise most acute in every thing, yet
here is at some stand, whether to take in the first five, or the first six
vials within the sixth trumpet. And considering, that the seven vials are put
together in one form by the holy Ghost, even as the seals and trumpets were,
What reason can there be given, why they should be divided, and the last only
made to contemporate with the seventh trumpet, and others with the preceding
trumpets, as if it were not one principal prophecy as the rest are, more than
to divide the trumpets, and to make the last only to contemporate with the
seventh seal, and the rest with the other preceding seals, seeing the Spirit
keeps the same form in both? Further, we argue thus, if the seventh vial and
the seventh trumpet only contemporate together, Then the first six vials must
contemporate with the preceding trumpet, to wit, the sixth; But that cannot be
said: because first, the vials, carry judgments on the same object with the
seventh trumpet, to wit, on the beast, but the sixth trumpet does contain a
judgment of another nature, and on another object, as is said: Therefore the
vials cannot belong to it. Secondly, The series and strain of the vials,
shows that they together, do contain one whole period of the state of the
Militant Church, to wit, Antichrists declining and decaying estate, even as the
seals and trumpets did contain two former periods, to wit, the Churches
sufferings, under Heathenish Persecutions, and Antichrist his rise and height.
The sixth trumpet therefore, being a step or degree of a former period, cannot
be contemporary with any of the vials, which are steps of a subsequent period;
for, two periods, neither in whole, nor in part can be contemporary one with
another.

More particularly, their rise must be at one and the same time: for, the
seventh trumpet comes immediately on the back of the killing of the witnesses,
and contemporateth with the whole course of their liberty, as appears by
this, that then, and not until then, the Kingdoms of the earth becomes the
Lords, Then he takes to him his great power and reigns, Then he rewards
his servants the Prophets, and destroys them that destroyed the earth, Then
the temple is opened in heaven and the ark of his testament is seen, etc. as it
is chap. 11. All which do suppone, that it was other ways in all these
respects before the seventh trumpet did sound, seeing these are marked to be
effects of the sounding of it: which demonstrateth, that the sounding thereof
must be immediately upon the back of Antichrists height, and killing of the
witnesses; and so must carry on his ruin, long before his destruction, which
comes by the sixth vial. It must therefore blow long before the seventh vial;
yea, it must contemporate with the first, because they (to wit, all the vials)
carry on Antichrist's ruin, from that same term, as is granted, and will
appear from chap. 15. where the Angels with the vials (even the first of them)
came out of the Temple thus opened by the seventh trumpet, upon the instant of
the earthquake and shaking of Antichrists Kingdom, at the expiring of the sixth
trumpet, which is the very march thereof: for which, see chap. 11. Lect. ^.
Therefore none of these vials can preceed the seventh trumpet, seeing before it,
the Temple is supposed to be shut. Secondly, This last woe does immediately
succeed the second woe, and therefore must have its beginning with the first
vial, because if six vials did preceed the blowing of the seventh trumpet, Then
would a distinct woe interveen between these two, to wit, Antichrists ruin,
which is carried on by the first six vials; which were absurd: for, the sixth
trumpet is not called a woe as bringing any judgment on Antichrist, as the
exposition will clear, and is granted by him. Thirdly, If it were so, that the
first six vials did belong to the sixth trumpet, Then would it, to wit, the
sixth trumpet, contain two woes, to wit, the plague of Mahomet and the ruin of
Antichrist; for, both these give a denomination to several woes; But the
former is absurd. Fourthly, If the seventh trumpet does comprehend Antichrists
ruin and the carrying on thereof to his destruction, Then must it contain the
first six vials, because by these he is ruined, and brought to naught, and his
judgment is begun immediately on the back of his height and fall, and perfected
by them, Therefore must it here belong to the seventh trumpet, or, the seventh
trumpet does no way belong to the ruin of Antichrist; but it does belong to
his ruin, as was formerly hinted, in the object thereof, and afterward will be
clear. Ergo, etc. Fifthly, If the sixth trumpet does contain Antichrists
height, and the Churches lowest sufferings, Then can it not comprehend the
first six vials, because by them Antichrist is ruined and brought to naught;
and it is absurd to place Antichrist his height, and total fall under the same
trumpet, or woe, seeing they do not fall under one period. Neither will it
consist with the nature of this prophecy, that one trumpet, which contains
but a part of one period, should contain effects of so contrary and opposite
natures, as Antichrists greatest height, and his total and full ruin; But the
former is true, the sixth trumpet contains his height and triumph. Ergo, etc.
Sixthly, The sixth trumpet does leave the beast still in some being while the
seventh come, as the same Author grants, Synchronism 1. of this second part;
But the sixth vial does wholly overturn Antichrist and casts him in the lake,
as will appear from Chapters 16, and 19. and is often inculcated by this
Author. Therefore the sixth trumpet and the first six vials can no way be
contemporary. Seventhly, This seventh trumpet does contemporate with the
palm-bearing company, chap. 7. which palm-bearing company does immediately
succeed to the sealed company preceding; so that where the sealed company
closes, there they begin, and the vials does the same. For, ( chap. 15.)
immediately upon the hundred forty four thousand, their being complete and
getting the victory over Antichrists name (which is all one with having palms
in their hands) then immediately came the Angels forth with the vials, and not
till then; Therefore it will follow, that the vials must in whole contemporate
with the seventh trumpet, the contemporary of that palm-bearing company,
according to the common rule, quae convenient uni tertio, convenient inter se;
But the first is true, as from the former grounds is clear. Ergo, etc. Lastly,
If we suppose 1260. days to signify so many years, as he does; and again, if
we suppose that just so many years must interveen between the breaking of that
Heathenish persecution, and the blowing of the seventh trumpet, and also of the
pouring out of the first vial, Then must the seventh trumpet, and the beginning
of the vials, be contemporary; this cannot but hold: But both the former are
true, And are to be supposed; the first from his grounds, chap. 11. The second
will appear thus, that so many years de facto, or, in experience, have
interveened, from the Churches delivery from Heathenish persecution, and her
begun delivery from Antichrist, before which, no vial can be said to be poured
forth: the other part, to wit, the blowing of the seventh trumpet upon the
expiring of these 1260. days from that date, is to be made out, chap. 11.
Lect. 4. In sum, if it can be made out, that the sixth trumpet is past, and the
seventh already has sounded de facto, Then the debate of contemporating the
seventh trumpet with the last vial only, will evanish; because that is the
thing driven at; that the seventh trumpet may hold forth an estate of absolute
freedom to the Church after Antichrist his full ruin; But, we suppose that the
former is made out, chap. 11. Lect. 4. The grounds therefore that are laid to
hold up this Synchronism, must also fail.

If it be said, that the seventh trumpet does suppone an absolute freedom from
Antichrist, because in it the Lord God Omnipotent reigns, the Kingdoms of the
earth are become His, etc. which cannot be verified during the first six vials
while in part Antichrist reigns, Therefore it must succeed them? Answer,
first, This is a mistake of the place, which is not to show what case the
Church shall be in at the sounding of the seventh trumpet, but, by way of
anticipation, to show the effects following thereupon before they come: and
serves to explicate the expected events thereof and make it observable,
because of such a wonderful change, to wit, that Kingdoms and Nations, even
now Antichrist, are, by its sounding, to become the Lords: which does suppone
Antichrist to be strong, having many Kingdoms and Nations, and the Church to be
few and low when it does sound. Secondly, Although it express the events in
their heighest degree, yet it will not follow that it was at its height
instantly at the blowing thereof; but only this, that it was to be so ere it
expired; Because it is usual in this prophecy to express the state of the
Church, during one period by the most eminent step thereof, as we will find,
chap. 11, and 12. where the Church is said to be in the wilderness during a
whole period, because that decay came to a height during that time, although it
was not at the first instant so low. Particularly, the whole state of the
Church, after Heathenish persecution, is set forth, ( chap. 7.) in two periods;
the one, to wit, that of the sealed number, is set forth at its lowest, the
other, at its heighest victory: yet, no question, ere that palm-bearing company
came to a height after the sealing time, there was a fight and wrestling
against Antichrist for his weakening. Hence we may reason, either the vials,
which bring down Antichrist, must belong to the sealed, or to the palm-bearing
company; for, there is no mids: But they cannot belong to the first; because in
all periods, the last step is the heighest step, as the last persecuting seal
is the sorest: The last trumpet of Antichrist his reign, has him highest, and
the last vial has his Kingdom lowest: the vials therefore which suppone
Antichrists height to be past, and the Churches flourishing condition to be
begun, can in respect of none of them contemporate with the sealed number, but
with the palm-bearing company; and so all of them must contemporate with the
seventh trumpet; which was the thing to be demonstrated.

His fourth Synchronism, is, of the Serpent and Dragon his binding, chap. 20,
with the seventh trumpet. This being well understood, according to our former
grounds, whereby the seventh trumpet, and all the vials are made contemporary,
is to be fixed as a truth: but being understood (as he does understand it) by
contemporating the seventh trumpet with the seventh vial only, and that
intervall which follows the destruction of the beast by the sixth vial, is
not to be admitted. And supposing that that binding of Satan, (during these
thousand years, chap. 20.) does contemporate fully with the seventh trumpet,
chap. 11. (which is indeed a truth) and supposing that the seventh trumpet does
begin with the seven vials immediately on the fall of Antichrist his declining
Kingdom (which we have formerly made out) It will necessarily follow, that the
thousand years are to begin with the vials where the sixth trumpet closet
Antichrist his height: and as the seventh trumpet does not presuppose
Antichrists full, but his begun ruin, (as has been shown) So it must be said
of that thousand years binding of Satan, which is called the time of his
binding; because, during that period, he comes to be bound, although at the
entry thereof his restraint be not at its height: concerning which, more is to
be seen, chap. 20. Lecture 4.

His fifth Synchronism, is, of the thousand years of Christ's reign with the
seventh trumpet or intervall following the beasts destruction. This reign of
Christ's, being the same with Satan's restraint; what judgment we have given of
the former Synchronism, is also to be applied here.

The sixth Synchronism, is, of the new Jerusalem, and the Lambs wife, with the
seventh trumpet and intervall foresaid. This, we cannot admit, because we
conceive that new Jerusalem is to set forth the glorified estate of the
Church-triumphant, and so falls not in under the seventh trumpet, safe as
that trumpet does put an end to time and enter the Church (then made ready as a
Bride for the Bridegroom) within the palace of the King, and there to abide for
ever. But of the grounds thereof, see more, chap. 21. Lect. 1.

The seventh and last Synchronism, is, of that palm-bearing innumerable
company, chap. 7. verse. 9. with the seventh trumpet, or, intervall aforesaid.
This general we acknowledge to be a truth, the seventh trumpet being begun
with the first vial, as has been said: but the restricting of it to the
intervall, following the destruction of the beast and sixth vial, cannot be
admitted: and is the rise of that discrepancie which is in the application of
many of these Synchronisms, which otherwise in the general are solid, and do
agree fully with the series and mould which we have laid down, as in the
procedor will appear.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 1. ANd I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard, as it
were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts, saying, Come, and see.

2. And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat on him had a bow, and
a crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.


Follows now the History of opening the seals, which is to be knit to verse.
7. of chap. 5. and he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that
sat upon the Throne. There is then a digression by a Song from the matter,
whereunto now he returns, as it were, thus; I saw when the Lamb had taken the
book out of the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne, He went on to open
the seals, thereafter I saw and behold, etc.

Every one of these seals has a type, holding forth the matter contained in
it, and some word of explication added for the understanding of it.

The first four have one common type, to wit, a Horse, because they relate to
one common subject or object, to wit, the Church; and they have a voice,
calling, Come, and see: The fifth and sixth have no such voice, because they
speak so distinctly of themselves with difference from the former four in
respect of their scope.

For conceiving the meaning of these seals, take notice, 1. that they are not
to be looked upon as continuing a Story of the Church from the beginning to the
end of the World, as was said; yea, it appears by the Answer given to the
Saints in the fifth seal, that there were Martyrs to be crowned by suffering
after that time before the end; and it being clear that these Martyrs are not
crowned by the sixth seal, which brings judgment upon persecuters, It must
remain therefore to be fulfilled under the trumpets, and consequently that they
must interveen between the sixth seal and the end.

2. Take notice, that by them is set forth the state of the Church, and that
under persecution uninterrupted, until the sixth seal be opened. For, 1. there
is one common sign or type in the first four seals, to wit, an horse, which in
the first seal represents the Church as honorable and victorious by the
spreading of the Gospel. And therefore, 2. by an horse, under the second,
third, and fourth, must be understood the same thing represented, to wit, the
Church, although different in her condition from the former, according as the
same type is variously set forth. 3. It appears by the fifth seal, that the
Churches suffering is here to be understood, Where we have these four, 1. That
the party suffering was the Church, as appears by their Prayer, Do thou not
avenge our blood; etc. 2. It appears, that their suffering was for no private
quarrel, by their description, verse. 9. The souls of them that were slain, for
the Word of God, and for the testimony which they held. 3. It appears that
this suffering was from men, and that without the Church, by their description
who were instruments, Do thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? as looking to the multitude of the world, contradistinguished from the
Church. 4. It appears, that this suffering was for a long time uninterrupted,
and so must be the first suffering of the Church before God overthrew Heathen
persecuters: their Prayer, How long, Lord, will thou not judge and avenge our
blood, etc. which imports, that unto this time God had not visibly reckoned
with Heathen persecuters as He did when Authority began to own Christianity:
and so these first five seals, at least, hold forth the suffering condition of
the Church during the time of Heathenish Emperors: and this period runs to
the first great change of Gods outward dispensations to His Church, to wit,
when civil Authority and force began to befreind the Church against her
enemies, which will be found to be in Constantines time, about the year 310 or
thereb^. Yet would we not peremptorily assert, that none of these judgments
affected the wicked world during that time. For, 1. God sends the Gospel into
the world. 2. Many profane men reject it: for which, 3. God plagueth the
ungrate world more than before the Gospel came: whereupon, 4 the rage and
malice of men do break out against the Gospel and the professors of it, as the
causes of all their evil, which procures again new judgments from God. By
which we may see what interwoven connection there is amongst these things, to
wit, the Churches su^^erings and the worlds (which has been long since
observed by Tertullian and Cyprian in their Apologies contra Scapulam and
Demetrium) But this we think, that though there might be (and no question
were,) judgments on the world for despising the Gospel, and particular plagues
on persecurers; yet during that time, there was no such general reckoning with
them, nor are they such judgments which these seals primarily describe, which
is all we would say.

For understanding these seals, or types in them, we would have respect to
these three, 1. To the key or series of the Story before expressed from the
fifth seal. 2. To the nature of the type it self, being compared with other
Scriptures. 3. To the events as they are recorded in story.

The first words of this Chapter hold forth the rise of the vision, to wit, the
Lambs opening one of the seals; which is to be knit to verse. 7. chap. 5. as is
said. By opening one of the seals, is understood the first seal, as Matthew.
28.1. by One of the Sabbath^ or, by One day of the week, is understood the
first day of the week, as by comparing of the Evangelists is clear, and is here
confirmed by d^signing, the second, the third, etc. after this; and so also it
is clear, that by mentioning one beast, is understood the first, by the same
reasons. We show before ( chap. 5.) that these Books were long scrols, rolled
about something, and the Book being so rolled, it might be divided by sundry
seals, so that one part might be opened and read, while the rest were sealed,
and so, when he had opened the first seal, imports, that such a part of the
scrol was made legible.

The first thing that occureth, is, the preparation by the first beasts
inviting to come and see. This is common to the first four seals, though in
some things there be difference. There are three parts in the preparation for
this seal* the first is common, a voice, saying, come and see: which is not
only for John's upstirring and warrant to behold that type; but also for all
Readers and Hearers, to put them to observe it, implying, that there is some
mystery in the thing, yet desirable in it self to be known, and to be desired
by Gods People.

The second, is, That it is the first beast that utters this voice, Chap. 4.
he is like a Lion, importing the valiant courage and boldness that faithful
Ministers had in the Primitive times, when Christ first sent forth the Gospel,
and it suiteth well with the type following, the beasts being so marshalled as
they hold forth the qualifications that should be, and are requisite to be, in
faithful Ministers in the execution of the things prophesied of in these types.

The third, is, that it is said to be like the noise, or voice, of thunder,
because of the power and force of that word, exhorting all to the beholding and
welcoming of Christ in the Gospel, as was in the first founding of the
Christian Church, and spreading of the Gospel and the flourishing state
thereof, when He furnished His Apostles and Ministers with such liberty and
boldness.

From all which, these two special Doctrines arise, 1. That the best of men
need upstirring for receiving the things of God and considering His
dispensations; were it John himself, he has need of upstirring; and
consequently, all Gods People have need of upstirring on this side of time,
else things may escape us and not be observed, means are not useless, a
Ministry is needful and useful as long as there is a corrupt member in a
Church or corruption in any member.

2. That our Lord Jesus in dispensing gifts to His Church and People here, has
suited and accommodated the qualifications of His Ministers wisely to that
which they have to do. Therefore, He having the Gospel to spread, He fitteth
men like Lions, as through the Acts of the Apostles is clear; and when He
calls men to suffer, He fitteth them like a Calf, as the second beast is set
out, with patience to endure persecution. Or t^ke the Doctrine thus, That the
thriving of the Gospel is accompanied with bold and valiant Preachers; Or,
boldness and liberty in Preaching, is a good sign that God minds the
thriving of the Gospel.

Verse 2. We come now more near to the types. The first thing seen, is a white
horse. Where consider, 1. The type, that is, a horse and a rider. 2. How he is
described and set out in several circumstances, as, First, from his color, he
is white. Secondly, in his rider and his armor, he that sat on him had a bow.
Thirdly, in his dignity, a crown was given unto him. Fourthly, his employment
(which is expressed in the word added for explication) he went forth
conquering, and to conquer.

1. By a horse and a rider, is understood in Scripture amongst the Prophets
some dispensation of the Lord to His Church, brought about mediately by the
Ministry of Angels or men, or immediately by God Himself, as is clear by
comparing Zochar. 1. verse. 8. with verse. 10. Verse. 8. the Prophet sees a man
riding, etc. and behind him were red horses speckled and white. Verse 10.
Again, expounds this to be these whom the Lord had sent to walk to and fro
through the earth, That is, His dispensations of several kinds, by what ever
mean He pleases to bring them about, and they are either good and prosperous,
or adverse and afflicting dispensations, as the colors and other circumstances
difference them, as in the forecited place.

His dispensations are compared to horses and riders on them, for these
reasons, 1. To let us see His Soveraignity that has all these at His command
to send for good and ill, as great Kings have their Messengers for executing
their will. 2. To show the speediness, swiftness, and irresistiblnesse of
whatsoever dispensation He sends, as the horse is speedy and valiant. 3. To
show the dependence of all events on His dominion, and His immediate ordering
and guiding of them as a rider does an horse: and he lets them not run at
random, or by guess, as a horse without a rider or bridle, but has them all
well ordered whether good or bad.

2. A white horse signifies comfort, gladness, victory, triumph, and
antiquity, both as Scripture and profane Authors clear it. See chap. 19.11.
where Christ in His triumph upon a white horse.

3. The riders armor and dignity, a bow and a crown, which signifies the same
thing: The bow shoots far and peirceth deeply, as is said. Psalm. 45. Thy
arrows are sharp in the hearts of the Kings enemies. A crown again, sets our
stateliness and victory, especially while it is said, a crown was given him,
which supposes growing success.

4. This is cleared by the word added for explication, He went out conquering,
that is, carrying all before him; and to conquer, that is, continuing and going
on to do so victoriously. In the application of this, and of the following
types, we shall look, 1. to them as Prophetical, relating to particular events
and times. 2. As holding forth some Doctrines in general, useful for all
times.

By this type, is understood the flourishing estate of the Gospel, and the
spreading estate of the Church by it after our Lords Ascension, as it were,
Christ in the Ministry of His Word, going out to conquer souls and prevailing.
First, This exposition agrees well with the type, being compared with Psalm.
45.3, 4, 5. and Revel. 19.11, etc. In which places, Christ is represented, 1.
as riding on horseback, and that upon a white horse. 2. as armed with arrows,
and the two edged sword, which is His Word. 3. As Crowned. 4. As having the
same design of riding prosperously, etc. for the subduing of the people under
Him by His sharp arrows in their hearts: which is the very same thing agreeing
with this type. Secondly, It agrees well with the event: If we consider the
first estate of the Church, immediately after Christ's Ascension, (the describing
whereof is the scope of this first type) we will find it in the Apostles days
to have exceedingly spread, the Gospel then and a little thereafter triumphing,
and conquering almost over the whole world. Paul preached from Jerusalem to
Illyricum, Romans 15.19. then among the Jews, the Word increased mightily, Act.
6.7. to Damascus, Act. 8. in Arabia, Gal. 1. Pontus, Asia, Cappadocia, Babel,
Bithynia, 1 Pet. 1.1. and Chap. 5.13. to Parthia, Media, Mesopotamia, etc. Act.
2.9, to Corinth, Athens, Macedonia, Galatia, Rome, Antioch, etc. as appears
by the History of the Acts, and the Epistles written to these Churches: which
being looked upon in it self, to be carried on so suddenly by such weak means
and despicable instruments, as the preaching, and Preachers of the Gospel; and
over so great difficulties, as the wisdom, power, and enmity of the world. It
cannot but be wonderful and passing credit, and can be no other thing but the
conquest of Him who can subdue all things to Himself, and call things that are
not, to bring to naught things that are, by the most fectlesse and unlikely
means; So that justly this event may be described by such a type as this.

If we take from History a view of aftertimes, it spread to Africa, Spain;
yea, to Britain it self, as is testified by the most Ancient writers, whether
by Simon Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathea, or by some of the Apostles
themselves, as is asserted by Cent. Magd. Cent. 2. Fox, White in his way,
Usher de suc. Eccl. Brit. we shall not determine. This is clear from Tertullian
Apol. adv. Gentes, that before his days, Britain, which was inaccessible to
the Roman Armies, was made subject to Christ by the Gospel. This is enough to
prove the event to answer the type, and that this horse has conquered
according as was foretold, the Church at that time being enlarged in bounds,
increased in number, shining by the gifts of Ministers and lives of Professors,
and being in a great measure, for a time kept from being overrun with Errors
and Schism. This horse and rider, though He began to conquer then, He has not
altogether given over yet, though for a time He may seem to halt: when the
world is again restored from Antichristian darkness, ye will find Him thus
mounted, chap. 19.

For general Doctrines ye may Observe these, 1. That the preaching of the
Gospel (more than any other dispensation) comes not by guess amongst a
people, but is sent, and ordered as other dispensations are, and has a
particular Commission. It is one of the horses He sends here: and hence it is
that it is sent to, and preached in one place, and not in another. So, Acts 16.
the Spirit puts them to one place, and suffers them not to go to another
place. There is not a Sermon comes without a Commission. Obs. 2. That the
thriving and success of the Gospel (more than the coming of the Gospel among a
people) goes not by guess. The Gospel has its end as well as its Commission,
a particular Commission for such an effect, Isa. 55.10. as the rain comes
down. 2. Corinthians. 2.14. Thanks be to God which always causes us to triumph in
Christ. 3. The Gospel is most mighty to conquer and subdue when Christ armeth
it with a Commission and does concut therewith, 2 Corinthians. 10.4. The weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of
strong holds, casting down imaginations and ^very high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of Christ, and bringing into captivity every
thought, etc. 4. From this description of the horse and his rider and his
employment, Obs. That the great and main end of the Gospel, where it comes, is
to conquer and subdue souls. That is the end of a Ministry, to bring souls in
subjection to Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. To pull down strong holds, to cast down
imaginations, and every high thing, to lead every thought captive to the
obedience of Christ. And it has its end, when Christ's arrows are made
powerful to pierce hearts. Compare, Ephesians. 4.8. with Psalm. 68.18. He ascended on
high, and led captivity captive, and received gifts for men; even for the
rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell among them. This is the main thing
the Gospel aims at: and as many of you as render to Jesus Christ, the Gospel
has had its force and effect in you. But where folks stand out in their
rebellion, it has not its proper fruit: And O, how few are wrought upon
kindly! How few are made subject! How many are yet serving their lusts and
pleasures, and yielding themselves to sin which they were born slaves to, sin
and Satan keeping still their old dominion in them, and they their old
subordination to them! Obs. 5. The Gospel conquereth more or less where ever
it comes, that being its earand to conquer; when Christ is mounted, He is
going to conquer, if it were but to take one fort or one soul from Satan; when
He lights His candle, it is for some lost groat, and it will accomplish that
for which He sent it, Isa. 55. 6. Taking this conquest and flourishing estate
of the Gospel to relate to the first times thereof when it came into the world,
Obs. That most frequently the Gospel at its first coming amongst a people
prevails most, and has more sensible success and conquest, than at any
other time. So was it when it came first to the world, its victories were swift
and speedy; increasing more for a few years at that time, than afterward in
many generations. And so it is when the Gospel, after Antichrists defection,
reviveth again, Chap. 19.11. In a few years it spread through many Kingdoms and
Nations, when there were but few Laborers comparatively. In Luthers days it
conquered more than for a hundred years since. And as this holds in the
general, when the Gospel comes to a Land; so does it proportionably hold with
a Congregation, yea with particular persons, who in experience are found often
to take more sensible progress at their beginning than afterward; So also with
the coming of a particular Minister with the Gospel to a certain place, often
he is most sensibly countenanced, or at least by people more accepted than
afterward, it being often with them as with the hearers of John Baptist, Ioh.
5.35. who rejoiced in his light for a season.

Reas. 1. Because ordinarily some more than a common impression upon the hearts
of hearers accompanies the Gospel at its first entry, there being generally
amongst people some common effects of the Spirit, such as convictions, warming
of affections with love to the message, and to the carriers of it, as was in
John's hearers; partly, from the newness and uncouthnesse of the thing;
partly, from the loveliness and desirablnesse of what is contained in it;
partly, from the reasonablnesse and equity of what the Work calls to; partly,
from the exercises and wakenings of others touched about them; partly, from
some special efficacy and power usually accompanying the Word at its entry,
while the affections of both Speakers and Hearers are most warm: which things,
being somewhat new to many, and not being acquainted formerly with the like,
breed some stirring and motion amongst people; which though it be but common,
yet someway disposes for the more serious and single use-making of the Word,
even as miracles, though not saving gifts of themselves, yet thus contributed
for making the Gospel to be received at first among the people: and experience
teaches, that when the Gospel (to speak so) becomes more habitual to folks,
these motions are more rare, and the disposition to profit, less.

Reason 2. When the Gospel comes among a people, it readily finds them in
some gross temper of ignorance, profanity, or the like, etc. and therefore
when or where the general truths of the Gospel are believed, there is a more
ready way to convince, and threaten, and a greater facility to take with
convictions, and to tremble at threatenings, when the natural conscience can
neither say against the truth it self, or the application of it to them. But
again, where the Gospel has been for a time, men are so puffed up with the name
of Christianity (like Laodicea, or, are satisfied with formality for removing
of challenges for grosser evils, or with presumption in misapplying the
promises) that it is not so easy to alarm them with their hazard.

Reason 3. Gods intention and purpose in sending of the Gospel to a people or
place, is to conquer: and His way of conquering, is, to catch (as it were)
whole draughts by His net at once (as we may see by the many thousands, Act.
2.3. and 4. that are gained by one preaching) and therefore as He never sends
the Gospel, but where He has some to gather, (so to speak) He keeps the
tide, and sends where, and at such time as He has many together, having, as
it were, fitted and trysted them for that end. As we may see from Mat. 9.37,
38. the fields are first ripened, then Laborers are sent to the Harvest. Every
time is not Harvest-time, and therefore not a ripening time; but when He has
ripened a Kingdom, Town, or Parish, then, and not till then, ordinarily thrusts
He out His Laborers, who speedily cut down the ripened grain: But as the
Harvest does not always continue, so neither does this ripening; for, a
Ministers success, is not always according to His pains, but according to the
ripnesse of the Field he labors in; and therefore he may, when the Harvest is
past, be at more pains in the gleaning of a reaped Field, than at first to
gather whole sheaves.

Reason 4. Because then ordinarily people are in more capacity to profit by the
Gospel, at least, in a less incapacity, than when without fruit they have
lived for a time under it: for, when it edifieth them not, through their
corruption they grow more hard and cold, more secure and presumptuous in
respect of themselves, more prejudged in reference to the Word and the carriers
of it, and can abide freedom less patiently than before, as we may see by the
Churches of Galatia, who, at first, received Paul as an Angel of God, Chap.
4.14. and so far he prevailed with them as to make them give up themselves in
profession to Christ with much seeming zeal, verse. 15. yet afterward, these
same Galatians being Christians, took worse Paul's freedoom, verse. 16. and were
not so easily, even by him, brought over a fault in Christianity to be singly
Christians, as they were at first to be Christians. This being ordinary where
the Word comes, and bettereth not folks condition; the longer they live under
it, the greater will be their incapacity of getting good by it, Isa. 55.

Reason 5. Which follows upon this Gods giving up a people Judicially, that
they who have loved darkness, rather than light, though light came into the
world, should be given up (as it is, Isa. 6.) To see and not perceive, to hear
and not to understand: which is, to have means and not to profit by them, or,
(as it is, Isa. 29.10.) to be cast into a deep sleep, so that all visions
become as a sealed book unto them. This cause has diverse steps, in some less
and in some more, according as they continue to thwart with the light of God
and to imprison it in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. Hearers had need to advert
what use they make of this Gospel: many sad proofs of this truth are amongst
them: young ones and beginners had need to be watchful if they thrive not at
their entry by this Word, before the scroof grow over their hearts, it is a
hundredth to one (as may be seen in experience) if ever it do them good.
Ministers at their entry to a place, and the people with whom they enter, had
need to be bussie, every time of the year will not be Harvest-time to them.

7. From the order that the Lord keeps when judgments and sad dispensations
are coming, you may see though there be three sad, for one comfortable, yet He
begins with the comfortable offer of His Grace. Hence Observe, That in Gods
order the offer of Grace comes first, He is content to do folks good, if they
do not reject it: the white horse goes before the red or any other. This is
His way to sinners, First, to offer Peace before War: which is His practice to
you, and so it is now the time of your visitation.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 3. And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say,
Come, and see.

4. And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him
that sat thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one
another: and there was given unto him a great sword.


Follows now the opening of the second seal, which has the same type, to
wit, an horse and a rider, as the former, but very diverse in respect of the
other particulars, as by comparing them is clear.

That this and the two following do hold forth sad dispensations, will be
easily granted by these who consider the descriptions of them. The main thing
to clear then, is, 1. Whether these hard things do principally point at
judgments on the world, for despising of the offer of Grace made under the
former seal; or, 2. Persecution stirred and moved by the world against the
Professors of Christ; or, 3. Gods judgments on persecuters: These three in
their causes and in the events, are so linked together, that one of them is not
long without the other, and it is no great inconsistence to take in all. The
world despises Grace, God plagueth it for that; the Heathens blame the
Christians for those evils, being stirred up by the devil against them, as the
only troublers of the world and contemners of their gods, which puts them to
persecute, and then the Lord lets loose all sorts of judgments on them, as
was hinted before.

Yet more especially, considering the scope (which is to show the condition of
the Church) and the arguments which are in the Text, we think, it specially
sets out the sufferings of the Church: For, 1. it is the same type in all
with the former, to wit, a horse, differing only in accidentals, as color,
etc. It is most like then that they set forth the same thing, and belong to the
same subject, to wit, the Church, but as she is diversely affected, according to
the diverse description of circumstances. 2. The fifth seal clears this; for,
they suffer here, who cry for vengance there, But that is the Church, who are
supponed by that crying to have been long under suffering before that, which
can be no other but the sufferings holden out by these seals. 3. It agrees
best with that contemporary prophecy, Chap. 12. where this bloudinesse is set
out by the red Dragons waiting to devour the man child new brought forth. 4.
The event, and Christ's prediction, Mat. 10.34, 35. and Luke 12.51, etc. that He
came not to send peace but a sword, and to kindle a fire already almost begun,
confirm it: and we cannot more warrantably expound these sad things which
follow and accompany the Gospel of any particular event, than of that which
agrees with His plain Word; by which Word also we may be helped to understand
what taking peace from the earth is, to wit, confusions and troubles that come
on the Church after the manifestation of the Gospel.

The meaning then of this type, as a prophecy, in short, is, to foretell that
that Church which should at first shine by the spreading light of the Gospel,
and should be captivated unto Jesus Christ by His triumphing in His Ordinances
throughout the world, that Church should be suddenly set upon by persecuters,
and a bloody and a terrible-like dispensation should immediately follow the
conquest of the Gospel, so that in no part of the world the Professors thereof
should have external peace; but being hated of all men, should be betrayed,
killed, massacred, and cruelly and universally put to death, in so far that the
former dispensations to the Church should seem quite to be altered in their
outward face, and she changed from her former whiteness to a bloody color, in
respect of her many sufferings.

The preparation here to this type, is the same as under the former, to wit, a
voice, saying, Come, and see: whereby, all are again and again stirred up by
all the Ministers of Christ, whatever be their qualifications, to consider the
opened seals. Only it differs in these two, 1. That this is the second beast
formerly described, Chap. 4.7. 2. That though he speaks the same thing, yet
does he it in a different manner, as a Calf or Ox differs in their sound
from a Lion. The reason why the second beast so qualified as a Calf, is made
use of to invite to come and see the events of this seal, is, because, that
beast, being most famous for patient enduring and hard laboring, suiteth best
with such a suffering condition of the Church and so sad news as were to be
revealed by this type; and also, because it represents best the
qualifications of a Ministry fit for such a dispensation, and so also sets
forth Gods wisdom most, in fitting men for, and trysting them with, such a sad
condition of His Church. It is therefore to good purpose observed at the
opening of each seal, whether it be the first, second or third beast that
calls; for, they are not ranked by guess, but purposly, to point out a
suitablnesse and conformity between such an event or condition of the Church,
and the persons made use of in reference thereunto, according as they are
represented by the said beasts; and as this exposition agrees with the scope
of the prophecy, so with the type, and with the word of explication that is
added.

1. It agrees with the type; for, it is said, There went out another horse
that was red; and there was given unto his rider a sword, etc. This red horse,
signifies a bloody dispensation: for which cause, the Dragon, ( Chap. 12.) in
the prophecy contemporary to this, is called red: and the beast that was drunk
with the blood of the Saints, is described as scarlet-colored, for that same
cause, to wit, their bloody effects upon the Church. The Sword also which was
given him, imports persecution, as, Matthew. 10.34. Luke 12.49. I came not to
send peace, but a sword. Also, Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love
of God? Shall tribulation, or persecution, or sword? etc. The meaning then of
this type, we clearly take to be the same persecution signified by the red
Dragon, Chap. 12. which persecution immediately followed and waited upon the
Church flourishing by the Gospel, which was typified by the woman, clothed
with the Sun, etc. even as this does follow upon the conquest of the white
horse. The word of explication also which is added, does confirm this; it is
said, Power was given him to take peace from the earth. Wherein we have, 1. his
earrand, to wit, to take peace from the earth, and put all in confusion. 2. The
mean or weapon suitable to that end, to wit, a Sword, signifying the marring of
that peace by persecution. 3. It is marked in both, that, that power, and that
great sword was given him, to signify Gods soveraignity over pesecuters, and
his absolute ordering of persecutions, even the most cruel (which is signified
by a great Sword) and most confused, which is signified by killing one another.
Yet in all, the Commission is particularly given by God: none can move it till
He give power; yea, all the weapons are furnished by Him; which is a great
proof of His Soveraignity, and contributeth much to the comforting of Gods
People under such trials.

There is one objection against this exposition necessarily to be removed, for
clearing this and other passages of this prophecy: That is, (say some) This
Commission is express to take peace from the earth; But, through this
prophecy, the Church is ordinarily understood by Heaven, and these that are
without, by the Earth.

For answer, We say, 1. It is true, by the Earth, often is understood the
unconverted world; yet it is not always so, even in this prophecy, as is
clear by these places, Chap. 3.10. The men on the earth which are to be tried,
are members of the Church; otherwise it had been no peculiar privilege to
Philadelphia to have been exempted from it; so Chap. 7.1. Chap. 12.9. Chap.
13.14. Chap. 14.16, etc. where the exposition of the several places will make
this clear. For, as sometimes the Church is distinguished from the World, and
in that respect called Heaven; so sometimes the Church Militant is
distinguished from that which is Triumphant in Heaven, and in that respect it
is called the Earth; and that is especially, when its trials or sufferings are
spoken of, which reach only to that part which is on earth.

2. We answer, That by Earth is understood the visible Church here Militant:
which is so called, 1. Because it seems this prophecy relates to that of
Christ's, Matthew. 10.34. and therefore is expressed almost in the same words. 2.
By persecution of the Church, peace may be said to be taken from the earth,
because by it all the earth is so put through other, it having so many
troubles, divisions, treacheries, and tumults, etc. going along with it. 3.
Because it points here at the outward and earthly peace which by persecution
could only be taken from them, and that it reaches not to mar their
spiritual, and eternal peace, according to Christ's word, Ioh. 16. last verse. In
the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace. 4. The
Church may be called the Earth here, because it is usual to the Prophets,
(whose expressions John often follows) to set out the Church and her troubles
under that name, because she is the most excellent part of all the World,
Therefore do they account it sad to all the earth, which is sad to her, and
contra. See Isa. 24.1, 4, 5, 6, etc. where yet the Church is understood, as
appears from verse. 5. and therefore the former exposition does agree well
with this expression. We take it then for granted, that this exposition agrees
well with the scope, which is to show the Churches condition immediately after
the Gospel came into the world, and her sufferings then, that it agrees well
also with the description of the horse in his color, rider, commission and
weapons. We are therefore, 3. to consider how it does agree unto the event,
which in every thing we will find answerable. None that know any thing, but
know how soon persecution, (especially killing with the sword) followed after
the Gospel. The Scripture mentions it of Stephen, Act. 7. of James, Act. 12.
The History of the Acts, Paul's frequent reckoning of persecutions, (and
particularly by the sword) Romans 8.35. etc. 1 Cor. 1.4. 2 Cor. 4 and Chap. 12. 2 Timothy 3.10, etc. and the former Epistles to the Churches of Asia, make it
evident. This also is in general made out by the ten several persecutions
(which are for their cruelty, and universality, famous (if we may speak so) in
all Church History) beside what particular murders were committed in several
places at all times; so that the event answers well both to the type and to
the exposition of it.

More particularly, we think this part of the prophecy looks especially unto
the first two persecutions, to wit, the first, raised by Nero, which began near
or about the year 66. of our Lord. The second followed (with some intervall)
under Domitian, whose persecution began, Anno. 97. These were the first, who by
public Edicts stirred up the Heathens and all the enemies of the Christians
against them, to kill, murder, and torture at their pleasure. By those
persecutions, suffered almost all the Apostles, as the History of the Church
clea^eth, and many other famous Champions of Christ: and it came to that
height, that Christians were accounted all the day long as sheep for the
slaughter, Romans 8.36. and could have no certain dwelling place in the world,
though it was not worthy of them. We apply it especially to these two first
persecutions; Because, 1. It agrees best with the order of time formerly laid
down, to wit, that the second seal is next immediately unto the first. 2.
Because the nature of these persecutions, and the effects of them, which were
in a bloody, cruel and open manner driven on by these two beasts (one of whom,
Paul calls the Li^u, 2 Timothy 4, 17.) do suit best with the type formerly
expounded, though proportionally the following persecutions in their nature are
described here, as they were, bloody: in which respect, we will find killing
with the sword again to be mentioned, verse. 8. under the fourth seal.

This being the exposition of this type, as it is prophetical, we shall now
lay down some general Doctrines which may be drawn from what is said and
further confirm it. 1. From renewing this exhortation, Come, and see. Observe,
That every passage revealed by God, for the good of His Church, should be taken
notice of by them. 2. That it is the second beast which is now made use of when
the Church is suffering, Obs. That our Lord Jesus has Ministers fitted for
suffering, as well as for action; He has them who are like Lions to spread the
Gospel; and therefore the first Preachers or Reformers in a Land are eminently
furnished ordinarily with boldness and zeal, daringly to undertake such a
difficult task. Again, He has them who are patient like calfes, when He
calls for suffering. Obs. 3. That fitness for patient suffering, is a gift
necessary and profitable for the edification of the Church, and a qualification
becoming a Minister of the Gospel, no less than the former boldness, and has
work and use in the Church as well as the former has; though it be not always
so shining, yet is it not to be despised by any. Obs. 4. That our Lord Jesus
Christ timeth and trysteth Ministers qualifications according to the task which
He has to do with them, whether it be for doing or suffering. He has them
accordingly qualified. 1. He sends out as it were Lions, because then He is
to triumph over difficulties; then come, as it were, calfes after them, because
their great work, is not so much to gain new ground, as to maintain what the
former have gained, and (as it were, calfes) to endure suffering; yet both
sorts are employed for one end, to preach one Gospel, for the edification of
the Church. ^. More particularly from that which is holden forth in the type,
being compared with the former seal, we may Observe, That a flourishing Gospel
in the World or in a Land, is not long without a persecuting sword on the back
of it; Or, ordinarily there is a certain connection betwixt a conquering Gospel,
and sad trials upon the Professors thereof, Luke 12.49, 50, 51. I came to send
fire on the earth, and what will I, if it be already kindled? etc. Scripture
and experience do abundantly confirm this.

We may only ask, How it comes, that persecution follows so at the heels of
the Gospel, and what sort of connection this may be? Answ. We will find a
threefold connection between these.

The first, is meritorious, procured by the Churches walking unworthy of the
Gospel; for, many despise and reject it; others walk unworthy of it; the most
part sit down under a formal and lukewarm profession: and so, by not welcoming
kindly the white horse, they do procure this red horse to be sent out upon them
for punishing their hypocrisy. This is given for a cause of these first
persecutions by some of the blessed Martyrs, particularly by Cyprian, who,
laying out the causes of the persecution, does name worldliness, emulations,
divisions, etc. as sins amongst Christians justly provoking God so to exercise
them, accounting that a chastisement as from God, which was persecution as from
men. See Cyprian in his fourth Epist. of his fourth Book, (which is the 8.
Epist. page 15. Edit. Pamelii, and frequently, See Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 1.

The second connection, is final, in respect of Gods purpose, who by these
persecutions intends the bringing about of good ends, as, to make His truth
more manifest, to discover the rottenness of some professors, to evidence the
honesty of others. Many will rejoice for a time under the profession of the
Gospel, who, when persecution comes (like the seed sown in stony ground, Mat.
13.) by and by will stumble; therefore the Lord in His wisdom lets a sword
pierce through many of His most precious Servants, that the thoughts of many
hearts may be revealed; which reason is given, Luke 2.34, 35.

The third connection may be called occasional, that is, when the light of the
Gospel with power comes into the world, (where sin has had the dominion, and
by it men's corruptions begin to be restrained, and their liberty in sinning
marred) corruption and malice in men take occasion thereby to rage, as being
the more provoked; and therefore leaves no mean unessayed to have that Gospel
out of the world, which disturbeth their sinful peace. This does not properly
flow from the Gospel, but from the devils malice, and men's corruptions, which
are imbittered thereby, and now rages to be disturbed in that dominion and
possession, which for a long time he has possessed like a strong man keeping
all in peace within his bounds, till this stronger come to cast him out. This
makes many, who lived quietly before light came amongst them, to appear quite
another thing.

More particularly, we will find these Primitive persecutions to have been
raised upon these occasions, which went along with the Gospel.

1. The Gospel drew men from the old Heathenish way of serving Idols, and by
force of reason did evidence the nothingnesse of Idolatry, and vanity of that
worship which was used by these Emperors, and almost all the world. Upon this,
Satan took occasion to charge Christians with singularity, in taking up a
Religion of their own; and with pride, in counting themselves wiser then their
Predecessors; and to be insufferable, as untractable men who would not follow
the rest of the world; nay, not their own Emperors, nor Predecessors in the
matter of their Religion, but took them to a new way of their own: all which,
was exceedingly heightened by the devil, to make Christians and Christianity
odious. This pretext is frequent.

2. A second was, The devil striving to make Christianity suspected unto the
great men of the world, as inconsistent with civil Authority, and tending to
the ecclipsing and diminishing of temporal greatness, dominion, and power of
Kings: which was confirmed by these things. 1. Ministers freedom in reproving
the faults of all, and their not sparing nor flattering of any, often
occasioned the enimity of great men, who thought that derogatory to their
honor, and unbecoming inferiors. Therefore, to suppress that, often the most
faithful men were persecuted, as we see in that instance of Herod, in John the
Baptist, Matthew. 14. 2. This suspicion was confirmed by the multiplying of
Christians, and the mistake of the nature of Christ's Kingdom, as if His Kingdom
had been inconsistent with theirs; therefore, fearing lest the multiplying of
Christians should have tended to the setting up of Christ's power, and the
overturning of theirs, they endeavored to bear them down. This made Domitian
in a special manner to search for, and put to death, all the natural kindred
of our Lord Jesus, lest any of them in the abounding of Christians, should have
pleaded title to his Kingdom. 3. The many slanders that were vented against
Christians, especially by Magicians, Idolatrous Priests, Jews, Apostate
Christians, and such like, who crying out on them as enemies to mankind, and
guilty of the vilest sins, as of Adultery, Incest, Drunkeness, etc. at their
meetings, and so to be the causes of all the plagues that came upon the world:
which calumnies, are fully refuted by Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Cyprian in
their Apologies. Wherein these two things are asserted, 1. That Christians were
innocent of these scandals. 2. That it was not the Gospel, but the worlds
rejecting of the Gospel, that brought these judgments on. 4. This occasion
rose from Christians strictness, who would not flatter their Emperors by
worshipping of them, and calling them gods, as others did. 5. Nothing more was
mistaken than Churchmen in their exercising of Discipline and censuring of
others without dependence on civil Power, especially when they exceeded in any
particular, as that law of Euaristus, ordaining that no accusation of a
Lay^man, or laick, against a Pastor, should be admitted. This is recorded to
have provoked Trajan to persecute all the Christians.

3. The failings and practices of some Christians, and their unwarrantable
carriage, made Christians odious in the world; especially these, 1. The many
differences and divisions that were amongst themselves, and the many sects
contrary to truth, and one to another, that sprung up with the Gospel, and the
great bitterness wherewith these differences were followed. 2. Outbreakings of
Professors in any gross sin, made all others to be so accounted; yea,
practices of the Saturnians, Nicolaitans, and other gross Heretics, though
disclaimed by true Christians, yet were imputed to them. 3. Unfaithfulness in
some few of them, in reference to their trust, provoked persecution against
all. It is particularly recorded that Philip (who was the first Christian
Emperor) his killing of the Emperor Gordianus (by which deed he came to the
Empire) did not only stir up Decius afterward to kill him, but also to raise a
most hard persecution against all Christians, as become odious by that fact.

Obs. 6. The persecutions of the Church of God are particularly ordered as well
as the preaching of the Gospel, and the thriving and flourishing of the Church.
This horse has a rider, that has his armor and a sword given to him, and it
is told what he shall do, he shall take peace from the earth, go so far and no
further: yea, there is a more particular commissionating of this nor the
former, to point out that there is a particular hand guiding the sufferings of
the Church and People of God. See it in Ioh, how in all the commissions Satan
gets, he is straightly bounded and limited. If the world rage at Christ and
His followers, and persecute, yet that horse is not without a rider, and a
bridle, and the sword he carries is limited, it cannot hurt a hair of the head
of any but as it is commissionated, Mat. 10. The hairs of your head are all
numbered. Persecution comes not without a particular Commission, more than one
is converted without the influence of His Spirit; He that guides the one,
guides the other; and our Lord Jesus reigns now, as before. 7. The restraint
mentioned here, to take peace from the Earth, shows, that no persecution can
mar spiritual and eternal peace, they reach but the outward condition, as,
to hurt the name, to plunder the goods, and to kill the body; but can reach no
further. Ioh. 14.27. Christ's peace is given, not as the world gives it,
uncertainly, but surely: which should make us esteem the more of it. 8. An
earthly condition, or peace, is never settled; any trouble may quickly disturb
that. 9. The world is much in Gods reverence for their outward peace: at one
word He can take peace from the earth, and turn order into confusion, and
imbitter the spirits of most familiar friends and near relations one against
another. Did not He prevent it, our life would be soon miserable. It is He that
we should depend on and acknowledge, even in outward things: for, when He
gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when He hides Himself, who
can behold Him? Job 34.29.

LECTURE IIII.
Verse. 5. And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say,
Come, and see. And I beheld, and so, a black horse, and he that sat on him had
a pair of balances in his hand.

6. And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat
for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny, and see thou hurt not the
oil and the wine.


THese Verses continue the history of the opening of the seals, or rather the
prophecy revealed by them. The third seal holds forth a sad condition of the
Church, in some things agreeing with the former type, and preparation
thereunto; but, in many circumstances, differing. As first, the voice that
calls, Come, and see, is the voice of the third beast, which ( Chap. 4. and
7.) had the face of a man: whereby is signified, 1. Prudence and reason in the
Ministers of the Gospel, as we said there. 2. It signifies such a condition of
the Church to be typified by this type, as should have need of prudence,
reason, and wisdom in the Ministers of the Gospel, even as the former two
called respectively for boldness and patience as meet for them. 3. It holds
forth that the Church under this dispensation should be well furnished with
Ministers accordingly qualified, as suitable to such a dispensation.

2. The color of this horse differs from the former: this is black, the
former was red. 3. The weapons of the rider differ. As also, 4. The word added
for explanation, differs, as we will see more particularly in the opening of
them.

That this type may be understood, it will be necessary to insist a little both
in the explication and application of it. At the first view, it seems to hold
forth some terrible famine by all the circumstances of it. More particularly,
this horse is said to be black: which, in general, holds forth a sad strait.
Job, ( Chap. 30.30.) gives it as one of the symptoms of his lamentable
condition. And so Zech. 6.2. the black horses do represent a sad dispensation
coming. Most ordinarily it sets forth the plague of famine, which turns
the most beautiful color to blackness, as from Lament. 4.8. and 5.10. is
clear. 2. The pair of balances in the hand of the rider, import a strait,
wherein men should not have meat at their pleasure, but weighed and measured
out to them: which ordinarily is used to set forth famine, Ezekiel. 4.16. Levit.
26.26. famine is threatened under these words, ye shall eat your bread by
weight, etc.

In sum, This type imports these three, 1. A great scarcity and restraint. 2.
Not an utter want. 3. A sort of justice or equity in the mannaging of this
want, or accompanying this strait, wherein it differs from the great
confusion and violence without any show of justice, as was under the former. 3.
The word of explication added, verse. 6. has two things to be considered in it,
1. Whence this voice came: it is said to be from the midst of the four beasts,
that is, from God, or from the Lamb, as He is placed, Chap. 5.6. to show
Christ's particular ordering of this most sad dispensation in the object and
extent of it: and therefore He is to be considered, not as the rider, but as He
who gives orders unto him. 2. The words uttered, are to be considered: in
which there are, 1. A proclamation, and 2. A limitation. The proclamation, is,
A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny: wheat
and barley are the two grains most commonly made use of for the entertaining of
life. The word, rendered measure, is in the Original (...). What the particular
quantity of it is, needs not to be enquired: this is commonly acknowledged,
that it was the ordinary measure allowed to a working man for his meat in the
day, so as it came to be understood ordinarily for a days meat, according to
the proverb, Nou sedondum est super Chaenicom, meaning, that none who had but a
days meat beside them, ought carelessly to sit down, but had need to provide
more.

The price of this measure, is a penny, which is likewise the ordinary wages of
a workman for his service in the day, as appears from the parable, Matthew. 20.
The sum comes to this, that men by their labor and toi^ should hardly buy so
much wheat, which was the best grain, or so much barlie, (which was more
course, and so taking a greater measure) as was meet to entertain them. The
limitation added, is, See that thou hurt not the oil and the wine. Wine and oil
are more for chearing and refreshing men, Psalm. 104.15. The scope is, to show
(according to the letter) that though there was much hardship to befall the
Church in things that necessarily pertain to their life; yet all should not be
destroyed, but a reservation should be of the best things, useful for their
refreshment.

This type then holds forth a hard condition the Church should be under, and
a sad dispensation she should meet with, which, though moderated in a more
orderly way than the former, yet should exceedingly mar the beauty of the
Church, and bring her low, so that she who before was white and lively, and
afterward red and wounded, should now, (as it were) drawing near expiring,
fainting and swouning, as one who has shed much blood, turn black and pale:
which, in general, holds forth a growing strait of the Church, drawing
nearer unto death than the former.

That we may consider the meaning of this type more particularly, we would lay
down these conclusions touching it, 1. We conceive it does not hold forth an
abounding or reigning of justice in the world simply; for, that is of it self
no plague, but a great good, and so does not agree with the scope, which is to
set forth the trials of the Church, though we think it may point at a sort of
seeming justice in the way, and persons of these who should be isntrumental in
these afflictions; in which respect, this rider differs from the former, as
is said. 2. Neither can it only literally be understood of bodily famine, but
figuratively; for, the plague of famine, is no peculiar exercise of the Church,
but is common to the rest of the world. Again, this famine here, is such a
cross as makes them in the fifth seal to cry for vengeance on these who were
instruments of it; which cannot agree to famine properly, which ordinarily
flows from Gods immediate hand. Beside that, there is little in story to
evidence the fulfilling of it in that sense, save what is mentioned by
Tertullian and Cyprian to have been in Africa. Neither is it likely that any
famine has been or could be, (in the ordinary way that famines come) and wine
and oil be spared, which yet necessarily according to the letter must be. Add,
that there is always some suitableness between the qualifications of the beast
inviting to come and see, and the event foretold by the type; but there can be
none between the third beast, and famine literally understood; which yet may
well consist, if figuratively it be considered. Conclusion 3. The event here
foretold, must fall within the first period laid down, to wit, after the first
persecution, and before the vengeance executed upon Heathen persecuters; yea,
it must be (as it were) a middle sort of persecution between the rise thereof
under the second seal, and its height under the seals following.

By this type then in sum, we understand the Churches sad condition after the
first two persecutions; yet, not so much any particular sort of trial on her,
whether from without only in respect of persecution, or within only in respect
of divisions, errors and heresies in her self, but a concurrence of both, and
what accompanies both, in a manner suitable to this type, whereby the beauty
of the Church formerly glorious is now marred and more obscured and darkened,
than it was by the preceding violence and rage of the former persecuters. This
exposition and application we will find to suit well with the type in its
color, sign, word of explication, qualification of the beast that inviteth to
come and see, and with the event drawn from Story.

1. It is ordinary in the Scripture, particularly in Ezekiel. 24. to set down sad
judgments of any sort under these four plagues, Sword, Famine, Pestilence, and
Beasts: and therefore we would not particularly astrict this type to one sort
of plagues, but generally comprehend all these sad calamities which came upon
the Church, even as by Sword, under the former seal, is not only understood one
plague, but all persecution by whatsoever mean the Church was brought low and
made bloody: And considering, that the following type cannot be literally
understood (wherein also this plague of famine is included;) considering also
that the effect (to wit, the Churches sad condition) is rather in the event
holden forth to be black, than any particular mean to be pitched upon, whereby
that is brought about. We do incline to take it more largely, as comprehending
the Churches sad condition in general, and all the means that are
isntrumental in bringing that about.

2. Famine also is figuratively spoken of in Scripture, as it holds forth a
famine, not of Bread, but of the Word, Amos 8.11. and this famine more
peculiarly and properly agrees to the Church.

3. Famine is sometimes mentioned as a particular affliction of the Saints,
even as Sword and Prison are. So in Romans 8.35. 2 Corinthians. 11.27. that is a
famine and strait even of outward things occasioned by the worlds imprisoning,
banishing, forefeiting, and spoiling of Gods People of their goods, as Heb.
10.34. and 11.37, 38. This famine agrees to the Church in her persecuted
state, and as the Sword was, so was this made use of by persecuters against her.

Now if it be asked, whether this famine, expressed by the type, be to be taken
literally or figuratively, as it more generally comprehends all the troubles
of the Church, both in reference to her outward and inward condition, according
to the three acceptions mentioned? We Answer, figuratively: on these
considerations, 1. The famine here mentioned, is some sad condition, peculiar
to the Church. 2. Because it holds forth such a trouble as men are
isntrumental in, and therefore are liable to Gods vengeance for it, as is
clear by the fifth seal following. 3. More particularly, the considering every
thing in the type will make this out.

1. It agrees well with the type: for, blackness on the Church, is spoken of
in Scripture both as an effect of outward persecution from others, and inward
carelessenesse and division; from which two grounds, the Church ( Cant. 1.5,
6.) does derive her blackness. Upon the one side, her mothers children were
angry with her, and on the other, she had not kept the vineyard that was
committed to her; which two had brought on blackness, as Sun-burning does in
these hot Countries.

2. This will agree well with the sign of a pair of balances: whereby open
persecution is set forth to be done by seeming authority, by sentences,
proscriptions and the like; men, as it were, weighing the violence of their
hands, Psalm. 58.2. as if violence could be covered with pretext of Justice.
This also agrees well to error, abusing the Word (which is the balance of the
Sanctuary) for the covering of it.

3. It agrees well to the voice of the third beast, whose qualification of
prudence, learning, etc. will be tried and put to exercise by this sort of
famine.

4. It speaks such a famine as has a reservation; so that though the beauty
of the Church may be marred by it, and many things corrupted, Yet the main
fundamental and soul-refreshing truths, which are the marrow of the Gospel
(called the finest of the wheat, honey, wine and oil, Psalm. 81.16. Isa. 25.)
are in despite of all oppositions kept free for the refreshing of Gods
People, by which it differs from the overflowing of heresies under the
trumpe^^, where some persons are exempted, but no truth kept free from these
winds, Chap. 7. but every green thing made to wither.

More particularly yet to make it out, we look upon it as applicable to the
state of the Church during the second Centurie, after Domitians death which put
a close to the second persecution, to wit, under Trajan, Hadrian, Antonium
pius, Antoninus Philus, Commodus, Pertinax, Maximius and Severi^, which takes
in five several persecutions. The reasons why we apply it to this time, are,

1. It suiteth well with the series formerly said down: if the former seal hold
forth the first two persecutions, under the first Centurie, as is said, Then
this following seal must hold forth the state of the Church immediately
succeeding the former.

2. Because during this time, though the Churches troubles continued; yet began
they, after Domitian's death, to be of another nature, and to be followed in a
different manner from the former, and to look likes this type, as we will see
by considering the state of the Church during that time. 1. After Domitian's
bloody rage, the Church had but a little times breathing for a year, then
followed a third persecution under Trajan, which continued under Hadrian and
the first Antoninus: all which time is accounted but one persecution by some,
because not interrupted. Some intervall again there was under Commodus, though
a more gross man than any of the former. Then persecution again brake out
under Antoninus Philos. Maximinus, and others; so that the Churches condition
is always suffering even under these Emperors who did not actively persecute:
yet because they restrained it not, men took occasion to vent their malice
against Christians. 2. These persecutions were most especially followed against
Ministers, thereby increasing the famine of the Word. Clement was almost the
first Martyr under Trajan; during that time also suffered Ignatius, Onesimus,
Polycarpus, and many faithful Ministers; and that persecution of Maximinus was
especially directed against Ministers, as being, in his esteem, the shortest
and readiest way to root out Christianity from the world.

3. By public Edicts, all meetings of Christians, for Worship or hearing the
Word, were discharged: so Trajan began, not forbidding Christianity, but
condemning all meetings of Christians as contrary to the Law; by which it came
to pass, that Pastors were banished, public Assemblies deserted, and people
left without the public means, Baron. Vol. 2. page 5.

4. Consider in these persecutions the many banishments and great spoilings of
goods, used during that time. It is marked in History, that then they
endeavored the undoing of Christians by banishments, not only to have them at
a distance, but, that by fore travel, and spoiling of all they had, they might
be weakened and debilitated. At one time, Trajan having tried who would own
Christianity in his Army, and finding ten thousand Christian Soldiers adhering
to the faith of Christ, he banished them all, with many Ministers, into barren
Islands: beside, some were purposly Martyred by sterving, as is recorded of one
Hyacin^bus, one of Trajans own Chamber; plundering and confiscation of goods
was rise, particularly under Severus, whereby, no question, much poverty and
great straits followed on the Church, Baron. Vol. 2. page 27.44. etc. and other
Writters make it clear.

5. Consider, besides all these outward trials, the Church was distracted and
overwhelmed with errors, heresies, and corruptions that creept in, such as the
Marcionits, Basilides, Corprocratii, Valentinians, Prisci^ianists, Montanists,
Cataphrygians, Appollinarists, with thousands more, venting most gross and
vile errors and foolries, whereby both the purity of Doctrine was obscured;
and, even in all, a great declining from the Primitive simplicity, under the
pretext of reverence to Martyrs, and following of traditions, etc. All which
is specially marked to have begun about that time of Trajan's beginning to
reign, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 26. and lib. 4. cap. 11. more largely observed,
Cent. Magd. in their preface to the second Centurie.

6. Consider that there were even failings in, and differences among good men
and great Lights in the Church, so that what time she was free from outward
persecution, it was spent in intestine divisions and debates, as is regrated by
Eusebius. lib. cap. 1. Papias brought in Chiliasme, wherewith Ireneus, Justin
martyr, Lactantius, and many others were infected. Tertullian, after great
appearing for Christ, became a Montanist, and many great men began to cry up
Free Will.

7. In Worship, much of their former simplicity was lost; the multiplying of
Holy days, inordinate reverencing of Martyrs (at first honestly intended) were
brought in, and many other things observed by the Cent. Magd. Cent. 2.

8. Upon these followed Schisms in the Church: when men drove their own
devices, and did not acquiesce in the simplicity of the Gospel, in Gods
righteous judgment they broke on these: particularly then broke up the long
lasting Schism betwixt the East Church and West, concerning the keeping of
Easter; the Church in the West (for the most part) driving to have it kept on
the Sabbath following its ordinary day, moved thereunto (as they alleged) by
tradition, and that difference might be put betwixt Jews and Christians in the
observation of that day. The Churches of the East again, pressing it to be
kept on its ordinary day, alleged John's example and the common rule. And
though Ireneus, and Polycarp (who was John's Disciple) took much pains to
prevent and remove these divisions, and for a time kept these Churches in
communion together, notwithstanding of that difference; yet afterward, it broke
out by undiscreet censuring and condemning of one another to the contempt of
all Church Authority, and rendering of the Church contemptible before others:
which, though rising from such a small ground, yet grew to that height, that
these two Churches were never heartily united afterward. Which considerations
certainly show the growth of famine in the Church, and the fainting of her
spiritual life, being joined to persecution, while, (as it is, Amos 8, 9.) her
sun was going down at noon, and the famine of the Word coming to that height
(which followed on the former) that the virgins were made to faint for thirst,
verse. 13. All which agree well with the type.

9. Add to these, the many reproaches, and slanderous calumnies, that upon
these occasions were cast upon the Church, both by Heretics and Heathens who
charged all the evils, which any bearing the name of Christianity committed,
upon the Church, as witness Celsus his bitter writings answered by Origin, the
vindication of Christians by Justin Martyr, Tertullian and others in their
Apologies, who reject these slanders as belonging to the Gnostics,
Saturninians, and others of that stamp.

10. If we consider several circumstances of the Churches outward persecution,
we will find it not unfitly resembled by this type, as especially in the actors
and way followed by them. The actors were not Comm^dus and Heliogabolus,
profane wretches, (the Church had peace under them) but men for civil Justice
and excellency of parts, such as the world never had better, a^, Tr^janus,
whose style was, Princeps optimus, So that the salutation to the new Emperors
after him became this, I wish you may be felicior Augusto and ^elior Tr^jano.
Hadria^^s had this encomium, Restaurator orbis. The two Antonini, the first was
styled Pius, the other Philosophus. S^verus, was a most severly just man.
Again, their way of persecuting, was not tumultuary, by raging violence joined
with outward dissoluteness and tyranny in their other carriages (as was in
Nero and Domitian) but (by making good Laws for the Commonwealth, and en-acting
Laws against Christians) they pursued them in a legal way as an act of
justice, under pretext of Christians opposition to the worship of the gods, or
as a being guilty of the many slanders imputed to them: in which respect, it
may be said, that these actors (in comparison of the former) weighed the
iniquity of their hands in a balance, Psalm. 58.

11. All these persecutions, though being at their height very terrible, yet
were they almost all, one way or other restrained: which agrees well with the
limitation of the commission in the type. That persecution raised by Trajan,
was staid by Plinius Secundus, proconsul of Bithynia, who thus wrote to Trajan,
that he supposed it unmeet to kill such multitudes of innocent men, whose Law
(as he calls it) leads them to such strictness, as to abstain from these
things wherewith they were slandered; but that they used to meet, and sing
Psalms, etc. (as may be at further length seen in the Epistles themselves,
apud Eusebius. and Con^. Magd.) To which, Trajan returned answer, That Christians
should not be sought for to be punished; yet, if they were presented, and
accused, that sentence should pass upon them, Eusebius. ibid. This answer is
justly taxed by Tertullian in his Apology, as inconsistent with it self, that
Christians, as innocent, should not be sought for, and yet if presented as
guilty, should be punished: for, (says he) if guilty, why should they not be
sought for? if innocent, why should they be punished? Yet did this occasion
much calmnesse to Christians, especially in these parts. The persecution
stirred by Hadrian, was staid by the Apologies which Quadratus and Aristides
presented to him. Anton. Pius was made to relent by that Apology of Justin
Martyr. Anton. Philosophus, by an extraordinary providence, was changed, and
made to befriend Christians, which was thus; In the Marc^manick Wars, he and
his Army were brought to great straits, being overpowered with the enemy, and
enclosed among mountains without water, so that he and they were like to perish
for thirst, a Legion of Christian Soldiers (who then were in the Army) did
separate themselves from the rest, and before them all, falling down to Prayer,
they obtained from the Lord not only water in abundance, but a glorious victory
over the enemies; the Lord causing it to rain with such fire and thunder upon
the enemy, as made them to give backs. This Legion, upon this occasion, was by
him called Legio fulminatrix: and this miracle prevailed so with the Emperor,
that presently he gave out an edict most favorable to Christians, ordaining
that they should neither be sought for, nor punished, if presented; but that
their accusers should be punished, seeing that his safety and the safety of the
Empire depended upon their Prayers. And it is worth the marking, that so many
persecutions together were restrained by God during this time, for it makes it
the more applicable unto therestraint insinuated in this seal, which can be
found in persecutions at no other time.

12. We may add, that in no age the Church had more well qualified men, nor at
any time had more appearing for her against all sorts of enemies, as may be
witnessed by the Apologies of the foresaid Quadratus, Aristides, Apollonius,
Melito, Asi^nus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and sundry others boldly and
learnedly pleading the Christians cause against persecuters; and were presented
to several Emperors. There was also much dispute with Heathens, as Origin
contra Celsum; with Jews, as Justin, dialog. cum Tr^ph^ne; and Tertullian,
adversus gentes and ^ud^os. So also against many Heretics, as witness Ireneus
his writings, and Tertullian, de Pr^scriptions adversus Hereticos, Yea, many
able and holy men appearing also to prevent and remove schisms and differences
in the Church, as is evident by Ireneus and Polycarp their pains and travel to
keep a good understanding between the Churches in the East, and in the West:
not only by writing serious exhortations to peace, and forbearance one of
another, and in reproving the vehemency of some, too fervently advanceing
their own judgment with hurt to the Churches peace; but also by their
traveling from East to West to compose their differences, whose labor for a
time God blessed, till about Anno 200. when Victor excommunicated the Churches of
the East; which rash deed, is condemned by many. Vide apud Eusebius. Cent. Magd.
Baron. in the History belonging to that time.

By which we see, that as there was never more to do with well qualified
Ministers, so was the Church well furnished with them; which does well agree
with the qualification of the third beast represented like a man in the type,
as is said. By these, Christian Religion was preserved from Heathens without,
and vindicated from Heretics within, and the substantials of the Gospel were
kept from hurt. The white horse was still conquering, and many were brought
in to Christ, so that the Heathens Idolatrous Templs were almost desolate, no
man haunting them, nor buying their Sacrifices, as the same Plinius in the
forcited place compleaneth; and yet there was no place almost where
Christianity was not: and though all other Monarchies had their bounds, and
were limited; yet this Dominion of Christ's, had none, but spread over all; and
therefore behooved to be the Son of Gods, as Tertul. at length proves, Apol.
cap. 37. etc. Yea, Christians did so increase, that (as the same Author
affirms) had they but withdrawn from their Towns and Countries, they had left
them almost desolate, and terrible to the indwellers that remained, and yet all
this was without humane force and help, but, as it were, by the alone voice of
Him whose Throne is amongst the four beasts. All which being considered, we
suppose it will not be unanswerable to the type, nor any straining of the
scope, thus to apply it, seeing this seal does especially speak out these four,
agreeing better to the event of this time than any other. As, 1. a decaying
state of the Church in some things worse than the former, whereby she becomes
black. 2. A remarkable restraint upon the instruments and effects of this sad
decay. 3. A sort of seeming justice in the authors and abettors of these evils.
4. With a sober improving of parts and abilities by the Ministers of the
Church, in a rational way opposing themselves to these evils. All which we
have found in the event, and therefore conceive it not unfitly to be resembled
by this type, as differing both from the seal preceding and the other
following.

And from it thus understood, we may observe, 1. That the Church is subject to
more sorts of trials than one; and when one comes, there is readily a second
that follows before the outgate of that; and the last trial is ordinarily the
saddest, and brings the Church lowest. Obs. 2. That men may be good, civil,
and moral men in things belonging to the Commonwealth, and yet be exceeding
great enemies to Religion and the Church. Or, That the most excellent men in
the world for parts, if they be not sanctified, are often the greatest enemies
of the Kingdom of Christ. The Church had peace under Commodus and Heliogabolus,
but suffered by Trajan, Severus, Hadrian, and Antoninus Pius, whose government
was excellent to the Commonwealth, which made many in that time without force
submit themselves to the Romans; Yet, in the matters of Religion, and what
concerned the Church, there were none greater enemies to them; which proceeds
partly, from the nature of fleshly wisdom, which ( Romans 8.7.) is enmity to God;
partly, because men of that temper had more settled principles of persecution
within them, not acting by profane fury as others, but from deluded zeal. This
made them more eager, more constant, and more vehement in the persuing of
Christians, than the principles of profanity use to do, as we see in Paul, who
in his blinded zeal furthered persecution more than many others. 3. Because the
more wise and civil one be without Religion, the more foolish does Religion
appear to him, and the more furnishing has he to persecute with. 4. The
persons of such men have more weight with others to provoke them to their
practice, and to abhor, as a gross ill, the thing they persecute. It was
nothing thought of to see Nero and Domitian persecute Christians; but when
Trajan, Antoninus Pius, and such like, opposed Christianity, that made men
abhor it, while such men (otherwise blameless) cried out upon it: and this
ground makes the devil especially aim to engage such into persecution; and
therefore in the first ten persecutions, we will find that the Church suffered
never more nor oftener than by such men. Obs. 3. A thriving estate of the
Gospel, does not usually long want errors and offenses from within following
it, as well as persecution from without. The black horse follows the white,
almost as soon as the red; as Christ has foretold, a sword should follow the
Gospel; so does Paul of heresies, that they must be in the Church, 1 Corinthians.
1.19. 1 Timothy 4.1. How soon in the Apostles days crept in false teachers, and
deceitful workers in the Church of Corinth and Galatia? Hymeneus, 1 Timothy 1.20.
Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.17. The Nicolaitans and Iezebel, R^vel. 2.3.
After followed Ebion and Cerinthus. The devil in Gods righteous judgment
keeping this way, (as it is Revel. 12.) to spew out a stood of error after the
Church when the sword of open persecution by the Dragon does not devour her.
The devils aim in this, is, 1. to carry many away by that snare, who have stood
firm against external violence. Experience teaches us, that many have
continued constant in the time of persecution, and have not ceded to any
terror, yet have been withdrawn from truth, by error. 2. By this, he makes the
Church more hateful and odious to onlookers, when he obscureth her beauty by
error and schism from within her self, than can be by persecution from without,
as in the event is clear. Hence it is that our blessed Lord, ( Ioh. 17.17, 21,
22.) prays more for truth and unity amongst His followers, as conduceing more
to their native beauty, than He does pray for outward peace and prosperity to
them. Gods end again, in overruling this trial of the Church, is, that these
who are approven may be made manifest, 1 Corinthians. 11. Obs. 4. That no trial
darkeneth the Church more, nor makes her blacker than error and schism within
her self: this strikes at the soul and life of Religion, Amos 8.11. with 13.
makes the fair Virgins to faint and fail with thirst: this makes darkness
where there was light, confusion where there was order, envying and strife
where there was love, and gives much occasion to others to speak evil of the
Church of Christ. Obs. 5. There are some special times when Ministers and
others ought to improve their parts for the advantage of the Church, and when
they must not only suffer as calfes, but dispute as men; which is especially
called-for, when light is in hazard to be obscured in the Church.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 7. And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the
fourth beast say, Come, and see.

8. And I looked and behold, a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was
Death, and hell followed with him: and power was given unto them over the
fourth part of the earth to hell with sword, and with hunger, and with death,
and with the beasts of the earth.


WE have already opened three seals: now follows the fourth, which, at the
first appearing, holds forth some terrible event more sad than any of the
former, as the particular description will clear.

It has, as the former, these three, 1. A word, calling, Come and see. 2. A
type representing something to come. 3. A word added for explication.

For the first, it is common with the rest, When the Lamb had opened the fourth
seal, I heard the fourth beast say, Come, and see. This Preface is the same,
save that he is the fourth beast, which ( Chap. 4.7.) is like an Eagle, whereby
is holden forth the sharp sightednesse, and learning, with a heavenly high
fleeing (so to speak) strain of spirit calledfor amongst the Ministers of the
Gospel. This fourth beast, is reserved for this type, because then such
qualifications amongst Ministers should be most necessary, and also should be
by God bestowed upon them during this time, while death was so frequent in the
Church, and temporary contentments so blasted, Therefore Ministers were to soar
on high themselves, and to call others upward with them, this fleeing and
mounting being a special property of the Eagle, Isa. 40.31. Ier. 40.16. Io^
39.27. Prove. 23.5.

2. For the type it self, the matter of it, is the same with the former, a
horse and a rider; But in every other circumstance different, 1. His color is
pale, pointing forth a further degree of the Churches affliction: she was
before fainting and swooning, but now draws near to death, as the words
afterward clear. 2. The rider is named with a terrible name, (...) that sat on
him was Death: which holds forth, 1. A spreading of death to many, so it is
expounded, a fourth part of the earth shall be killed. 2. That there should be
many sorts of death, and many ways to put an end to men's lives, as, Sword,
Famine, Pestilence, etc. 3. He gets this name of Death, to import the cruel
kinds of death which Christians should be obnoxious to under this horrid and
barbarous persecution, beyond what formerly they felt. The third thing peculiar
to this rider, is, his convoy, which is suitable to his name, and further
expresses the terriblenesse of the event, and hell, or the grave, followed
with him. The meaning is, that death and mortality was so frequent, that in
every place were graves, and that this dispensation brought men so frequently
to death, that where ever it came, there was need of graves to receive them. 1.
We expound it rather of the grave, than hell, in this place, not only because
the same word in Hebrew and Greek does signify both; but because it is
ordinary to them, in expressing a desperate-like condition, to join death and
the grave together, Job. 17.1. and 13. And 2. because this death especially
relates unto the Church; and therefore must be understood of the grave, rather
than of hell.

The third thing, is, a word added for explication, To them was given power
over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with Sword, Famine, Pestilence, and
Death, and with the beasts of the earth. In which explication, these things are
employed, 1. A Commission, that this rider gets; he is not absolute, to go
and do as he plea^eth, but it is said, power was given unto them: whereby Gods
Soveraignity and active Providence over the sadest dispensations of the Church
is holden forth. This power, is said to be given to them, in the plural number;
either because, 1. It looks both to death and the grave. Or, 2. rather to
this horse with the former two, seeing all these seem to be running together in
this seal; and the grave is rather to receive men dead, than to kill according
to this Commission.

2. The Commission it self which they get, and the extent of it, is, to kill a
fourth part of the earth. To kill, holds forth the ^arrand, horrid acts of
cruelty, and murder. A fourth part; this does both show the extent and
limitation of their Commission, that it should be many, even a fourth part; and
yet not all, it is but a fourth part, being a definit for a indefinit number.
It is said to kill a fourth part of the earth: by which, is not understood the
world as contradistinguished from the Church; that will not agree with the cry
of the souls under the following seal, (it being these that cry there, who are
killed here) But we understand here the Militant Church on earth, as formerly
under the second seal; there being the same scope in both.

3. This explication holds forth the particular weapons, as it were, by which
that great murder is to be executed, to wit, Sword, Famine, (which two were
made use of in the second and third seals) death, and the beasts of the earth.
By death may be understood the Pestilence, called the mortality, because so
many ordinarily die by it. And these four here do certainly allude to Gods four
great plagues, under which ordinarily is holden forth by the Prophets, Gods
singular Judgment. For this end also beasts are added; which we conceive is
not so much properly and literally to be understood, as it is with allusion
unto the expression of the Prophets formerly mentioned; and may point at these
three here, 1. At the greatness of this strait, wherein such a deluge should
at once set upon the Church, as if Gods four plagues were let loose together,
there being but one under each of the former seals, to wit, Sword, or Famine;
here these evils continue, and two more are added, to wit, Death, and the beasts
of the earth: which does certainly hold forth a greater degree of persecution
than was before. 2. By beasts, we may understand absurd, unreasonable, and
beastly men, as 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Such Paul fought with at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15.32.
Of this sort was Nero, 2 Timothy 4 and of such the faithful Martyr Polycarp
complains in his Epistles, apud Eusebius. who thought long for the Lions and
beasts, unto which he was condemned to be casten, that he might be freed from
these beasts (his keepers) which were worse than the former. 3. By beasts we
may understand that kind of death frequently used by persecuters, (especially
in the last persecutions) their hungering of ravenous beasts, and then, for a
sport, casting Christians unto them. It being thus understood, it may hold out
that plague of beasts, as it does peculiarly relate to the Church, in which
also men were isntrumental, committing that murder by beasts under this seal,
as by Famine under the former. However, this is certain, that this points at
some dreadful condition of the Church beyond the former, wherein persecution
is at an height (malice leaving no mean unessayed for undoing of the Church
(and wherein the Saints are pressed to double their cries to God for vengeance,
as in the following seal; and so it appears to be at, or immediately before,
the fall of the Heathenish persecution. Before we make particular application
thereof, we may observe some things useful for understanding the rest of the
seals.

As, 1. That this seal with the former two, does signify sad things unto the
Church; for that they are all of one kind, appears by the gradation which is
clear and conspicuous in them. The red horse wounds, the black horse
faints, the pale kills. 2. Hence also it is said, power is given unto them
together, as having one Commission. And 3. Considering, that sword, famine and
death, are joined together under this seal, to signify a strait in the
heighest degree: when they are separated, they must also be understood to point
at things of the same kind; and therefore what ever is found to be the nature
and object of any one of those contained in the three seals, must be understood
of all, though in a different degree. Seeing then that some of them hold forth
clearly the afflictions of the Church, it must be so in the rest also. 2. It
appears, that by these riders we are to understand the dispensation, or event
it self, signified in these seals more than any particular actor, who is either
the supreme or inferior cause of it; here the rider is death; and consequently
we may call the first, victory; the second, war or violence; the third, Famine,
by the same reason whereby this is called death, 3. That one seal does not end,
in respect of the event contained in it, when an other begins. Here are both
sword and famine under this seal, though death and beasts be added to it. 4. We
may gather, that these types are to be applied to special times, and do not
only hold forth in general the kind^ of rods and judgments, which were to come
upon the Church; for, the repetition of sword and famine by this seal, says,
such judgments were to continue during the time this seal relates unto, as
had been exercising the Church under the former seals, otherwise the repetition
were needless. 5. It appears, that these plagues are not literally to be
understood according to the letter of the word of explication, and therefore
must some way be figuratively taken, else it cannot be told how to expound that
of hell following and beasts, if it be not to hold forth, by allusion to them,
some sad dispensation on the Church, as has been said.

In application of this prophecy to a particular time and event, there are two
opinions, even amongst these who agree in this, to wit, that the first period
of bloody persecution, which ends about Constantins time, about the year three
hundredth and ten, is typified by this prophecy of the seals. Some make four
steps of these persecutions; the second seal, (that is, the first seal that
typifieth persecution, to wit, the second; for, the first is of an other kind)
comprehending the first two persecutions of Nero and Domitian; the third seal
to them comprehends the third persecution of Trajan, with the fourth of
Anton. Philos. the fifth, of Severus; the sixth, of Maximinus. Under the fourth
seal, they take in the seventh persecution raised by Decius; the eighth, ^^^ed
by Gallus, or Valerianus, or Volusianus; and the ninth, rather intended than
exec^^^d, by Aurelianus, who being so terrified by thunder immediately after
his subscribing of the Edict, that he instantly recalled it. These who so
reckon, under the fourth persecuting seal (which is the fifth in order, wherein
the cry of the Saints is expressed) do comprehend that great and last
persecution of Dioclesian. By this reckoning, this seal relates to the events,
betwixt Decius persecution inclusively, and Dioclesians exclusively; and the
fifth seal following does contain the story of the last persecution in its
heighest degree of cruelty on the earth. There is no material hazard in this;
yet considering, that by the seal, persecution is set forth at its height, so
that if we look to the rider, Death, or his convoy Hell, or the Grave, or his
Commission to kill so many, or his weapons, having Sword, Famine, Death, and
Beasts going together, we can hardly conceive persecution at a greater height:
and therefore we incline rather to make but three steps in these persecutions,
and so to include that last and most horrid massacre by Dioclesian under this
seal, and to take the seal following as expressing no new matter, but added for
explication and consolation in reference to the foregoing sad events; and
therefore differs in the type, common to the first four seals, as will be
more particularly clear in the opening of it.

This seal then contains the sad condition of the Church under the last
persecution of Dioclesian, taking in with it the former intervall after the
persecution of Decius, 1. Because in this time persecution came to its height,
the Church having now all her former trials lying upon her, and new degrees
added to the former; partly, because it is the trial immediately going before
the change of the Churches persecuted condition (the cry of souls, and the
comfortable answer in the seal following, being the result of this sad
condition;) partly, because the story in the event and particulars of that
persecution, will be found exceeding answerable to this type: which we shall
consider, 1. in general; and then, 2. in the particular circumstances thereof.

1. In the general, the Church, after Decius his persecution, almost (except
in that of G^llus and Aurelianus) had peace in a great measure from outward
persecution, for the space of forty four years together; but, during that
time, had fallen from the simple purity and power of the Gospel into jarres,
divisions, and strivings amongst themselves (as Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 1. and many
others observe) by which, God was provoked, and the Church made contemptible:
upon which, followed this horrid persecution, begun in the ninteenth year of
Dioclesian, about the three hundred year. This Dioclesian, being engaged in
many wars, choosed for a Colleague to himself in the Empire one Hercul^us
Maximianus; and while their wars increased, every one of them choose a helper
to themselves, who were called Cesars, yet had not the style of Augustus, as
the Emperors had. Dioclesian choose one Maximinus to help him in the East, who
is also called I^vius. Maximianus choosed Constanti^s, Governor of Britan; he
was Constantins father, and a good man. These Emperors set themselves together
to root out Christianity out of all the Provinces of the Empire, joining
together craft and violence for that end. 1. Putting to the choice of the
Soldiers and Officers to Sacrifice with them to Idols, or to quit their
service. 2. Making that same offer to Magistrates, with promises to both if
they should obey. 3. By throwing down all Churches. 4. Inhibiting all meetings
of Christians, and such like. And when these wrought not their end, they fell
to open violence, giving out public Edicts against Christians, stirring up all
against them, and following their cruelty so hotly with a profane emulation,
who should go beyond others in persecuting (save Constanti^s who was still
friendly to Christians) that almost no Province of the Empire was free: and the
number of Martyrs, is by all, during that time, counted innumerable.

To make out the conformity of the event with this type, take these particular
considerations, which will evidence the horridness of this persecution, which
is called Turbo persecutionis. 1. That it was universal through all the Empire,
and executed by so many prime persecuters, combining together in several parts
for that end. 2. For length of time, it continued full ten years in this heat.
3. Particular instances of some places may give us to conjecture at the whole;
in particular places often there would be hundreths in a day, whole Churches
full, burnt at once; some whole Cities, refusing to sacrifice to Idols and
calling themselves Christians, were burnt; whole Legions of Christian Soldiers
(being in number six thousand six hundred and sixty) were put to death. One
Legion is instanced, who, (after a most Godly Orati^^^^ Maximianus by Mauritius
their Commander,) with him were killed, because they ^^fused to act in
perse^utin^ Christians (even after they twice were decimate for that cause)
though they willingly yielded to serve against all public enemies. In some
places, the blood of the slain, of it self made little brooks, and colored
great rivers, as it is in Fox^, page 103. and Eusebius. lib. 8. Chap. 11, and 12.
also Chap. 10. who affirms he has seen the actors of that persecution so
outwearied, and their swords so blunted with killing, that they behooved to be
relieved with fresh actors. In one month of that time, seventeenth thousand
are reckoned to be killed, and by M^d^ in locum, (out of famous writers) that
in Egypt alone (which was but one little Province of many, belonging to the
Empire) there were one hundredth forty and four thousand Martyrs: which may
give a hint of what great number the whole, put together, might draw to. 4. The
diversity of deaths used by these persecuters on the Christians, may be
gathered, First, From the many engines purposly made for that end, as Iron
grates to ^os^ on. Brazen Bulls, Iron pikes in Barrels, and such like, never
heard of before. Secondly, The many ways used to kill them, drawing with
Horses, cleaving with Trees, casting to wild Beasts, sending to Sea in Boats
without any Provision, and thousands of this kind to be seen in Fox his table
of these tortures, and in Eusebius. lib. 8. who affirms there was an emulation
among the wicked people, who might invent the mo^^ ^^^ouring deaths unto
Christians. 5. This cruelty may appear by this, that none of whatsoever
relation were spared, friends, neices, children were put to death: yea, this
D^^^^sia^ put his own wife Sirena to death upon that account. And as no
natural relation, so no good offices of the most faithful friends, found
place to divert that rage. It is reported of one Eustac^ius, who having
returned victor over these enemies against whom he was sent, that, on the day
of his triumph, and entry to the City, he and his Family was put to death,
because he refused to sacrifice with the Emperor at his entry, professing
himself to be a Christian unto the Emperor, who out of honor to him had gone
forth to meet him. 6. Add to these, the great mortality and deaths that were
throughout the world in this Dioclesians time. It is recorded by Eusebius. Lib. 8.
Cap. 10: that men died faster than the living were able to bury them: by which
it came to pass, that dogs were so accustomed to eat dead men's flesh, that
they became a terror to the living, lest they should eat them also, which made
them in all places endeavor the killing of all dogs, as is recorded by him. 7.
Consider, that many excellent Ministers stepped out at this time to comfort
Gods people, and to draw their minds upward to a creature-contemning and
spiritual walk, as Arnobius, and Cyprian, who, upon a very like occasion, wrote
his Treatise, de mortalitate, under the ninth persecution. From all which
considerations, we may see an event answerable to the type, which may be well
called death, with such a convoy, commission, and arms, as this rider has, yet
was there even such a restraint, as made the Church have still a being in
despite of them, as will be more clear in the following seals. From which also
we may gather these Observations,

1. That there may be many sad trials past unto Gods people; and yet more sad
before them: Or, That the saddest trials come often last, like women's
traveling, the sharpest showers come last immediately before a delivery. There
is no warrant for Gods people to limit their own trials, or to sit down upon
beginnings. 2. After-trials have ordinarily some other circumstances and
aggravations beyond the former, as we may see by the gradations of these seals.
Trials are like Physic to Gods people; therefore there is a necessity of new
ingredients to purge away such humors and corruptions as former potions have
not reached. 3. When trials begin on Gods people, they ordinarily come to some
great height ere there be a turn, 1 Samuel 3.12. God has ordinarily some more
than ordinary cause in bringing them, which He will accomplish: and often men
are not brought to His design by smaller rods; therefore is there yet seven
times more and seven times more added unto the former, as it is, Levit. 26. 4.
God will sometimes give persecuters great seeming advantage, and will bring His
Church very low under them. We might be ashamed to fret or repine under our
sufferings, which are not worth to be mentioned in comparison of these here. 5.
Though death and the grave, etc. be terrible; yet God has them ordered in all
the circumstances of them, they are limited by Him, and are not boundless in
their Commission. They are ordered by Him, and neither death, famine, nor
pestilence walk at random. It is observed that the Pestilence in Hebrew is
expressed by a word DEBER, which signifies speech or command, because, how
ever it walk in darkness as to men, yet walks it not one step without Gods
word of command. This may be said of all other trials or deaths, which are as
precisely regulated by God. 6. We may gather, that the most horrid massacres of
Gods people cannot wrong them, nor mar Gods design concerning them. All these
trials do but (as Polycarp said of the beasts teeth to which he was to be
casten) as a Miln, grind them, that they might as good wheat be fitted for
their Lords table. 7. We may gather, Gods peoples happiness, and the evidence
of Gods love to them, do not consist in outward things, their lot is oftener
suffering from one seal to another. Death, the King of terrors ( Job 18.14.)
marches upon them, whileas the world seems to be in Covenant with him. These
are old truths, That through many afflictions is the way to Glory, and who so
will live Godly, shall suffer persecution. Gods people would make for trials,
seeing these words are yet unscraped out of the Bible; and the story of these
times do confirm it: for, however there may be difference in the naming of
instruments, timeing of events, and other circumstances among Writters; yet, in
the main they agree.

LECTURE VI.
Verse. 9. And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
souls of them that were slain for the Word of God, and for the testimony which
they held.


IN the former three seals we have heard many sad events prophesied of, to
befall the Church, every one sadder than the former, till at last, Death and
the Grave came as the yondmost step of temporal affliction, so that men might
now be in a doubt what had become of the many souls that had been murdered for
Jesus Christ, and if it had not been better to have wanted the white Horse and
his rider, or not to have stuck so to the profession of the Gospel, than to
have suffered so many sad things for it.

The scope of this seal, is, to remove that doubt, and to comfort against that
tentation, that though persecutions should come to the heighest they can reach
unto, that is, to take away the life of the body; yet was not their happiness
marred by it: they have souls (unto which persecution does not reach) which
after death enjoy blessedness; and therefore their trouble is not to be scared
at, nor exchanged with the tranquillity of worldly men, nor suffering to be
shunned for fear of any hazard which accompanies it.

This is the scope, which is here made out in these four, 1. By showing that
the souls of Believers have a life after the body is killed, and a comfortable
being in the enjoying of God; I saw (says he) the souls, etc. 2. By showing
that their death is precious in Gods sight, and that vengeance on their
persecuters is as certain, as if their cry unto God day and night, for that
end, were ascending, and He particularly taking notice of it. 3. By showing the
wise ends for which God suspendeth that vengeance; which proceeds not from
his forgetting of them, but is so ordered for the accomplishing of his own
designs. 4. By holding forth Gods present kindness unto the souls of these
murdered persons in clothing them with white robes, so that the suspension of
Gods vengeance upon their persecuters, i^ no let nor interruption to their
present happiness or comfortable enjoying of God. This is the sum of the
words, which are more Doctrinall than Prophetical, trysted with the former sad
condition of the Church, to be a consolation unto Believers, and an
encouragement against the former great straits, as is said. We take up the
matter in these two, 1. In something which John saw. 2. In that which John
heard: which also has two parts, First, A sad cry, Secondly, A comfortable
answer to it. This seal differs from the former seals in these three, 1. That
it has no type of horse nor rider, as all the former have. 2. That it has no
voice, calling, Come, and see. 3^ That it relates not to any such particular
time, as the former do; but in its scope, is common to all these persecutions.
As when he says, I saw the souls of them that were slain, etc. it is not to be
astricted to the souls of men slain at such and such a time; but is applicable
to all slain for such a cause, especially these under all the former
persecutions, as the prayer, How long, etc. imports. The reason of which we
conceive to be, because the scope of this seal, is not prophetically to point
out new events, and to relate to a particular time, But to lay down some solid
grounds of comfort to Gods people, as is said, Concerning which, these things
are clear, 1. That this seal looks to the most sad condition of the Church,
when souls are so put to it, to cry as if they could endure no longer. 2. That
it relates to former sufferings, and that not for a short time, but for
sufferings of some continuance. Their complaint, that their blood ^s spil^,
implies their sufferings to be past; and their cry, How long, implies their
continuance under suffering for a time: and therefore must relate to the
sufferings mentioned under the former seals, as is said. 3. That the matter
contained here must be understood rather Spiritually, as it points at the
scope, than literally a^ the words bear: for, properly souls can neither be
seen nor heard, and so also in other circumstances, but the Spirit makes use
of such expressions for setting forth the reality and certainty of the thing
intended.

More particularly to come to the words, in what John saw, verse. 9. These three
are to be considered, 1. What he saw, the souls of them that were slain, to
wit, of Martyrs. 2. Where he saw them, to wit, under the altar. 3. We have the
properties whereby he describes these Martyrs and differenceth them from
others, They were slain for the Word of God, and for the testimony which they
held.

1. By soul here (which elsewhere is called Spirit, Acts 7.59. Luke 23.46.
Eccles. 12.7.) is understood that immortal substance which God breathed in
man's body when it was made, whereby man became a living soul, 1 Corinthians. 15.45.
The soul, thus understood, is contrad^stinguished from the body, as that which
cannot be killed when the body is killed, Mat. 10.28. In this sense it is taken
here, where there is a proof given of that which Christ asserteth in that place
of Matthew cited: and though the soul be not the object of the eye, yet are
they thus expressed as represented to John, to show the reality of their
existence and being, even when separated from the body.

2. The place where they are seen, it is said he saw them under the altar.
There was then no material Temple (that of Jerusalem being destroyed;) So
neither by the altar can be understood any material altar: for, in heaven
where we must conceive these souls to be, there is neither material altar nor
Temple: and to say these souls were under any altar on earth, (suppose such
were) were to contradict the scope, and overturn the consolation that is
intended, and would involve many absurdities concerning the nature of the soul,
its speaking and being under an altar; which were also literally to be
understood, if that concerning the altar were: both then must be figuratively
understood, to set out one or all of these three, 1. The happiness of these
souls, which not only have a being, but exist in a notable safe and comfortable
condition in a special nearness to God, as under His altar which was so much
delighted in and longed after by the Saints in their life. It is like alluding
to these places, Psalm. 31.20.84.3.91. 1. For, as the Tabernacle was a special
sign of Gods presence, so the altar was a special part of the furniture of the
Tabernacle; and it would seem that He looks on the Martyrs as so many
sacrifices offered unto God, as Paul speaks, Philip. 2.17. 2 Timothy 4.6.
thereby to hold out a special respect that God puts upon them. 2. More
especially, this expression points out these souls to be in Heaven: the most
Holy was a type of Heaven, as it is expounded, Heb. 9.10. And Heb. 9.12. it is
said when Christ entered into Heaven, He entered into the most holy. The altar
was before the most Holy; and therefore we conceive this must be understood of
the glory of Heaven, Heaven being that where Christ is; and Christ's presence, (
Philip. 1.21.) is the company that the souls of Martyrs are to enjoy; and
therefore it must be where He is, which Christ on the Cross ( L^k. 23.)
calls Paradise unto the Thief. 3. Most especially by the altar must be
understood Christ Jesus, by whom we have access to God, of whom the Tabernacle
and all its furniture was typical, and who is called our altar, Heb. 13.10. by
whom we and all our services; yea, even the deaths of Martyrs are sanctified
and made acceptable to God. This we conceive must be understood, because other
Scriptures hold forth Him, and nearness with Him, to be the happiness of
souls departed; and because it is that which made Martyrs so despise suffering,
that they might be with Christ, Philip. 1.21. and because it agrees best with
their own prayers and desires under suffering, as in Stephen, Act. 7.59. All
comes to this, to show, that they enjoyed a most happy condition and Communion
with God, but is set forth under an expression belonging to the service of the
Tabernacle of the Old Testament, as many other things of prophecy are.

The third thing to be considered, is, the description of these Martyrs, which
is especially drawn from the cause of their suffering, (it being an old maxim,
Non est mors, sed causa mortis, qua facit Martyrom) which is laid down in two
expressions, the first, is, for the word of God; that is the first character,
to be adhering to the faith of the Gospel revealed in the Word, and to be a
conscientious practiser of Righteousness according to that same rule, and not
shunning to suffer any thing rather than to depart from these. In this they
were led, not as to follow their own humors, or to propagate their own
inventions, or any way to seek themselves, but out of respect unto God and His
will revealed in His Word. The second, is, for the testimony which they held:
this looks to the outward profession and confession of that truth, which in
their heart they believed. Christ calls it ( Mat. 10.) a confessing Him
before men. And ( Romans 10.) the Apostle distinguishes confession with the
mouth from believing with the heart: which two, being put together, hold forth
a well ordered conversation both in Faith and Practice. In Faith, that they
believed right concerning Christ; in Practice, that they were answereable to
it, and held forth that word of life by a good example, as a witness to
others; and when called unto it, they did not shun the testifying of both upon
any peril. In sum, all comes to this, by opening the fifth seal, was
represented to me the happy condition of the souls of the Martyrs in Heaven,
who were accounted by God to have lost their lives, not for the calumnies and
slanders imputed to them by men, but for testifying unto His truth. This being
clearly the meaning of the words (the contrary whereof, to wit, the miserable
condition after death of these who seem happy in the world, and are not happy
in God, is joined with this in the parable of the rich glutton and Lazarus,
Luke 16.) there is no ground here, either of approving of altars under the
Gospel, or of sanctifying them by burying of the relics of Martyrs under
them; which are amongst the superstitions of the Papists. It is a poor altar
that is sanctified, and does not sanctify its offerings. Beside, neither was
there Churches or altars in this time, neither could the Martyrs who were so
numerous be buried under them, but they were decently buried together in places
called Coemeteria, as is plain from the story of these times.

From this Verse we may Observe, 1. That though Gods people be liable to many
sufferings, yet, their consolations being considered, do far exceed them all.
2. That Gods people are not to place their consolation on this side of time; it
consists most in their comfortable being, and enjoying of God after this. 3.
That in suffering times, they would comfort themselves in the happy outgate of
their sufferings, and look more to these things which are eternal, than to the
things seen, which are but temporal. 4. It is a certain truth, that souls have
a life and being, when the body turns unto dust, and that they exist, being
separated from bodies. The soul, at man's Creation, was differenced from the
body, as not being made of that substance, but in a peculiar way was created
and infused by God, Genesis 2. At death, the soul is contradistinguished from the
body, Matthew. 10.28. the one dies, the other cannot. After death they are
differenced also, both in respect of the Godly and wicked, as these places, (
Eccles. 12.7. Philip. 1.23. Act. 7.59. Christ's word to the Thief, Luke 23. and
that parable of the rich glutton and Lazarus) abundantly do clear. 5. The souls
of Believers, especially of sufferers, are in a most happy condition after
death, to wit, under the altar, in Paradise, Abraham's bosom, with Christ
Jesus, etc. God has a special care of the souls of all His Saints; they are
precious to Him, their reward is great in Heaven, Mat. 5. and sufferers with
Him, they do in a special manner reign with Him; which being well considered,
there would be no great cause to scare at suffering. 6. From the description of
these Martyrs. Observe, That it is not every suffering for every thing which
will denominate one a Martyr of Christ; it must be for the Word of God, and for
that testimony, or it is not to be so accounted. It is recorded, (by Baron. an.
19. of Dioclesian) that in these Primitive persecutions, especially that last,
that many assumed to themselves out of pride, and had ascribed unto them by
others the title of Martyrs unjustly; wherefore it was appointed, that where
any Christians suffered, the cause of their sufferings should be diligently
observed, that these who were found worthy might be enrolled, and that none
other but such should be accounted so. This afterward turned to much
superstition, and gave occasion to that superstitious canonizing of Saints,
which afterward followed in the Church of Rome; yet had it an honest intent in
the authors thereof; as, 1. To keep the credit of Martyrdom from that contempt
which came upon it, when men that were scandalous in their conversation, were
so reputed. 2. To bound that carnal itching pride in many, who, because of
that honor to be accounted Martyrs, thrust themselves unwarrantably into
suffering. This honor was especially denied to three sorts of sufferers, 1. To
these who by profaneness in their conversation, heresy in their Doctrine,
schism in their practice, had walked unbecoming the Gospel. Hence the
Catholics (so the Orthodox were called) when they were led to suffering with
Marcionits, Novatians, or others such like, (for, sometimes persecution raged
upon all that were Christians by name) did still disclaim all fellowship with
these Heretics in their errors, as not accounting them witnesses to Christ in
their sufferings. A second sort that were denied, were such as without Gods
call, by their rashness occasioned their own suffering, such as these who
being unasked, professed they were Christians, and that they had the Bible, but
would not give it. A third sort refused, were such as had fainted in their
confessions formerly, though afterward they should become sufferers: this was
not done, as if they accounted them not Martyrs indeed; but that thereby they
might prevent fainting when any should be called to a testimony. So Baron. page
746. and 760. where he sets down the decree of one Mensurius, a Bishop in
Africa, ordaining none that occasioned their own sufferings, to be enrolled,
and giving this reason for it, Quia non divino instinctu ducti, sed temeritate
acti, id saciunt.

7. Observe, That the giving of a testimony by outward confession of the truth
when called-for, is necessary, and commendable as well as foundnesse of Faith;
yea, it is oftentimes the outward testifying of the truth before men, more than
the Faith of it before God that brings on suffering: and there was nothing
more abhorred in the Primitive Christians than dissembling of a testimony, to
evite suffering, as appears in Augustins Writings de Mendacio and contra
Mendacium, and the Writtings of others to that purpose: wherein three sorts
that creeped in in these times, are sharply condemned. As first, These who
called themselves Nicodemites (but falsely from Nicodemus, who is said to come
to Christ by night, and not openly) alleging it to be enough to be inwardly
sound and to keep their heart, mind and intention clean, though they did not
evidence or express that soundness to others: Such thought they might be
Christians, and yet let none other know it. A second sort were the
Priscillianists, who being most vile Heretics (particularly asserting the soul
to be a part of Gods substance) did also maintain and practice this, that they
might hide their opinions, and carry so with these they conversed with, as if
they were of one mind with them. A third sort were such, as out of a misled
zeal to discover the former, did counterfeit as if they had been maintainers of
that error, to make these Heretics the more freely to communicate their
tenets unto them. The Primitive Fathers utterly condemned all these, as
inconsistent with Christian simplicity, which requires a testimony of the
mouth as well as Faith in the heart.

Obs. 8. That every truth of the Word may be a ground of suffering warrantably:
for, the least thing that has a truth in it, as well as the more concerning
fundamental truths are the Word of God, and so not to be dispensed with by His
people.

9. Every truth in the Word has an outward testimony joined to it, and
sometimes may be called-for upon very great hazards.

10. When it is called-for, this testimony or confession to any truth before
men, is no less necessary, and ought as peremptorily to be held and stuck to
as the former: therefore it is called ( Romans 10.) confession unto salvation,
and called-for by a peremptory certification, Math. 10.32, 33.

Obs. 11. That these who are sound in the Faith of the Word, will be also
exceeding tenacious of their testimony. In Scripture, and in primitive times,
we will find the Saints sticking at, and hazarding themselves on things which
appear of very small moment, yet were to them of great concernment, because of
the testimony which was involved in them, which they would not let go. Such
was Mordecai, Ester 3. Daniel 6. his not shuting of his windows. When this
persecution of Dioclesian began, the persecuters sought but the Bibles, the
poors Coats, Money, or Cups, (wherewith they served) to be given them, as some
evidence of their ceding; but they refused to accept deliverance upon these
terms: yea, when the Soldiers, partly wearying to be so bloody, partly
desirous of seeming victory over Christians, did profess themselves content to
take any old paper or clout in place of the Bible, or poors Coats: they refused
to give any ecvola (as it was called from the Greek (...)) or castaway clout;
yea, when Soldiers would violently pluck such things from them against their
wills, they would follow them, professing their adherance unto the truth, and
that they had not any way willingly delivered these things, as is to be seen in
Baronius An. 303. page 748. It is reported of one Marcus Aretbusius, who was
put to torment under Julian, because he would not build the Idol Temple, which
he had formerly demolished, when they were content to accept some part of the
expenses from him, and to spare his life, he refused to give obolum, or one
penny, Sozom. lib. 5.9. Cent. Magd. Cent. 4. page 797, and 833. Tertullian also
( de Corona militis) makes mention of a Christian Soldier, who when others
after their victory carried their Crowns upon their heads for honor of their
Idols, he, notwithstanding of all hazard, carried his in his hand, professing
himself to be a Christian. By which and many other instances, we may see how
resolutely they held fast their testimony: from which especially they were
called Martyrs, or, Witnesses; and by which often, not only many weak ones
were strengthened, but also many persecuters convinced, and made to cry out,
certainly great is the God of the Christians, while as they saw that no
allurements on the one side, nor terrors on the other could make them loose
their grips, but still Truth and Christ were born witness unto, and well
spoken of by them. That is a good word which Polycary had to the Proconsul (who
took much pains to draw him to pity himself, and to deny Christ by his swearing
by the life or good fortune of the Emperor) he refused, saying, These
fourscore and six years have I served him, and he has never once done me
wrong, How then can I deny him?

LECTURE VII.
Verse. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood, on them that dwell on the earth?

11. And white robes were given unto every one of them, and it was said unto
them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellow servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled.


WE come now to the second thing in this seal, that is, what John heard, in
these two, 1. A serious suit. 2. A gracious, yet a wise return. The suit is in
these words, verse. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long,
Lord, do thou not avenge our blood? etc.

Concerning this Cry, we would premit these generals, 1. We are not to conceive
that souls audibly speak to the ears of men, more than they are visible to
their eyes, seeing they want material organs: it is therefore to be understood
with respect to the scope only, as we said in the former. 2. Neither have souls
in Glory any sense of sufferings, as if they were affected with them; it is not
consistent with that happy estate wherein they are, as absolutely free of all
tribulation and anxiety, and will not admit of any such thing. 3. Nor do they
carry any revengefull thoughts to Heaven, to desire vengeance for particular
wrongs done unto them: that agrees not to Saints, as Saints, on Earth, much
less in Heaven, where there is perfect purity. 4. Neither are they conscious
of the particular sufferings of Saints on earth, Isa. 63.16. Yet may this cry
of vengeance be applied to them in a threefold sense, 1. As it expresses
their respect to their Head Christ, whose final victory they in a holy way
long for, desiring to have all His enemies under His feet, as will be at the
last day, which is the day of their full Redemption. 2. As it proceeds from
their sympathy with the rest of the Members of Christ's body; in which respect,
they may be said to long for the perfecting of the Bride, and the vindicating
of her in general from all her sufferings. 3. It may be understood of the
guilt that sticks to their persecuters from their innocent suffering, which,
in some sense, pladeth for vengeance from God on the persecuters, even after
their death, as it is said of Abels blood, Genesis 4. that it cried to God against
Cain: to which, it is like, this does allude; so that crying for vengeance,
signifies this much, that their innocent sufferings are not forgotten by God,
but are as effectual to procure vengeance from Him who is holy and true, as if
they were daily crying for it.

More particularly, this Prayer has three parts, 1. The Petition it self, to
wit, Vengeance. 2. The Object against whom they pray. 3. The Arguments whereby
this Petition is enforced.

The Petition is in these words, laid down by way of complaint, Do thou not
avenge our blood? including in it a desire, that their blood might be avenge,
in the sense formerly laid down. We take it mainly to respect Gods final
sentencing of persecuters at the last day of Judgment, 1. Because many of
these, whose guilt made them liable to this vengeance during the former
persecutions, were already dead, and so were without the reach of temporal
judgments. 2. Because it is such a vengeance, which is sought, that puts an
end to persecution, as the reason of suspending this vengeance, which is given
in the answer, clears it, to wit, that their brethren and fellow servants
were yet to be killed, and therefore there behooved to be a suspending to
satisfy that desire. 3. Because the guilt of Saints blood, draws on that
judgment, and the ends mentioned, to wit, Christ's final victory, and the
Saints absolute freedom, do import no less: yet, may it have its partial
fulfilling by temporal judgments at particular times upon particular persons,
as might contribute in part to the vindicating of truth and the former ends,
such as Gods judgments upon persecuters under the following seal may be said
to be, always reserving the full decision between Gods People and their
enemies until the great Day, wherein this petition shall be fully satisfied.

2. The object of this petition, the men that dwell on the earth: not as if all
that were upon the earth were included under this imprecation, there being many
Godly then living in the world; But they are so designed, 1. Because often, and
particularly in these times, the generality of the men of the world are
persecuters, and by acting, conniving, approving, delighting, or such like
ways, do make themselves guilty one way or other of the blood of Saints. 2.
They are so styled, to show, what sort of men they mean, to wit, wicked men, or
great men, who aimed no further than this earth, and to have a portion in this
world; and so are contradistinguished from the Godly, who, though they sojourn
on the earth, yet do not dwell, nor have their conversation there, but in
heaven. In which respect ( Job. 17.16.) they are said not to be of the world,
as the former, ( Psalm. 17.14.) are described by this, that they are men of this
world, which have their portion in this life, etc.

3. The motives, whereby this petition is pressed expressly, are in these words,
How long, O Lord, holy and true? which we may take up in these three, two of
them being from two essential Attributes of God, made use of here as most
strengthening and encourageing to their Faith in this petition. The first, is,
from Gods holiness, O Lord, holy, etc. Lord, say they, thou art holiness it
self, and cannot but approve holiness in others, and disapprove wickedness
where it is, seeing Thou art of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13.
Psalm. 11.7. Can it be then that our innocence and righteous cause shall suffer?
and their violence and oppression go unpunished? There is reason from Thy
holiness to expect the contrary; and therefore we pray for it. The second
motive, is drawn from Gods faithfulness, and true: This respects God as he
has engaged Himself in His word, as if they said, Thou have promised to own
them that own Thee as we have done, and Thou have threatened judgments against
them that wrong Thee and Thine, as these persecuters have done, and Thou art
true in performing and executing what ever Thou have promised or threatened,
therefore Thou must avenge our blood upon them. Each of these grounds does
strongly by it self plead in this case, there being in them a twofold
obligation (if we may say so) on God in reference to this end. His holiness
swayeth Him to maintain His peoples innocence, and to reprove their enemies
malice; His truth also engages Him to make out His promises to His people, and
His threatenings to His enemies: but when these two go together, Gods Holiness
and Gods Truth, in such a case there is inexpressible comfort to be drawn from
them. There need no other midses to plead with God, but what is in God Himself.
His own Attributes, considered in themselves, and as flowing to us, and
accessible to us by His truth, as He has revealed them in His Promise and
Covenant, do furnish all manner of consolation: And these two ought never to be
separated in our pleading with God, 1. What He is in Himself. 2. What He has
graciously engaged Himself to be in His Word. The first, is the Fountain or
Ocean, wherein what is needful to us, breeds and abounds. The second, is
the streams, whereby what is in Him as the fountain, is communicated to us. The
first gives us ground to conceive largely of the fullness that is in Him; the
second (to wit His Truth) gives us access to approach unto Him for partaking
of it, seeing without this, God, considered in Himself, would be terrible to us,
as we are now in our sinful condition. And this is the reason why these two
Attributes are considered together in this place. The third motive, is in these
words, How long, Lord, etc. which is not to express any complaint on God, or
any unbelief in them (the titles they give God do clear both these) but the
words, considered with these titles, do enforce the suit, thus, Our sufferings
have not been for a short time, but we have lain long under them, and they are
now come to an height, that almost we can bear no more: Therefore is Thy
holiness and faithfulness the more concerned to avenge us and not to permit
us to suffer, and the enemy to triumph always. So that as these words do imply
the continuance and height of a sad condition, they do also plead pity and a
favorable return exceedingly from God, who so sympathizes in His peoples
strait; therefore is the word, How long used by the Saints, when they are, as
it were, at an extremity here on earth.

The other thing that John heard, to wit, the return of this suit, follows,
verse. 11. fully consolatory; having these two things in it, serving to that
scope, 1. Something is done unto them. 2. Something is said unto them. First,
Before any thing be said unto them (for, God deals not by bare words with a
praying people who are in strait) White robes were given unto every one of
them. The thing given, is, white robes, which (from Chap. 3. v. 4. they shall
walk with me in white) is clear to be understood of heavenly Glory, souls being
capable of no other raiment. It is said to be given them, not as if they had
been at any time without it (all things here not being literally to be
understood in the time more than in the thing that is given) but, to show that
Gods delaying of vengeance upon persecuters, does not prejudge the present
happiness of Martyrs souls, but that this delay is abundantly compensed by God
who freely gives them heavenly Glory, so that the other is no ground of
complaint to them. This is the scope, as appears by what is said, that they
should rest for a little season, etc. as if grace should give them the bud or
bribe of Glory to satisfy them in the mean time. It is said, robes were given
to every one of them, not as if all Martyrs had an equal share of Glory (though
every one get a robe, yet there may be difference in robes) But it is to show,
1. That none is missed, whether their parts or place be great or small, high or
low, Christ takes notice of every one that suffers, and rewards them. 2.
It is to show, that what ever be the measure that every one gets, yet all
get what is fitting to them or becoming them. Glory is shapen out to them, as
clothes are to men, every one according to their measure, as is sit; so that in
Heaven every one gets their own coat (as it were) and the clothes that are
meetest for them, according to their stature in Christ, and each one may say
their own measure becomes them better than the measure of one taler than they.
In sum, it says, all are contentedly happy, and none grumble at Gods way in
disposing what is His own: although heavenly Glory be the thing mainly intended
here, as the last judgment was the thing petitioned-for in the former words;
yet as in them we included temporal judgments in some respects, So here we
may take in, under white robes, Gods owning and vindicating of the Martyrs that
were dead, and servants that were living, from the many vile slanders and
calumnies imputed to them, by which formerly they were made black, as is
hinted-at in the third seal: in which respect, now they may be said to be made
white, because their innocence was manifested, and credit put on them even
before men: which in the event was fulfilled in the days of Constantine
immediately thereafter: and often he has given particular proofs of this, by
vindicating in an extraordinary manner some of his eminent servants, who were
not only overwhelmed with the reproaches of adulteries, murders, witchcraft,
etc. but by malice stirring up false accusers, witnesses and Judges, were
condemned judicially (or in hazard to be so) of such crimes, especially by the
Arrians means, until God, by terror on the consciences of accusers and
witnesses, or other extraordinary ways, brought truth to light, to the greater
credit of His servants, as, in the case of Eustachius Bishop of Nicomedia, and
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, with diverse others, wonderfully vindicated by
God in their estimations before men, is clear.

The other part of the consolation, is contained in that which was said unto
them, comprehending four Arguments of comfort to quiet them under the delay of
Gods final judgment on the persecuters (beside what is already said) It was
said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellow servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled.

The first and principal reason of the delay, may be thus conceived, Gods time
of final judging is not come; He has more sufferers to perfect, a certain
number are enrolled for suffering as well as for Heaven, many of which
(especially these who are to suffer under Antichrist) have not yet obtained
their crown, though these who cried had obtained theirs: and therefore in
respect of Gods purpose and decree, there is a necessity, that that suit of
theirs should be suspended. This is the force of the reason, which goes upon
these grounds, as is hinted, 1. That there is a determinate roll of sufferers
particularly condescended on by God. 2. That suffering has in it a special
dignity and honor unto the sufferers. It is a gift bestowed by God on some,
and not on all; yea to some of these whom He loves, and not to all, Phil.
1.29. 3. That Gods purpose and decree must stand, nothing can alter that (known
unto Him are all His works from the beginning) and in time He has no new
counsel to take concerning any of these things. Therefore must that
appointment, concerning the number of sufferers and manner and circumstance of
their suffering, be fulfilled. 4. That all Gods decrees, even these which seem
hardest to flesh (as this of suffering does) are wisely and graciously levelled
at His own Glory and the good of His People; and therefore ought, and may be
quietly and contentedly submitted unto by them.

The particular motives which the Lord adds to satisfy them to be quiet,
(though His Soveraignity were enough) are these four, as is said, 1. That for
the time their rest was not suspended until the fulfilling of His purpose, but
that good ground was given to them of acquiescing in the happiness bestowed on
them; They shall rest, etc. 2. The time of that suspension was not long, but
for a little season: therefore it might be the better born: all the time of
suffering, though seeming long to sufferers; yet, being compared with eternity,
is but short and for a moment. 3. That little whiles suspension is not in vain,
but for good ends; even then God is promoving His design of perfecting His
Saints, and making ready for that final judgment upon His adversaries, and
their cup is filling up for that end.

A fourth Argument, is, from the persons who are thus to be dignified with
suffering: they are brethren and fellow servants, Sons of that same Father,
employed in the service of that same Master with them; and therefore they, out
of respect to them, might quietly wait for the fulfilling of Gods purpose of
crowning them, and making them partake of the same dignity with themselves.
These reasons are expressed, not so much for the comforting of Saints in
Heaven, as for the clearing, satisfying, and encourageing of Saints on earth
against the continuance of sufferings, that they might patiently under them,
wait for Gods final vindicating of them and judgeing of their enemies.

From this seal, we may gather, 1. That there has been much suffering of Gods
people before this time; and therefore that the former seals, which employed
sufferings, must be understood of the Churches sufferings, this cry, How long,
etc. being brought-in here as the result of these. 2. That these sufferings
were such as proceeded from men, sinfully acting therein, by which they became
liable to Gods vengeance, and were not to be understood of Famine, Pestilence,
etc. or such judgments as do immediately flow from Gods hand. These could not
have procured a cry of vengeance against the men of the earth, as is in this
seal, if they had not been actors in these evils. 3. We may gather, that the
Churches condition has been generally suffering before this time, and that
there has not been any solemn and universal judgment on persecuters before
this, The cry, How long, O Lord, etc. implies so much: and therefore, this
seal, as it expresses suffering, must relate unto the time of the Church
before Constantine: at which time, God gave a visible testimony of His owning
His Church, and of His indignation against persecuters, as we will see in the
following seal. 4. It expresses the Churches extremity, and that immediately
going before her change from outward persecution to external peace; the
vehemence of the cry, the comfortablenesse of the answer compared with the
matter contained in the following seal, do confirm this, as if this were the
very crisis and turn of that condition. 5. That the following seal is not to be
looked on as a description of the day of Judgment, seeing that day, which is by
this seal for a time suspended, does not immediately succeed to Heathenish
persecution: beside the reason given here of the suspension of that day, to
wit, that all their enrolled number of Martyrs must be fulfilled, which in a
great part is to be accomplished in the time of Antichrists tyranny, will
confirm this, there being no possibility of including that persecution of
Antichrist before the terrible events mentioned in the following seal.

In the opening of the words we have hinted at several Doctrines, which now we
shall not resume, but shall shortly point at these observations further,

1. That there is no sin that more effectually pleads for vengeance from God,
or more certainly and severely shall be punished by Him, than the sin of
persecuting and wronging of the Saints. Wrongs done to any innocent men in the
world have their cry before God, and God is the avenger of these; but wrongs
done to His Saints, cry louder than the wrongs of any, even though Kings. God
cannot (as it were) but hear and avenge, as is clear from the parable, Luke
18.7. And from experience this has been found, that persecuters (even often in
this life) have been remarkably plagued of God, as Cain, Pharaoh, Babylon,
Antiochus, Herod the great, who was horribly plagued of God before his death;
Pontius Pilate, who was degraded and banished; Herod the Tetrarch, miserably
perished, Acts 12. Nero, Domitian, and many others, brought death upon
themselves, as is clear from Scripture, History of Josephus, and the
Ecclesiastic story, especially Cent. Magd. De paenis persecutorum. It is true,
Gods way in this, is sovereign and unsearchable in respect of the manner and
time of this reckoning: sometimes He will suffer great persecuters to die in
worldly credit and peace, as Nebuchadnezar did, and in later times the Duke of
Alua, the great persecuter in the low Countries: sometimes He will pardon the
persecuter, as He did Manasseh; yet ordinarily does He manifest His
displeasure, even before the world, by temporal plagues of infamy and
judgments upon them, or others, as may make the world know that He abhors
that sin: Such was Gods thrusting Nebuchadnezar for a time to the beasts of the
field; such was Gods plagueing of Manasseh for his blood in his own
imprisonment, and in denuding his children of the Kingdom. This proceeds
partly from the greatness of the sin of persecution, partly from the nature of
it; God is more eminently and singularly engaged against it (He being in some
manner persecuted in His people) So that we may say, that the blood of Martyrs
sounds always with that word before God, which Zachariah the son of Iehojada
expressed at his death, 2 Chro. 24.22. The Lord look upon it, and require it.
This is the language of their blood, even then when their tongue may be praying
with Stephen, Act. 7.60. Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

Obs. 2. That Gods people may continue long under, and be brought unto great
straits by persecution, as this cry imports, and the opening of the former
three seals makes it appear. For until the days of Constantine, from the
entry of the Gospel into the world, the Church for the space of 300. years and
some odds was under persecution, and had little breathing time for these many
years, Which is evident from story: wherein these two things are clear, 1. That
during that time the Church was wasted by ten stated persecutions. The first by
Nero, which began Anno 67. The second by Domitian, Anno 90. The third by
Trajan, continuing (as is written) for 19. years, it began Anno 100. The fourth
was under Hadrian and Ant. Pius, as is reckoned by some, and began Anno 126.
The fifth by Antoninus Philosophus, and his Colleague L. A. Verus, beginning
Anno 168. The sixth, was under S^verus, which began in the year 208. The
seventh, was under Maximinus, 236. The eighth, was under Decius, 251. The
ninth, under Gallus and Volusianus, 258. The tenth, under Dioclesian, Anno 300.
or thereabout. These persecutions are so reckoned by some, who account not that
persecution of Aurelianus to be one: because his Edict was immediately
recalled, he being terrified by God by a terrible thunder in the very instant
of his subscribing the same: upon which, he afterward befriended Christians, so
as he interposed his Authority for making effectual the sentence of the Synod
of Antioch against Samosatenus. Others again who reckon this of Aurelianus one,
omit that fourth under Hadrian and Ant. Pius, either because they account them
one with that of Trajans, there being no considerable interruption betwixt
them, or, because they were sooner stayed than others were. This makes the
difference amongst the Writers, who, to adhere to the number of Ten, are made
to vary in the application of them; yet all agree in this general, that there
were at least ten distinct persecutions purposely raised against Christians,
during that time: which being put together, will take up a considerable part of
these 300. years.

A second thing clear from story, is, that even during the intervalls of these
persecutions, when the sword was not raging by Authority against Christians,
yet by tumults and insurrections amongst the people, and by the malice of
inferior Governors (who were either actors in, or connivers at, or negligent
of the punishing of such things) the Church was still suffering. In this manner
was Stephen stoned by the people, Act. 7. James was beheaded, and Peter was
imprisoned by Herod, Act. 12. Thus Paul and the Apostles often suffered in
their journeyings, even before public persecution was stirred by Nero, and
thus it continued almost through all the Provinces of the Empire, when the Law
seemed most favorable unto Christians, There being all that time no Emperor
Christian to own Christians in their suffering, save one Philippus, who
reigning but few years, was himself and his Family murdered by Decius, who
raised the eighth persecution.

Obs. 3. That Gods people in a holy way may pray for vengeance upon
persecuters, as is often used in the Psalms: not from self revenge, or from a
carnal spirit; but from love to the glory of God, the vindicating of
themselves and the truth maintained by them, and scaring of men from this sin
of persecution, and the hazard that follows upon it. Obs. 4. That God may
suffer the blood of His Saints for a long time to be unpunished, as if He took
no notice of their prayers in respect of the effect. Obs. 5. Even then when God
seems to neglect His people, and to take no notice of their prayers, He is
Holy and true, and is to be acknowledged so. Though sense would say the
contrary, Faith ought to lay this ground at the entry, Lord, thou art holy and
true, etc.

From the Answer, verse. 11. Observe, 1. That though God do not instantly grant
the particulars that His people do pray for; yet their prayers are not lost:
here the thing sought is delayed, yet a comfortable return of their prayers is
made out unto them; and their prayers are not without fruit even for the time.
Obs. 2. Gods peremptory decrees, and the prayers of His people, are not
inconsistent; yea, His decree may aim at one thing, and the particular
prayed-for by His people (as it is circumstantiated) aim at another thing, upon
the matter, inconsistent with that; ye may these prayers be acceptable to God,
and they in them, as is clear here and in Abraham's praying for the blessing to
Ishmael, whiles God had appointed it for another. The reason, is, because our
prayers and our practice are accepted, not because they are conformed to Gods
secret will and decree, but as they agree with His will revealed in His Word,
which is the rule of our duty. Obs. 3. Though prayers prevail not to alter Gods
decree; which must stand, yet prayers may procure much present quietness, and
satisfaction for the time. Gods decrees are so wisely ordered for the good of
His people, that it were no advantage, but prejudice to them to have them
altered. Obs. 4. The most rageing persecutions have their bounds set by God,
the number of Martyrs is determined, and all the persecuters from the beginning
of the World, to the end, shall not exceed in one person. Which, as it does
notably hold forth Gods Soveraignity and providence in the greatest confusion
of the World; so does it exceedingly contribute to the comfort of Gods people
under them. Obs. 5. That the filling up of this roll, or the ending the
sufferings of Gods people here on earth, and the coming of the great day of
Judgment, come together. Or, The final Judgment of the World shall
immediately follow the fulfilling of the sufferings of the Martyrs. The reason
given of the suspension here, is, that their fellow servants, who were to be
killed must be fulfilled: and the term that is set for the answering of their
prayer, to wit, until their fellow servants, etc. does confirm this. For there
is no delay put to Judgment then, and there is no more to interveen the
Martyrs perfecting, and this vengeance on the persecuters. These two are also
joined, Mat. 24.29. The ending of the affliction of Gods people, and the coming
of Judgment; Immediately, says the Lord, after the tribulation of these
days, shall the sun be darkened etc. There is therefore no temporal peace, or
millenary Kingdom, altogether free of suffering, to be expected before that
time, which is the day of redemption from these sufferings.

LECTURE VIII.
Verse. 12. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and to, there was a
great earthquake, and the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon
became as blood,

13. And the Stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a sig-tree casts
her untimely figs when she is shaken of a mighty wind,

14. And the heaven departed as a screwl when it is rolled together, and every
mountain and island were moved out of their places:

15. And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every freeman hid
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains.

16. And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face
of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb:

17. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?


WE proceed now to the opening of the sixth seal, which holds forth some most
terrible and dreadful dispensation, and that both in respect of the type and
the word of explication or effects mentioned for opening of the type.

The type is set down, verse. 12. in three expressions, 1. There was a great
earthquake. 2. The Sun became black as sackcloth of hair. 3. The Moon became as
blood. The effects (which serve for explication of the former) follow, and are
of two sorts, 1. Upon the reasonlesse creature, in three instances, 1. The
Stars fall from heaven, verse. 13. 2. Upon the heavens, they depart, etc. verse.
14. initio. The third is upon the earth, the mountains, (which are most stable
in the continent) the Islands (which are most remote in the sea) both are moved
out of their place, Ibid.

The second sort of effects, are upon reasonable men of all sorts, Kings, great
men, rich men, Captains, mighty men, bond men, and free men. Great terror is
upon all these: which is two ways evidenced, 1. In what they did, they hid
themselves in the dens, etc. verse. 15. 2. In what they said unto the mountains
and rocks, fall on us, and hide us, etc. verse. 16, Lastly, the rise of all this
terror, and these dreadful effects, is more plainly expressed, to wit, the
wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of His warth is come, verse 17.

In sum, the words point out this terrible dispensation, 1. That it is
universal in respect of all creatures; neither Sea, nor Land, Heaven nor
Earth, nor men of any quality or condition are free, but all are sharers of the
effects of it. 2. It holds forth terror on all these in a most high and
eminent measure and degree, as the effects do clear. 3. It points at the
special cause which has influence on all these effects, to wit, the wrath of
the Lamb, that is, of the Mediator, because the day of his wrath is come, etc.
Which we conceive especially to be added for these reasons, First, To hold
forth the special procuring cause of this judgment, which is not so much sins
done against God the Creator in the breaking of the Law, as against the grace
of the Mediator offered in the Gospel: therefore is the wrath of the Lamb
especially mentioned, as if he were in an eminent way avenging Himself against
these who had vilified and contemptously despised His Gospel, and the
professors of it. Secondly, To show some convincing appearing of Christ in this
terrible change, so as it should be seen to be He by on-lookers, and that this
acknowledgement should be extorted by that manifest appearance, even from these
against whom He pleads this controversy. Thirdly, it shows the scope of
all the former terrible effects that are mentioned in the type, to be the Lords
executing judgment on the great men and others of the world (who put no price
upon Him, but persecuted His servants) and that, so convincingly, as He might
be seen in the pursuing of that His quarrel against them. Fourthly, It shows,
Though Christ's forebearance be long, yet has He a time of reckoning, and
comes terribly when He comes: and so this seal, wherein it is said, the great
day of the Lambs wrath is come, etc. is to be looked upon in part, as the
answer of the Saints prayer, How long, O Lord, etc. in the former seal: there,
they long for His coming to Judgment; here, it is marked, that that day of His
wrath is come.

That some dreadful event is foretold here, is most manifest. The difficulty,
is, how to apply it in particular. For understanding whereof, we premit these
Considerations or Assertions, 1. It is usual to the Prophets to express great
judgments (even such as are in temporal things) by such expressions, as, the
overturning of Heaven and Earth, etc. It is also usual to John, to make use of
the expressions which are used by them: particularly, we will find the same
expressions in the Prophets that are here made use of in the threatening and
foretelling of temporal judgments, as that in the type of the earthquake, the
Suns darkening, and the Moons being turned into blood, may be gathered from
Ier. 4.23, 24.28. Joel 2.10. The earth shall quake before them, the heaven
shall tremble, the Sun and the Moon shall be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw
their shining. Hag. 2.21, 22. I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, says the
Lord, which in plain terms follows, I will overthrow the throne of Kingdoms,
and will destroy the strength of the Kingdoms of the heathens. In a word, it is
to foretell a remarkable ruin upon the enemies of His Church. Add Isai. 13.9,
10. Behold, the day of the Lord comes with fierce anger and wrath, etc. For
the Stars of heaven shall not give their light, and the Sun shall be darkened,
and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine. So also, ( Ezekiel. 32.7.) I will
cover the Sun with a cloud, and the Moon shall not give her light, etc. In all
which places, the Prophets, after their manner, are aggreging temporal
judgments by such expressions.

Again, the first sort of effects, of the Stars falling from their place, of
the mountains, and islands their moving, are, upon the matter, the same with,
Isa. 34.1. The Lord makes the earth empty, and turns it upside down, etc.
with verse. 3. and 4. with Ierem. 4.24. Psalm. 18.7. Habak. 3.6, etc.

The other sort of effects, are the same, ^. e. expressions of terror, used,
Isa. 2.19. They shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the
earth, etc. The other part of those effects we will find, Hos. 10.8. They shall
say to the mountains, cover us, and to the hills, fall on us, etc. which words
are by our Lord ( Luke 23.30.) applied to set out the terriblnesse of Gods
judgment upon the Jews, which was to come a little after at the destruction of
Jerusalem. From which places, put together, it will appear not inconsistent
with this description and expressions thereof, to apply this event to some
temporal judgment. For confirming whereof further, we may,

2. Consider, that this event cannot be understood principally, and primarily
of the day of Judgment; but must be understood of something going before that.
It is true, the completing of vengeance (to speak so) will be then at its
height: and, by proportion, we may gather from the terrible expressions used to
hold forth Gods wrath in a temporal judgment, the unconceivable dreadfulnesse
of the last Day, which will be exceedingly beyond the most terrible temporal
event. Yet, we conceive, the scope of this place, is not to hold forth that
day; but some particular judgment, wherein Gods wrath against the enemies of
Christ's Kingdom, is in a singular and extraordinary way manifested. For, 1. The
seventh seal is yet to be opened, which contains events in time posterior to
the sixth, as was shown, Lect. 1. on this Chapter. 2. No mention has hitherto
been made of Antichrist, either of his rise, reign, or ruin: and it will not
be consistent with that immediate dependence, which each of the former seals
has one upon another, to say, that this sixth seal leapeth from the Heathenish
persecution over many hundreds of years, and all the interveening events till
the day of Judgment. 3. The matter contained in it, is only terror against
Christ's enemies, who are enemies to Him as Mediator: which cannot be said of
the day of Judgment, which is as comfortable to His friends as terrible to His
enemies and all sorts of wicked men. It agrees therefore better to some
particular judgment, than to that general appearances. 4. If this were the
day of Judgment principally longed-for by the Saints in the former seal? Then
there needed not have been so many Arguments to press quietness during the
suspension of that suit, if it were so instantly and immediately fulfilled. 5.
It is not like, that the day of Judgment should be prophesied of and described
before any temporal judgment on enemies be heard of, especially seeing they
are spoken of in this same prophecy. But concerning this, see more in the
first and seventh Lectures on this Chapter.

3. We say, This event prophesied of here, cannot be understood as containing
sad things to the Church, but on the enemies and persecuters thereof: which is
clear, 1. by the former consideration, compared with the persons on whom this
judgment falls: it is on Kings, Captains, and great Men of the earth. Now,
during the Heathenish persecution under the former seals, unto which this
immediately succeeds, there were no such persons in the Church as these. 2.
This is confirmed by the terror accompanying this judgment, which makes them
in their practice flee from Christ, and in their words cry out against it, as
being to be reckoned with against their wills, and as apprehending certainly
wrath to themselves from His appearing, as in the parallel places, Hos. 10.8.
Luke 23.30. is evident. All which, agrees not with the Saints frame of Spirit,
especially under affliction, who are crying, How long, O Lord, as under the
former seal; and are described by this, that they love Christ's appearing, and
are joyful of it, as of the day of their Redemption. 3. Persecution on the
Church, could breed no such terror on the Kings of the earth, as is here
prophesied of.

4. We say, this type cannot hold forth defection in Churchmen, as if that
were typified by Stars falling from Heaven, darkening of the Sun, etc. For,
darkening of light, or defection of Churchmen could not breed such terror on
the Kings and great Men of the earth as is here: they are not usually much
troubled with these things; and yet it is clear, that this terror flows as an
effect from this sad judgment typified and expressed by these former
expressions. And therefore by the same reason, this seal is not to be divided,
as if by the first part thereof were holden out defection in the Church, and by
the last, judgment upon enemies, seeing this last part does clearly hold forth
the effects of the former, and does more fully explicate the same thing.

5. We do also assert, that here cannot be understood any trouble brought upon
persecuters by Heathens, nor any trouble brought upon the Empire while
Emperors and Rulers were Christians by these who were Heathens, such as that
of the Goths, and these inund^tions of barbarous Nations, which after the four
hundred year brake in upon the Empire. For, 1. the series of time will not
agree to that: this seal follows immediately the Churches sufferings by
Heathen Emperors; and therefore it is not like the great mutation on the
Empire, when it became Christian, should be omitted. 2. This judgment speaks
out especially the wrath of Christ, and that so palpably, as His hand is in a
more singular way acknowledged in it, than the prevailing of Heathens against
Heathens would readily produce. This conviction (as would seem) of Christ's
being acknowledged in it, flowing mainly from the instruments employed, and
owned by Him in the execution of it; and this terror that falls on them, is
not that terror as it seaseth on all the wicked in the general judgment, such
as was mentioned, Chap. 1.7. nor that which affects men simply by the dread
of Gods greatness, as He is in Himself; but it is two ways qualified, 1. It
is the terror of Him that sits on the Throne, that is, of God, as He rules
in His Church: in which respect, He is holden forth, Chap. 4. v. 5. and so
distinguished from the Mediator: so now, by this judgment on enemies for
persecuting His Church, He makes them know that He rules and has a Throne
particularly in Jacob to the ends of the earth, as the Saints Prayer is, Psalm.
59.13. 2. It is the wrath of the Lamb, appearing as Mediator, and befriending
His Church, which the more surpriseth them, that formerly they despised both:
now, they find them both in their tops, owning the despised Church and making
it known that their Idols which they worshipped, had not the absolute and
sovereign government of affairs, but the God whom the Christians worshipped. 3.
This judgment falls especially, and in a peculiar way upon the enemies of
Christ, as the expressions bear; But, judgments, executed by Heathens
(particularly and especially these brought on by the Goths, Vandals, etc.) lay
as heavy (if not more heavy) upon the soundest and best Christians as upon any
other. 4. The mutation brought on by this judgment, is so universal upon all
things, and so sudden, being contained under one seal, that it can hardly be
paralleled by any particular event of such an invasion: and therefore is not to
be applied to them.

Upon these grounds it is, why we conceive this seal to differ from the first
four, in these two, 1. The type is not a horse and a rider. 1. Because the
object is not the same. These first four concern the Church immediately, this
concerns its enemies. 2. Because though the Lord orders judgments upon the
most wicked men by His providence; yet this type holds forth judgment in a
more boundless way without such limitations and restrictions as the former
dispensations toward the Church (typified by horse and riders with their
several commissions) did admit. 2. In this seal, there is no word of
advertisement to come and see, as was in the former four. The reason is,
because God sends not Ministers unto, not allows warnings upon His enemies
as He does upon His people. To conclude then, we say, this seal relates not,
first, to the end of the world. Nor, 2. to the persecution of the Church under
Antichrist. And, 3. nor to the invasion of the Empire by Goths, Vandals, etc.
and other Heathen Nations: these invasions were not stated palpably on Christ's
account, as manifestly owning His interest, such as this seal imports. It
remains then to be understood of some singular and extraordinary change on
the Romans Empire, and its Heathen Emperors, whereby it becomes quite another
thing, persecution put to an end, persecuters brought unto judgment, and that
by such instruments as maintained Christ's quarrel against them, and with such
success as should extort the acknowledgement thereof from the persecuters
themselves. All which characters, as they are now clearly implied in this seal;
so will we find them remarkably fulfilled in that great change of the world in
the days of Constantine the great, about the year 310. and afterward; which
came immediately upon the back of the last persecution, (and so agrees well to
the time) by which the whole face of the Heathenish Empire was changed, and, as
Heathenish, was overturned. So that in effect the world became another thing
than it was: which agrees well with the type; persecuters were visibly
punished and taken with their hands hot in the blood of the Saints; and by such
instruments as particularly stated the quarrel upon Christ's account, and
therefore carried the cross in their Ensign; many Emperors and great Men,
were brought to acknowledge Christ's hand and indignation against them; The
Church had freedom from outward persecutions; Christianity became in request in
the world, so that Christians seemed now to enjoy in part the return of the
prayers of these that had gone before them. All which, being so evidently
fulfilled in that time, and being so agreeable to this type in all its
circumstances, we conceive, that the foretelling of this very event, is the
main scope of this seal: for clearing and confirming whereof, we shall add
further these considerations,

If we consider, 1. the usual manner of the Prophets their expressing of
horrible judgments (as we observed at the entry) it will be agreeable to them,
and to John who follows them, to understand this of some temporal thing,
especially upon enemies.

2. Consider, that it is ordinary in the Scriptures of the New Testament, and
agreeable to this prophecy to speak of the Roman Empire as of all the world,
and of things befalling it, as of changes and events befalling all the world;
So, Luke 2.1. It is said that Augustus decreed, that all the world should be
taxed, that is, all the Empire, Rev. 3.10. And therefore it will not be
unreasonable to a strict these expressions to changes within this Empire.

3. Consider, that the change of Religion in the Empire in its Nature,
Ordinances, Customs, Ceremonies, etc. and the bringing in of a different
Religion in its room, is ordinarily expressed in such terms as hold forth an
universal change upon all the world; upon Heaven, Earth, Sun, Moon, Seas, etc.
as if all were overturned, and yet the change is not upon the world in it self,
but upon Religion (if we may speak so) in the world: because that change has
such alterations with it, as if the world became another thing; and because
Religion being the most precious thing in the world, the great and remarkable
changes are reckoned accordingly as it goes with it. Hence we will find three
eminent changes, and periods in respect of Religion, spoken of in this Book,
and all of them in such expressions as bear forth, at the first view, a total
and universal change upon all the world. The first, is, the change of the
world from Heathenish Idolatry to Christianity; this change is set out as a new
world in this seal, because (as it were) that Heathenish world, wherein
Heathens bare rule, and Idolatry was publicly countenanced and authorized, is
overturned, and another world come in its room. This change of the world is
from Heathenish to Christian. The second great change of Religion, is from the
simplicity of Christianity, unto the darkness and doctrines of Antichrist.
This change under the trumpets, is set forth by smiting of the Earth and Seas,
by darkening of the Sun and Moon, etc. when the mutation is upon the state of
Religion in the world; This change is of a Christian world into an
Antichristian. The third great change, is under the vials, when Antichrists
kingdom again is brought down, Chap. 16. It is expressed by a mutation upon the
Eearth, Sea, Sun, etc. when yet the judgment falls but on the beast his
worshippers, and the pendicles, and superstitions of his kingdom, which may be
called the Antichristian world: and this mutation, is the overturning of the
Antichristian, and the inbringing of a Christian world again in the place of
it. And this way being kept in expressing all the other changes of Religion
in the world, we may the more warrantably apply this here, as is said. Only,
there is this difference, the other changes of Religion under the trumpets and
vials, are brought about by steps under several trumpets and vials; This
change is set out by one seal together, because that alteration was instantly,
and universally at one time brought to pass, which in the other change is not
so sudden.

4. The considering of that event more particularly in its several
circumstances, does so fully answer this type, that it may well be taken in and
accounted as a universal change upon the world. Which will appear by
considering these two in the matter of fact, 1. What the state of the Church
was immediately before this change. 2. Considering what the state of the Church
became immediately thereafter.

1. The state of the Church before Constantine's government, was, for outward
persecution, under the extremest sufferings that can be imagined, as was
hinted at in the expounding of the fourth seal. Amongst the four chief
Governors that then were, to wit, Dioclesian, Maximianus, Herculeus, Galerius,
Maximinus (called also Iovius) and Constantius, Constantine's father, only this
last had a favor to Christians, the other three being most cruel persecuters.
About Constantius death, started up Maxentius to usurp the Empire at Rome, who
for a time prevailed, and continued as barbarous and cruel as any of the
other. Against this Maxentius, Iovius sent one Severus (whom he called Caesar)
who was overthrown by him; after whom, he preferred one Maximinus his nephew,
who in persecuting was nothing behind any of the former. A little after
Licinius, who was constituted Caesar in his room (who for a time had
counterfitly befriended Christians for fear of Constantine) yet afterward fell
into most gross blasphemy and persecution. All of these having this for their
aim, to root out Christianity, by cruelty and subtilty, left nothing undone to
accomplish it. Their cruelty vented in these persecutions, and their subtilty
may be gathered from the Laws we find enacted against the Church in these
times. As, 1. that all the Bibles, Cups, and Church-furniture should be
delivered up and destroyed: it was from this giving up of the Bible, that
Christians, who made defection, were called after that Traditores, that
delivering up their Bibles, etc. being accounted receding from the truth, or
the testimony thereof. 2. That men and women should not meet together for
religious exercises, but men apart, and women apart. 3. That none should teach
women, but women. 4. That no meetings should be kept within the circuits of
Towns, but in the fields, upon the pretext of healthfulnesse. 5. That there
should be no meetings of Ministers or correspondences amongst them in Synods or
otherwise, which was prohibited as a thing dangerous to the State: 6. That all
the old Temples should be built, and all the meeting-places of the Christians
destroyed. 7. That no Ministers should be permitted, but, where ever found,
they should be cast into prison: which Laws, at last, ended in open persecution
against all that professed the Name of Christ; so that to be called a
Christian, was a most horrid crime. Unto these Laws, afterward Julian (who was
eminently taught of the devil to undermine Christianity after it had flourished
for a time in peace and tranquillity) added these four; or, more plainly and
craftily formed them out of what was before him. 1. That no Christian should be
admitted to any Trust, Civil or Military, but he who first sacrificed to Idols:
this was observed formerly under Dioclesian. 2. That the children of no
Christian should be admitted to Schools of Learning, or be educated in humane
Science, that by that means he might bring in ignorance amongst the Christians,
that they might be the less able to vindicate Christianity, and might be the
less thought-of amongst others. 3. That no Preacher of the Gospel amongst them
should have any allowance of maintenance (for, before him in Constantius time,
they had allowance settled by public Authority) intending thereby to overturn
the Church, knowing that the Church cannot consist without the Ministry,
neither a Ministry without it be maintained. His fourth device to undo
Christianity, was, in despite of it, to give way to all other Religions by
public tolerating of them, Therefore in his time was the rebuilding of the
Temple of Apollo at Delphus intended, and the Jews encouraged to lay the
foundation of their destroyed Temple at Jerusalem: both which, were
miraculously by earthquakes impeded: and his practices in reference to this,
were observed, ( Chap. 2.) in the Epistle to Thyatira.

From which particulars, with what was said in opening the fourth seal, it may
appear, how sad the condition of the Christian Church was when Constantine
began to govern. Let us now see what it became within some few years thereafter.

The estate which the Church was brought unto after that time, was shortly
thus. After Constantius death, Constantine being declared Emperor while he was
in Britain, continued in these parts for a time, while the forementioned
persecuters, especially Maxentius who lived at Rome, were become hateful to
all; not so much for their persecuting of Christians, as by their tyrannies,
adulteries, and all sort of vile cruelties upon every sort of persons:
whereupon, Constantine (called (...) from his color) was encouraged to march
toward Rome, having before him, as his end, the liberating of the Empire from
such tyranny of so many Tyrants: and being doubtful what Religion to follow,
at the noon day, or a little after, there appeared to him in the heavens, a
fiery cross, with this Inscription in legible letters ((...), i. e. in hoc
vince) in this overcome. This vision was seen by many others with him, as
Socrates, ( Lib. 1. cap. 1.) affirms: by which sign, he was not only
animated to go to Rome, while he was hesitating; but also to embrace
Christianity and the profession of Christ. In sign whereof he always carried
the Cross with that Inscription for his Colors, and set it up at Rome, when
he entered Victor in it. This story Eusebius. de vita Constantini, Lib. 1. cap.
22. affirms he heard Constantine himself assert to be truth with an oath.
After this, he with his Army marched toward Rome, and in the way had discovered
to him the treachery of Maximinianus his own Father in Law: By Gods mercy he
was delivered from it, and it returned upon the author. When he came to Rome,
God delivered the Tyrant Maxentius into his hand. Maxentius and his chief
Officers being put to flight on the other side of the River Tyber, was
necessitated to return by a Bridge ( per pontem Milvium as they call it)
whereupon he had made devices in a secret way to have drowned Constantine, by
which, he and these that were with him were drowned in the River. Upon which
occasion ( as Eusebius reports, Lib. 9. cap. 8.) Christians took occasion to
sing that word in the 9. Psalm, verse. 16. The Lord is known by the judgments
which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. And that
word, Psalm. 7.15. He made a pit and dug it, and he himself is fallen into
it, etc. After this, Constantine having the peaceable possession of the West,
had afterward two difficulties; The first, from Maximinus, aiming to drive on
persecution, and the death of Constantine together, Eusebius. Lib. 1. de vita
Constantini, cap. 40. The second, was from Licinius Emperor of the East, with
whom Constantine had made peace, and had given his Sister to him in Marriage,
who for a time did counterfeit Christianity; yet within five years, became a
most cruel enemy to Constantine and all other Christians, and was the author
of many of the former cruel Edicts, as is to be seen in the former places of
Eusebius, lib. 1. cap. 43, 44, 45, 46, etc. Against these also Constantine set
himself, not only by Arms but by Prayer to God and Fasting: over whom God gave
him glorious victories, as is to be seen, Ibid. lib. 1. cap. 51. lib. 2. cap.
11, 12, 13, 14, etc. After which, followed a most comfortable and joyful
estate of the Church, as Eusebius. has it, Lib. 2. cap. 19. Out of which general,
we may gather and observe these particulars, for making out the answerablnesse
of this event unto this type, and the greatness of the change from what was
before,

As, 1. This judgment was upon many great men, as Dioclesian, Maximianus,
Galerius Maximinus, Maxentius, Licinius: all which had the titles of Emperors
or Cesars, beside what came on many great Captains under them, as particularly
on Pontetius, Culianus, Theotimus and many others, remarkably plagued of God,
as is evident in the forecited stories.

2. Christianity that was before destroyed, was now publicly by Authority
countenanced; Idolatry that was before countenanced, is now abhorred by all;
Idol-temples every where are destroyed or shut up, and Christian Churches built
and Ministers provided, rather more sumptuously than sparingly, as we may
gather from Eusebius. Lib. 3. cap. 47. 49. 52, 53, 56, etc.

3. The Laws are just contrary to what they were; none but Christians are
admitted to Office: and though Constantine took not the way of discovering his
servants, which his Father Constantius did (who gave out, as Iebu, that he
would admit of none to serve him, but such as sacrificed to Idols, but
afterward expelled the sacrificers, and kept the refusers, saying, they would
not be faithful to him, who had never been faithful to God) yet was he
zealous in having faithful men about him, and to have Religious Worship not
only in public, but particularly in his own Family: Schools were appointed,
Ministers encouraged; Martyrs (or Confessors rather) who were in exile, were
brought back; these who had been put from Offices, were restored; Synods were
convocat and countenanced by Constantin's own presence, as that of Neice was;
heresies were condemned; toleration of other Religions, or of schisms, amongst
Christians, was not suffered, and many such like Laws and practices, just
opposite to what was before.

4. Consider the great Victories he obtained over enemies, and the account upon
which he pursued them. His first War against Maxentius, was undertaken as
particularly called unto it by Christ Himself; his last War against Licinius,
was not occasioned out of any temporal design to advance his own greatness;
(for he was desirous to live peaceably with him) but to restrain his
persecution by force, when all other fair means, attempted by him, had been
frustrated, God giving many singular evidences of his owning him in these
Victories.

5. Consider the time when these persecuters were surprised, it was even in the
time of their actual opposition to Christ, whiles professedly they had stated
persecution against His Servants, and could by no means be withdrawn from it,
but went on contemptuously blaspheming the Name of the Lord Jesus (whom they
called Novitius in opposition to the old plurality of gods whom they
worshipped.)

6. Consider the remarkablnesse of Gods judgments upon these persecuters, and
the terrible effects both in deed and word which they produced in them; not
only to the conviction of others, but also to the convincing of themselves,
that Christ was their party, Such terror of conscience seasing on them as was
palpable before the world. Dioclesian, and Maximianus Herculeus in the midst of
their greatness and heat of persecution, both in one day divested themselves
of the imperial dignity, choosing rather to live (as it were) in the caves and
dens of the earth, than to continue in their authority; a thing unheardof
before in the world. This partly proceeded from displeasure that they attained
not their end in destroying Christianity, but rather found it to grow under
them; partly from terror of conscience, arising from that, as if they had
gathered clearly that they were contending with God in that. Thereafter both of
them put violent hands in themselves. Dioclesian, being sent for by Constantine
upon suspicion, choosed rather to poison himself than to see him. Maximianus
Herculeus endeavoring again to recover his authority, was discovered in his
design by his daughter Constantines wife; he was pursued, and besieged by him,
and was either killed, or, dureing the siege hanged himself, as is diversely
reported by writers. The third, Maxentius, was remarkably drowned, as is said
before, with many of his chief officers, which made the Christians compare his
destruction in the water with P^araoh's drowning in the Red Sea. Maximinus
Iovius, through intemperance becoming corpulent, was smitten with byles in the
secret parts, out of which issued abundance of vermin, in a most loathsome
disease, so that Physicians were either suffocated by his smell, or were killed
by him, because they could not cure him, one of his Physicians telling him, it
was Gods judgment on him for persecution, which no man could remove. At last,
the conviction was so born in upon himself, that he acknowledged his wrongs
done to the Church to be the cause of that plague; and therefore being stricken
with terror, gave out Edicts that the persecution should cease, Churches should
be builded, and that in their meetings, prayers should be put up for him, as
formerly used to be. Which Edict, is to be found in Eus^bius, lib. 8. cap. 28,
29. where the end also of Dioclesian and Herculius is set down. The other
tyrant in the East (to wit, Maximinus, who was called Caesar) had been
industrious to invent tortures for Christians, especially to pull out their
eyes, was at last defeat, and in a base habit, made to hide himself, and
thereafter pursued by sickness, which made both his eyes to leap out; by
which, he was necessitated to confess, that only the God of Christians was
God; and that he had been mistaken concerning the gods whom he choose to
worship: all which he had found to be truth by experience it self. Which words
were uttered by him, being even expiring, as Eusebius testifies, de vita
Constantius, lib. 2. cap. 52. Lioinius again, who could not be fearred from
persecution by any of these examples (though in some thereof himself had been
actor, whiles he was in confedera^i^ with Constantine) was after many defects
and flights convinced of his folly, and made to vent his indignation against
these Idolatrous Priests who had made him disdain Constantin's God, and put
confidence in the multitude of old gods, as they called them. So that he and
his chief associates being taken, and brought to punishment by Constantius,
were made to understand how great and admirable the God of Constantine was, de
vita Constant. lib. 2. cap. 18. Which remarkable judgments, and confessions,
as also of many other great men their adherents, as if they were speaking out
the words contained in the Text, ye will find in the forecited History, and in
Cent. Magd. de penis persecutorium.

The like remarkable judgments with such confessions we will not find at any
time together in any story. All which considerations being put together, we
conceive the reasons now more apparent why we applied the seal to this event
and expounded it of it, seeing every thing jumps so in the time, event and
effects, as has been formerly hinted at.

We conceive it not needful to insist particularly in expounding and applying
every expression, as what the darkening of the Sun, the removing of Islands and
Mountains means, or how they differ among themselves. This is certain, that
all the parts of that Idolatrous world are comprehended under this threatening,
and all sort of persecuters are to be included in this stroke; that there are
none so great or strong, as may liberate themselves from it; and that there is
nothing so stately, firm or remote, which shall escape this change, But this
alteration shall be extended over all, so as the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day. If it be asked, why this particular temporal judgment is set out
under such high and universal terms, as seems more agreeable to the day of
Judgment? Answ. Beside the custom of the Prophets, and constant strain of
this book, we say, 1. The ill was universal, and the remedy was very broad,
and wonderful, which made the change be of the larger extent. 2. It was a very
great change from one extreme of suffering to another extreme of outward
prosperity. 3. It was a very sudden change, few years interveened between the
Churches low condition, and her outward flourishing estate; all which, looks
like a new world. Men could hardly have believed in so short time to have seen
such things, had it not been by the extraordinary power of God carried on (as
it were) like the day of Judgment on the one side, and like a new Creation on
the other. 4. This event may in some sort be a type and resemblance of the last
Judgment, and an evidence and pledge of it unto the Saints who were praying
for that vengeance; and therefore may be thought to be set forth under such
expressions, for confirming Gods praying people in the hope of that day.

We may from this scope take these observations. 1. That though the great
vengeance of God against persecuters be reserved till the last Judgment; yet
sometimes; yea, often God will remarkably punish them, even before men, as is
clear in the application before mentioned, and in the observations on the
former seal. We will scarcely find in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, or in story, any eminent persecuter, for the most part, to go out of
this world without some remarkable blot. The sin of shedding the blood of Gods
people, is spoken of in the case of Manasseh, 2 Kings 24.4. as a sin which God
would not pardon, as to temporal afflictions, though He pardon it to the
penitent, as to its eternal punishment. If we can look through the actors in
these ten persecutions, this will be clear. Nero, being hated of men and
persued by the Senate, killed himself; Domitian, having drawn a Catologue of
such as he was to kill, in which was the name of his own wife and other
friends, they having found it, put him to death; Trajan was continually vexed
with seditions, and after fell into an extraordinary desease, by which he was
taken away; Adrian, being vexed with commotions in his life, died with much
anxiety, as these verses expressed by him, before his death do manifest,
Animula, vagula, blandula,
Hospes, comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loco?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec, ut soles, dabis jocos.


Maximinus being declared a^ enemy by the Senate, was killed in his tent;
Decius by the Goths (in their first invasion of the Empire) with his whole
Army, was cut off; Valerianus was overcome by the Persians, and made use of by
Sopor as a rest for his foot when he was to horse; of Dioclesian we have heard
already. Thus, for the most part, were the persecuters dealt with by God, and
died ignominiously, and oftentimes with terror and regvate. Such a word had
Severus at his death, Omnia fui, and nihil mihi prodest; such also was the end
of that infamous enemy of Christians, Julian, who, in his height of contempt
against Christ, was deadly wounded in battle against the Persians, and
throwing his blood in the Air, died with that desperate expression in his
mouth, vicisti tandem Galilaea; Valentius the (Emperor,) being a great
favourer of the Arrians, and a great persecuter of the Orthodoxe, (as the
Arrians did exceed the Heathens in cruelty) was in battle against the Goths in
Thraci^ wounded, and being carried to some house near by, it was set on fire by
the enemy, in which he miserably perished. All which do show Gods revengefull
justice in persuing that sin.

Obl. 2. Wrath is exceeding terrible upon the stoutest men of the world. What a
terriblness^ must there be in the great day when wrath and terror (to speak so)
are at their perfection? and what a howling and crying must that be, when all
the families of the earth, and these that have pierced Him, shall mourn before
Him? It were good to prevent this terror, and to abstain from what provokes
it. This will be found a certain truth, that it is a fearful thing to fall in
the hands of the living God. Obs. 3. The great distance that is between God and
creatures, and how far all of them are in His reverence, He can at one instance
shake both Heaven and Earth, and turn the world upside down; He can make the
Kings to flee, and the stoutest men in the world to cry out for fear; He, even
He, only is to be feared; and who can stand when He is angry? Psalm. 76.7. It is
a wonder poor men will live under a controversy with Him, and be so little
affrighted of His wrath. 4. There is nothing makes wrath more insufferable,
than that it is the wrath of the Lamb Christ, v. 16. This is added as that
which augmenteth their terror and makes their case desperate, when the
Mediator is their enemy, there is none in heaven nor earth, that can befriend
them; The vengeance of despised Grace, executed by the Mediator, is the most
dreadful vengeance. The Lord save us from that. Obs. 5. The sicklnesse of all
creatures, even of the most mighty and valiant men in the world; What are they
when God begins to reckon with them? Stars fall from heaven, great men and
stout men hide themselves from the Lamb. It may learn us to cease from man,
whose breath is in his nostrils; for, wherein is he to be accounted of? 6. See
the insufferablnesse of wrath, the day of His wrath is come, and who can abide
Him? what means the great part of men who hazard without fear upon known
causes of wrath and can live at feed with God? There is a necessity of being at
peace with Him; this wrath of His, one day will be found unsupportable. Obs. 7.
Judgments oftentimes fall sorest upon the great ones of the world; and these
that in men's account might be thought most secure, Kings, great Men and mighty
Men, are especially stricken at; partly, because they use to be ringleaders in
the sin; partly, it serves most to the abasing of creatures and the
manifesting of Gods Justice and Power; partly, (to speak so) they think more
strange of it. 8. The stouter men be in their opposition to Christ, and the
more secure and confident they be in their sin, oftentimes, when wrath comes,
they are found the more desperate cowards: Because, the more security be under
sin, the more force and power is added unto the challenge of the conscience
when it is wakened. There is a great odds here between the language of these
gallants who now cannot abide the face of the Lamb, and the former braggings
wherein often they have defied the Son of God. 9. There is no condition so
hard, that the proudest men in the world will decline, nay, by the contrary,
they will desire it, that they may escape the wrath of God, when once the sense
of it breaks in upon them. Some gallants stand now upon their points and
credit, and will not flee where there credit is concerned, though it should
draw no sin upon them; but there will be no such sticking in the day of wrath;
men will be glad to flee to the basest corner of the earth, they would choose
that the greatest mountain or rock should fall upon them, and think no shame to
cry for it: yea, annihilation would be welcome to them, to prevent their
appearing before Jesus Christ: Men, great Men, and stout Men, will have a far
other language (if we may suppose it) at their appearing before Him, than now
in their grandour it were possible for them to imagine. Obs. 10. When God
reckons, He needs neither witness nor tormenter; He has both these in the
consciences of His most desperate enemies. What an awband is it that God has
over all men in respect of their consciences? which being armed by God against
them, would be worse to encounter with than thousands of Armies? This makes
men flee when none persueth. 11. No King, nor great one in the world, upon any
entreaty, will be exempted from judgment, but appear they must, even though
they cannot abide it. What a tortour must it be to be distracted between these
two, A necessity of appearing, and an utter impossibility to endure that
appearing? Certainly if men were to live and speak after some experience of
these things, they might be supposed to become much wiser in the ordering of
themselves, or at least in giving their advice to others, than they were
before, as the rich Glutton ( Luke 16.) gives advertisement to his brethren
out of hell. 12. There is a day coming when there will be no trysting; when the
Lamb comes in wrath to reckon with despisers, He persueth in wrath, and they
would fain flee; but there is no treating aimed at on either side. 13. This day
of wrath is certainly coming and will come, though it seem to be delayed. We
may well take all the instances of particular judgments as pledges of that
day. Men will once find they have wronged themselves, that they have so little
believed this great Article of Faith. 14. When that day comes, there will be
great odds between Gods people, and the rest of the world. The Kings and great
ones, who despised them on earth, would be glad in that day to exchange Thrones
with the meanest Saint, and will never attain it. Wrath when it comes, will
make the world know of what worth Godliness is, and what an excellent thing it
is to have a good conscience, and what advantage there is in having peace made
with God through Christ Jesus. These are the true and faithful sayings of God,
and who believes them not now, will one day with the rich Glutton find the
truth of them.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. ANd after these things, I saw four Angels standing on the four
corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should
not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.


AT the entry of the former Chapter we divided this prophecy into three
principal prophesies, holding forth and relating unto three principal periods
of the condition of the Militant Church. The first, relating to the Churches
sufferings under Heathens, which was expressed by the seals, whereof we have
spoken. The second, concerning Antichrists rise and dominion, holden forth by
the trumpets. The third, concerning the Churches outgate from under that
storm, is contained under the vials. These two are yet to come. And because
that second was a sad storm, which might shake the Faith of Gods People, if
they were not strengthened against it, The Lord armeth them in reference
thereunto by laying down these two strong consolations, 1. By showing His care
of His Church in providing for the safety of His own before the storm should
come. 2. By showing the certainty of the Churches outgate from, and victory
over that strait. Which two take up the Chapter, and are put together in a
little view and hint, before the Lord go on to describe the storm it self,
that thereby the faith of Gods people, and their consolation in reference
thereto, might be the more strengthened and confirmed.

If we look to the order of revealing the matter contained in this Chapter, it
does belong to the sixth seal (the seventh not being yet opened;) But, if we
look unto the matter it self, and the scope, we will find it belong to the
prophesies following, as preparatory to them, and set down before the opening
of the seventh seal, To make the transition from the one prophecy to the other
the more discernable; and also to make the prophecy coming the more to be
adverted unto, and the easier to be understood.

The Chapter then has these two parts, 1. The Lords taking care of His Church
and Elect before the coming of a storm; by separating of them, and (as it were,
by His own seal) setting them apart from others, that they should not be hurt
by it. And because these prophesies represent the events to John, as acted;
therefore is this care of Gods also represented to him in that same manner
before these events come. This first, is from the beginning to the ninth verse;
and the second part, from the ninth verse to the end, holds forth a calm and
flourishing estate of the Church after that storm, in respect of number,
beauty, and freedom in the serving of God: which relates, First, unto the
Church on earth, and in part foresheweth the spreading of the Gospel, after
Antichrists tyranny and domination has brought the Church low; but especially
is to be fulfilled in Heaven, where these things, which in a prophetical
manner are spoken of, and applied unto the Church here, will more properly be
fulfilled.

For clearing of this scope, and better understanding of this Chapter, let us
consider these three, 1. What these winds do signify. 2. What is meaned by
this sealing. 3. Unto what time or state of the Church they do relate.

By winds, three things are especially understood in Scripture, which make the
holding of these winds three ways to be interpreted.

1. By winds, in Scripture, are understood temporal judgments on civil
States, Ier. 49. 36, etc. and so the holding of winds supposes a restraint on
temporal troubles, keeping them for a time, from breaking loose upon the
Church, though they were ready even then to blow. The event is thus applied,
The Church had outward peace for a little time under Constantine, and after;
but immediately the Empire was overrun by Goths and Vandals, Saracens and other
barbarous Nations, who had been a little time restrained, that the Church might
have some breathing.

2. By winds, sometimes in Scripture are understood the blowings of the Spirit,
especially accompanying the Ordinances, in keeping them clean and making them
effectual. These Gospel Ordinances, and breathings of the Spirit with them,
being as necessary for keeping (...) Church uncorrupted, as winds are to the
air which we breath in. See Act. 2.12. Cant. 4.16. Ezekiel. 37.4. According to
this acception of winds, the holding of them does signify the restraining of
the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, whereby followed the spreading of heresy, and
the rising of Antichrist, who (say they) was working even in Constantin's time.

3. By winds, the Scripture sometimes holds forth spiritual judgments, as
heresy in Doctrine, Schisms, Divisions, Contentions, etc. which have upon the
Church an impetuous force and violence, like winds, driving unstable souls from
their steadfastness, as the word is, Ephesians. 4.14. That we be not children tossed
to and fro by every wind of Doctrine by the sleight of men, etc. It is so taken
also, Iud. 12. in respect of these who ( verse 11.) had followed the
gainsaying of Core; they are said to be carried about of winds, etc. Thus the
holding of these winds is to be conceived. I saw (says John) immediately after
the Churches freedom from persecution, a new storm of heresy and schism ready
to set upon the Church and to carry all away before it: but it was bounded and
restrained by Gods power, till He had established His Elect against it, so as
it shall have no force to overturn them.

We conceive the last to be especially aimed at here, and that these winds do
hold forth the growing and increasing of false Doctrine and Schism in the
Church, rather than any of the former two, 1. Because this agrees best to the
scope, which is to guard the Elect from these evils. Now, in the strain of this
Book we will not find the Elect saved from temporal evils more than others: it
must therefore be understood of spiritual judgments, and that in a high
degree; from which only they (to wit the Elect) have a peculiar exemption, Mat.
24.24. 2. This exemption does specially relate unto these evils of Antichrist
whereof the world partaketh, and from which only the Elect are kept clean, as
will appear from Chap. 13.8. and Chap. 14. verse. 1, 4. These sealed ones are
said not to be defiled; by which we may gather what is the judgments they are
to be kept from, to wit, spiritual defilement, seeing purity from these is
peculiar to the sealed ones as a fruit of their sealing. Again, we understand
the form of this spiritual judgment (to speak so) to consist rather in the
actual blowings of error, than in the privative restraint of pure Doctrine;
because the effects mentioned of hurting Trees, Earth, Sea, etc. are the
effects of winds actually blowing and bringing hurt unto these things. Beside,
the holding of these winds being for that end, till the Elect should be marked,
evidenceth that the judgment is in letting loose these winds, the holding
whereof, is a restraint upon them.

To the second question, to wit, What is to be understood by this seal, or
sealing, mentioned? We say, 1. That it is not any visible or discernable
character, as to men, which is intended. But 2. some separating and
differencing thing, whereby, as to the effect, these who are sealed, are
distinguished from others that are not separated. In a word, the scope is to
show, that every one of Gods own shall be as certainly kept free from the
hurt of that storm, as if there were a visible mark put upon every one of them.
This manner of speech, is borrowed, 1. From Kings that seal with their own Seal
what they would not have touched. 2. From the story, Exodus 12.13. where God,
being to separate Israe^ from the Egyptians in respect of the plague of
smitting the firstborn, did first separate them by a mark (as it were) upon
the posts of their doors, whereby His care of them was signified, and their
faith of immunity from that plague strengthened; and accordingly the effect
followed, none that were marked were hurt; so shall it be here. 3. It may look
unto Ezekiel. 9. where a story of sealing some, not unlike to this, is recorded.
In sum, it is to show the security of the Elect under that storm: Which we
conceive especially to flow from these two, 1. From Gods decree of Election. 2.
Gods care and providence in the executing of His decree of Election, so as the
saddest trial is limited in its commission in respect of the Elect, and they
are looked unto and sustained under it. This agrees well with Mat. 24.24.
where preservation from error is derived from Gods Election; and that which is
called sealing here, we take it to be the same which is expressed ( Chap. 13.
and 8.) by writing in the Lambs book of life mentioned there for the same scope
as this is here. It agrees also with 2 Timothy 2.19. where the Lords foundation
(which is His Election) is said to be sealed, because of the surenesse and
unalterablnesse thereof.

The third thing to be cleared, is, what time or state of the Church this
relates unto? Answ. Although doctrinally the words do in general hold forth
Christ's care of His Church and People in reference unto these trials which are
common to them with others, and so this may be applied to all times, Christ had
a care of His Church under the seals, and a peculiar care of His own under
every trial; this is a truth: but, considering the words as they point at some
particular time, and for that end are set down in this prophecy, We conceive,
that they hold forth Gods peculiar oversight of His Elect, in keeping them from
the storm which is threatened by the trumpets, and not from the temporal
strokes contained under the same, and so does belong to the following prophecy
and not to the preceding, 1. Because the seals hold forth especially temporal
judgments, the trumpets hold forth Spiritual plagues. Now, the Elect not
being exempted from the former, but from the latter, This prophecy then (to
call it so) of peculiar exemption, must belong to the trumpets which contain
judgments of a Spiritual nature. 2. If we look to Chap. 9.4. (which
comprehends the prophecy of the first woe brought upon the world by the fifth
trumpet) there these who are sealed, are peculiarly exempted from that woe. The
inserting therefore that limitation in the commission of that woe, that it
should not hurt these who had the seal of God, does evidently knit this sealing
unto that trumpet, as peculiarly belonging to it and intended for that storm.
3. We find ( Chap. 13.8.) only the Elect excepted from the worshipping of the
beast; and ( Chap. 14.1, 4.) we find the same number, who are said to be sealed
here, observed to be kept clean, according as was designed here, these places
showing the effect of Gods sealing here to have been answerable in the event,
that as He had sealed them to be kept clean, so were they by virtue thereof
actually preserved. Now, that preservation, in respect of the event in these
places, does manifestly look to their being kept free of Antichrists
corruptions, which contemporateth with the trumpets; and therefore this
sealing, which holds forth Gods purpose of bringing about that event, must
belong to that time also.

The scope then is shortly this, John being commissionated to reveal the second
great storm, which was to come upon the Church by the breaking out of Heresy,
and rising of Antichrist to a height, by which many more of the Visible Church
should be carried away than under the former persecutions, so that in effect,
the whole world should wonder after the beast, and the Elect be in great
hazard, lest the Lords people should faint, as if there were no Church during
that time; the Lord comfort them by showing the security of the Elect, and
immutability of Election in the most declining times; and that He would
preserve them from being carried away, or hurt, by that storm, as if they were
by some visible Character distinguished from the rest of the world for that end.

To come more particularly to this first part of the Chapter, There are two
things represented in it, 1. A sad judgment to the Church; this is implied,
verse. 1. 2. Christ's care in preparing for, and guarding His Church from it.

In the first we have these four things to consider, 1. Wherein this judgment
or trial consists. 2. The instruments entrusted with the oversight thereof
are set down. 3. Their Postour is described. 4. The object of this judgment is
pointed at.

1. The trial is in the blowing of winds, even four winds; by which we
understand Spiritual dangers of Heresies, Divisions, Schisms, etc. as is
before said: which are compared to winds, 1. To show the violence and force of
Error, which impetuously carries many away with it; therefore it is compared
to a flood, Chap. 12. and is called strong delusion, 1 Thessalonians. 2. which place
relates to the same event. 2. They are compared to winds, to show the effects
of Error amongst unstable souls, which drive them from former received Truths
to Error, and from one Error to another to and fro, even as winds toss any
light matter; therefore ( Iud. 12.) they that are given to Error, are said to
be carried about of winds, as Clouds or Weather-cocks are from one side to
another according as the wind blows.

3. Again, they are called four winds, to show, 1. The plurality of Errors
which come one with another and one after another, when once these winds begin
to blow. 2. To show the opposition of one Error to another, and the
inconsistency of them together, as well as with truth. In this, Error
differs from ordinary winds; these blow but from one airth at once, but this
sets upon-all corners together, the devil aiming to break in upon one side
when he is repelled at another, and to catch one by one Error, who has not
been taken with an other.

2. The instruments are described, I saw four Angels standing, etc. 1. They are
called Angels. And, 2. four Angels. We need not dispute much whether they be
good or bad, seeing God who is the Creator and Sovereign of both, may and often
has made use of either of them in executing of His judgments upon the wicked
world: it would seem these mentioned here, are good Angels, 1. Because for a
time they restrained these winds, ready before this to have broken out, but
were kept up as in prison by them, till Christ should give orders. It is true
the winds are from evil spirits, and prime Ministers of Satan; but the holding
of these winds, and the timeing of the blowing of them, so as might further
Gods design most, are good, and seem to be acts of Christ's Kingly Office,
executed by good Angels, who have that committed to them for the Churches sake:
and therefore, it may be said of them, that power was given them to hurt the
earth, because that cannot come to pass but by their leave who have the
oversight of that deluge of Error entrusted to them. 2. The Angel who speaks
to them, takes them in as joint servants of God with him, and as employed in
the same work, as it is, verse. 3. which makes it appear to be Elect Angels,
employed in that work for the good of Elect Saints. They are called four,
because there were four winds, and there being hazard from so many airths, God
will have His care and Soveraignity seen in having one Angel for every danger.

3. We are to consider their postour: which is set down, First, In their
standing on the four corners of the earth: which imports two things, 1. The
imminency of the judgment, it was ready to break in on all corners. 2. It
shows the vigilance and activenesse of these instruments in executing what
was committed to them, with a readiness to advert to Christ's orders and to
obey them. Secondly, As they are standing, so they are holding the four winds
of the earth, which confirms what is formerly said; and beside, implies a
degree of force in the winds, and of activity in the instruments, forcibly (as
it were) holding them. Thirdly, The end why they hold the winds, is, that the
winds should not blow on the earth; which is not simply to restrain them from
hurting the earth, but for a time, until the Elect should be prepared and
provided for it, as the Verses following will clear.

The fourth thing in the Verse, is, the object on which these winds do blow; it
is employed in this Verse to be the earth, the sea, and trees; for, the
restraining of these winds from blowing on them for a time, supposes them to
be the object of that storm, as is clearly expressed, verse. 2, 3. It was given
to them to hurt the earth, etc. These three are most ordinarily obnoxious to
the hurt of winds, and therefore are mentioned here. The earth lies open to
winds, being plagued by earthquakes, overthrowing of houses, spoiling of corns,
fruits, etc. the sea being so liquid and unstable, is subject to tossings, and
risings, whereby shipwreck and other inconveniences follow. 3. Trees are more
subject than other things, because of their height, which makes them the more
obnoxious unto, and the less able to bear with the impetuous force of the
stormy winds, whereby some are rent, others are overblown, etc. The scope, is,
to show, that as the wind seaseth on these things as the proper object of its
hurt, so Error has its own object, upon which the hurt thereof will be no
less effectual.

More particularly, by Earth, etc. here cannot be understood these without the
Church, (error not being a plague wherewith such are scourged) but we must
understand Professors of the visible Church, because the event (which follows
by the trumpets) is made good on them; and therefore this earth, is not
distinguished from the visible Church by any external profession, but from the
invisible Church, in respect of secret Election, as from what precedeth is
clear.

That these three, earth, sea, and trees, are mentioned together, as the
objects hurt by this storm, may be done in allusion to three sorts of
Professors, over whom error especially prevails.

1. The earthly-minded professor, who supposes gain to be Godliness, lies
open to this storm, when set upon by a tentation to error, which is backed
with worldly wealth, ease, credit, preferment, etc. Of such the Scripture in
many places speaks, who, upon that account, have been ensnared with this
bate, Phil. 3.19. 2 Pet. 2.15. Iud. 11. And upon this account it is, that, 1 Timothy 6.10. the love of money, is called the root of all evil, which while some
covet after, they have erred from the faith.

2. By sea, may be signified unsettled light professors, who, like Reuben, are
unstable like water, and fixed in nothing; therefore are they ( Jude 13.)
called raging waves of the sea, and wandering stars; and clouds that are carried
with a tempest, 2 Pet. 2.17. a light professor is an easy prey to Error.

3. By trees may be understood professors, who, in respect of profession,
gifts of knowledge, utterance, etc. may be said to be high above others, and no
less high in their own conceit, being by knowledge puffed up, though, in respect
of true fruits, exceeding barren; for, if these that are real Christians be
compared to trees, indeed bearing fruit: (which sort of Christians, Chap. 9.4.
are exempted from this judgment.) Christians, who are but in profession so,
yet much in their own conceit, may be called trees, as they are by Jude, verse.
12. and 2 Pet. 2. they are called presumptuous, as high above others in their
own conceit; which sort of professors, are as obnoxious to Error as any other.

The sum of this Verse, is, No sooner was the Church freed from open
persecution, but the devil stirs up Errors of all sorts, and that with
great violence; whereby, in Gods righteous judgment, many secure
earthly-minded, unstable and proud conceity professors were to be carried
away; yet were they for a time restrained by Gods power, till, etc. From which,
Observe,

1. That Error and Heresy waits upon the Churches outward prosperous
condition; and no sooner is she freed from open persecution, but as soon the
devil waits on to sow these tares. Chapter 12. when the child is delivered
from persecution, the devil, the serpent, speweth out a flood after her: it was
so in Constantin's time, unto which this relates: The Church was scarcely
landed from that sea of persecution, when the Heresy of Arius and other
divisions, set vehemently upon the Church, as we will see in opening of the
trumpets. It was so in the time of the Gospels breaking forth again in Germany;
floods of Anabaptists, Libertines, Antinomians, etc. followed it, and somewhat
of it has been made out in our own experience in this Island. The devil who is
a murderer and and a liar from the beginning, waits all opportunities to
destroy, if so he may gain by Error what he could not attain by violence.
Beside, men usually, then becoming more secure, and falling asleep, he has the
fairer occasion to sow his tares, which he does not neglect. 2. Error and
Heresy, is one of these plagues whereof God makes use in His Justice to
punish the ingrate world who have had the Gospel in peace and have abused it.
Therefore when delusion comes in its greatest height, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. or, a
false prophet comes to speak lies in the name of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 3. They
are both said to be sent of Him as a just reward of rejecting the truth. 3. The
abounding of Error is a sore plague: and therefore Toleration (which we
conceive to be no other thing, upon the matter, but the letting loose of these
winds) must be a sad stroke to many professors; by this, they are tossed,
snared, and made drunk with a fill of their own ways, and many carried
headlong to the ruin of their souls. By this, the best things of the Church,
to wit, its truth, purity, unity, etc. are blasted. Have not Arianisme,
Pelagianism, Popery, and other Errors wronged the Church more than many years
Famine, Wars, and Pestilence, and destroyed more souls than these have done
bodies? It is a wonder the world should think so light of so heavy a plague. 4.
When Error comes as judgment, it comes exceedingly fitted and strengthened
for carrying on its point. There is a deluge or flood of them together;
therefore it is called strong delusion, and a spirit of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
because, as it has from God a Commission, and cannot be quiet till that be
executed, more than the bloody sword can be, Ezekiel. 21. so it is armed suitably
for that end, sometimes with variety of Errors, sometimes with the number of
followers, sometimes with countenance from great ones of the world and
temporal advantages, sometimes with eminency of gifts, in the Authors and
Abettors thereof: these, or such like, going along with the tentation, make
it set on the more strongly and with the greater difficulty to be resisted. 5.
There are some Errors that are inconsistent together, and opposite one to
another, wherewith yet in Gods secret justice the devil may be permitted to
assault and trouble the Church: the Lord thereby aims the more to further the
trial of the sincere and discovery of the counterfeit; the devil thereby
aims to undo all by prevailing against them upon one side or another, that if
one error do not take, he may essay about to find out that which is suitable
to their humor, and to set on them where he shall find them weakest. At least,
by these diversities of Errors, he makes the truth the more disputable unto
the men of the world. In the Primitive times, some denied Christ to be true
Man, as Apollinaris; others denied Him to be true God, as Ebion, Arius,
Photinus, etc. These again, differing among themselves, Arius calling him God,
but a created God in time; Photinus and his followers, asserting Him to be but
mere man; some made Him to consist of two Persons as well as two Natures;
others, running to the other extreme to shun that, affirmed Him to have but one
Nature as He is but one person, This was the Heresy of Entyches; the former
was spread by Nostorius; Sabellians made but one Person, as there is but one
God, as the Antitrinitarians do now. Those called Tritheits, made three God as
well as three Persons. Augustine, de haresi. 66. names some whom he calls
Coluthiani, whose Error was, that no evil was from God, even these evils
whereby he punished profane men. He names also some whom he calls Floriani,
attributing all evil, even that which was sinful, to God. In the matter of
Discipline, some were too rigid, as the Novatians and Donatists, etc. admitting
no penitents to Church Fellowship who had once given offense, though they
granted they might receive pardon from God. Others again, running to the other
extreme, did too soon, without any evidences of a change, readmit the
scandalous, not only to Church Communion, but also to have trust and bear
Office in the Church, The rise of this is attributted to one Felicissimus, by
Baro^ius, Anno 235 page 481. The like might be instanced in many Errors, as by
comparing the Error of Papists, upon the one hand, giving too much to works,
and Antinomians, upon the other hand, giving too little; betwixt Prelacy,
monopolizing Government in the person of one Bishop, and Independency,
bestowing it indifferently upon all the members of the Church, and in many such
cases. These are enough to clear the truth of the thing, and to make Believers
watchful, and to put on the whole Armor of God, lest, what one tentation upon
one side does not, another may. 6. Considering this storm to accompany the
Churches outward peace, Observe, That oftentimes the purity of Doctrine
suffers most in the Churches outward prosperous condition, sometimes by the
devils slight, sometimes by the security of the Church her self becoming
secure or proud under her external peace.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 2. And I saw another Angel ascending from the east, having the seal of
the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels, to whom it
was given to hurt the earth and the sea,

3. Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have
sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.


WE have had some little view of that sad condition which the Church was to be
into by the storm of heresy from all airths blowing upon her: which storm, we
conceive, foretells the rising of the Arrian, Macedonian, and other Heresies,
but especially the rise and growth of Antichrist and the Churches defection
under him, 1. Because these winds did immediately set upon the Church after her
freedom from open persecution, and so falls in the very same time unto which
this prophecy belongs. 2. Because the event, being compared with the
prophecy, will be found exceedingly agreeable to it; yea, the scope of this,
being to show the next great trial of the Church after the close of open
persecution, it must be understood of these foresaid Errors and defection,
which are the second mean used by the devil to undo the Church. 3. What we said
in the former Lecture, clearing the scope of this prophecy to be Gods guarding
of His People against that storm which comes by the trumpets and beast, Chap.
8, 9, and 13. does also confirm this, that the storm here principally meaned,
is that defection under Antichrist, seeing this seal is particularly to guard
against it, which comes with power and lieing wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

We come now to consider the consolation which the Lord gives unto His people,
to guard and comfort them against that storm. It has two parts, as is said.
The first shows Gods care of them before the storm come; the second
expresses their happy outgate from it. The first is from the second Verse unto
the ninth; and the second, from the third Verse unto the close of the Chapter.

The first consolation, is described in these four, 1. The instrument of it. 2.
His going about it according to his commission. 3. The persons whom this
consolation concerns. Lastly, The event is observed to be answerable to what
was intended, all being sealed who were designed to be exempted by God.

1. The instrument, verse. 2. He is called another Angel, etc. He is described
in three, 1. That he is an Angel. 2. Ascending from the east. 3. From his
office or trust, that he had the seal of the living God. 1. By Angel, we
understand no created Angel but Christ Jesus the Angel of the Covenant, called
Michael, Chap. 12. For, 1. it is Christ who chiefly takes part with the Elect,
and provideth so that none can pluck His sheep out of His hand; and with His
Angels ( Chap. 12.) fights against the Dragon and his. 2. Because the keeping
of the seal of the living God (as great Lord Keeper or Chanceller under Him)
belongs only to the Mediator. 3. In the words following, He cries
authoritatively, and gives order to the other Angels who were overseers of the
judgment; by which it appears to be some eminent Angel unto whom these
properties do agree, which is none other but Jesus Christ, though He may have
other Angels employed under Him, as it is, Chap. 12.

2. He is said to ascend from the east: either alluding unto Christ's names of
Sun, Light, Star, Morning, etc. showing that as all light comes from the east,
so all comfort comes by Christ, who seasonably and refreshfully manifests
His care of His Church, as the rising of the Sun after darkness: in which
respect ( Mat. 24.27.) Christ's coming is spoken of as lightning from the east.
Or, it may be in allusion to that entry of the Temple upon the east, by which
only the Prince was to ascend, Ezekiel. 44.2, 3. whereby may be signified who this
is who thus comes into His Church in a sovereign, princely way.

3. He is said to have the seal of the living God; to show His immediate trust
under Him, (the keeper of the seal among men being next unto the King) whereby
he has absolute power to exempt from trials or not; which is, upon the matter,
equivalent to that of His having the keys of the house of David committed unto
Him.

2. His manner of executing His Office, or Trust, is expressed in these three,
1. In that He is said to cry with a loud voice unto the four Angels, etc. By
which is holden forth, 1. His Authority in commanding. 2. The imminency of the
hazard that made Him cry to have it prevented. 3. Carfulness in Him to have
it for a time restrained. The second thing in the execution, is, the parties to
whom He cries, that is, to the four Angels, to whom it was given to hurt the
earth and the sea. By which we may gather, 1. That the Commission of these
Angels, was not principally to restrain judgment, but to execute it. 2. That
there is a power and Authority derived from God, even in these judgments
whereby the earth is hurt. 3. That Angels are subject to our blessed Lord
Jesus, not only in receiving of their Commission, but in the execution of it;
they cannot act but by orders from Him. 4. That He cries first to them and to
all of them, shows both His care of His People, when they are not minding
their own hazard, He is providing for them; and also His wisdom, in taking the
right way in manifesting of it.

3. There is the matter of His cry, verse. 3. saying, hurt not the earth, etc.
till we have sealed, etc. Which words hold forth, 1. Christ's great design in
His coming and suspending this judgment, it is the safety of His People. 2. We
may see His peremptorinesse in ordering all things in reference to that end.
This judgment is not simply discharged; for, afterward it may hurt the earth,
but it is so bounded and ordered, and that peremptorily, as not to blow or hurt
till Gods People be provided for it, and that they may be kept from the hurt
of it, The restriction until, etc. bears out this.

3. The objects about which this care is taken, are the servants of our God, so
called, not as all creatures are, nor as some special Ministers are, but as
such who by special compact and agreement have given up, and Covenanted
themselves to be so, and in their conversations carry suitably to that
engagement. Thus all Israel, especially true Israel, are called the Lords
servants, Levit. 25.55. in opposition to Idolaters who worshipped other gods;
and thus, true servants, are described by this, that they desired to fear His
name, Neh. 1.11. in opposition to hypocrites, who say, and do not. In sum, by
servants are understood such, as adhere to God in a declining time, and do not
enslave themselves to Antichrist with the rest of the world, as it is Chap. 13.
He says, of our God, because Christ, as Mediator and Head of the Body,
stands in a joint relation to God with His People, as it is, Ioh. 20.17. my
God, and your God, etc. which is a special consolation unto them, and marked
here as a special privilege.

4. The effect of the execution of His Commission, is marked, verse. 4, 5, 6, 7,
8. wherein His faithfulness in sealing of the Elect, is set down, 1. generally
in the number it self and of whom they were, verse 4. 2. More particularly,
they are distributed in the Verses following. The scope of all which, is, to
show, 1. The exactness of this Angels performing of what was entrusted to Him.
2. That none missed who were in His roll. 3. To show that it was the very
persons designed of God, and therefore they are marked here and there of
several tribes, and not indistinctly together. That circumstance, verse. 4. and
I heard the number of them that were sealed, is added to show the certainty of
John's record, he being, as it were, an ^ar witness thereunto. That we may more
particularly take up the meaning of this, we are to enquire, 1. What is meant
by Israel, out of whom these are said to be marked. 2. What is meaned by the
particular distribution of them in so many Tribes, and so many thousands of
every Tribe. By Israel and the Tribes thereof, sometimes in Scripture are
understood the Israelites who were come of Jacob according to the flesh; this
is the most proper and usual meaning. Sometimes again, by Israel is understood
the Church of God under the Gospel, who profess the faith of Abraham, of what
ever Nation and People they be of, as Gal. 3.29. and 6.16, etc. called Israel,
1. Because they are a spiritual seed to Abraham, who is the father of all them
that believe. 2. Because they are admitted to the same essential privileges
and promises which the Israelites once had, Romans 11.17.24. they are ingrafted
in the same olive tree; and now in Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor
Gentile. 3. It is f^^quent to set forth the worship of the New Testament under
the names of that which belongs to the Old, and to st^le the Gospel Church by
the name of Jerusalem which is above; and therefore it is agreeable to this,
that the professors of the New Testament should pass under the title of
Israel, especially in this prophecy, in which the old titles are to frequently
applied unto the new state of the Church. We conceive, the last, to wit, the
spiritual seed of Abraham, or the Gospel Church, to be meaned here by the
Tribes of Israel, and not Jews by nature only, And that beside the former
general reasons, upon these three considerations,

1. Such are understood by Israel here, as were to be kept free from
Antichrists pollution: Now, these are not only Jews, but mainly Gentiles, as
the event, and time, to which it is applicable, does evince. 2. If by this
sealed number of a 144000. we are to understand all these, who during
Antichrists tyranny shall be kept free of his pollutions, and if they are to
be contradistinguished from the plurality of the Church who wondereth and goes
a whoring after the beast, Then they cannot understand them to be Jews only,
but the pure part of the Church of whatsoever Nation they be: But the former is
clear, to wit, that by these are to be understood all the pure part of the
Church, as contradistinguished from Antichrists followers, as will appear, 1.
By comparing the end of their sealing here with Chap. 9. verse. 4. and 13. verse.
8. for, they that are sealed here, are the servants of our God, to wit, all who
adhere to Him. 2. The end of their sealing, is, to keep them from that
defection whereinto all others not sealed, are involved, as the effect
clears. 3. These that are passed by, are left open to this storm, and carried
away with it, Therefore this sealing must take in all the Elect during that
time, of whatsoever Nation they be, seeing no Elect can be understood to be
unsealed, and so left open to this storm, as is clear, Chap. 9.4. They must
therefore be understood under the name of Israel who are thus sealed. 2. It
will further appear by comparing this with Chap. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, where these
144000. are particularly mentioned as the Virgine-church, distinguished from
the adulterous world, and that at the turn of Antichrists dominion, as if it
were particularly recorded, that notwithstanding of Antichrist's tyranny and
the worlds defection with him, yet all whom God had appointed to life, were
kept from that defection, And therefore this number must comprehend all such
(being a definit for an indefinit) who during his tyranny should be kept
free; and therefore it is not to be astricted unto the natural Jews. 3. The
distinguishing of Jews here from that innumerable company ( ver. 9.) of all
Nations, does clear this; For; they are distinguished, not in respect of Nation
or Kindred, as if by each of them were set forth some part of the Gospel Church
contemporary one with the other, but in respect of diverse successive states of
the Church, belonging to diverse times, as that however the Gospel Church
immediately after the Christian Religion shall obtain liberty and authority,
shall be brought unto great straits, and reduced to a few number (as Gods
Church was in the days of the Old Testament) yet, it shall afterward break
forth and flourish among all Nations, so that the Church in the latter days
shall be as far extended for number and diversity of people beyond what the
Church shall be under Antichrist, as the Gospel Church was at its first
spreading, extended beyond the Church of the Jews: and therefore the whole pure
professors of the Church, during this storm, being comprehended under these
that are sealed out of the several Tribes, it cannot be astricted unto the
natural Jews.

That this comparison and opposition of Jews with Gentiles, or the smaller
number with the greater, does belong to several states of the Church, will
appear by this, that these sealed ones are living in the time of a storm and
great tribulation, and whileas pure profession, and professors of Jesus Christ
are exceeding rare, as the scope here and the places formerly cited, Chap.
9.13, 14. do clear. That innumerable company again, are remarkable for their
number, and are said to have come out of great tribulation (as if now the storm
were past) as Victors and Conquerours having palms in their hands. This
innumerable company therefore must denotate a following outgate of the former
storm; and so by each of them, some condition of the whole Gospel Church, and
not of Jews or Gentiles severally, is typified.

The second thing to be cleared, is, wherefore the number is so peremptorily
determined and particularly distributed in several Tribes? Answ. 1. By what is
said, it may be seen, that this definit number is indefinitely to be
understood, not as if they were just so many in all, or in every Tribe alike.
But, 2. For these reasons, 1. To show that they were particularly determined by
God and known to Him. 2. That though the defection was universal and great, yet
there should be a considerable number reserved, as was of 7000, in Elias days.
That yet in comparison of the whole world that was to follow the beast, that
number was to be very small, as it is said in Isaiah, Though the number of
Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved.

More particularly, this number is proportioned amongst the Tribes, to show, 1.
that God not only numbereth them in gross and in common together, but has the
very particular and individual persons, who are constituent of that number,
marked and determined (to say so) both numero numerante and numero numerato. 2.
To show Gods soveraignity and good pleasure, in choosing some of every Kindred
and Tribe, and His care in providing for them whom He has chosen, of
whatsoever Tribe they be.

Obs. 1. That Error oftentimes brings the Church; yea, the Saints, into the
greatest hazards. What makes Christ cry so, and makes all this business? It
is to mark the Elect, which supposes them to be in great hazard: yea, that, (
Matthew. 24.24.) if it were possible, the very Elect should be deceived, shows
it comes near the march, even as near as possible; yea, often there is more
fear and hazard to the Elect their Spiritual estate by Error, than there is by
persecutions; yea, by gross sins and tentations to them, as murder, adultery,
etc. and more are taken off their feet by the one than by the other, because it
comes under some pretext of Holiness and Piety; in which respect it is said,
the devil, in this tentation, transformeth himself in an Angel of light, 2 Corinthians. 11. Believers had need to be watchful against all evils, but in a
special manner against this; it is no little difficulty, in a corrupt time, to
stand it out. Obs. 2. The greater the danger be, Christ has the greater care.
This makes Him cry and come down, whereas no such particular act of His is
marked when the Church was suffering, Chap. 6. He had rather keep them from sin
than suffering; yea, often Error hurts more than suffering does. More
particularly Observe,

1. Christ is great Overseer of what concerns His People; none can hurt, but
as He gives orders; all that execute judgment, are in a dependency on Him:
which is a great consolation to His People. 2. He is never so angry at an
ungrate world as to forget one Elect; in the midst of this storm, He
remembereth them. So had God respect to one Noah in the old world, and to one
Lot in Sodom; they could do nothing who were to execute that judgment, till he
were set free. 3. God has some Elect, and a Church under the greatest
defection, even seven thousand when Elias thinks there is not one, which
should make us warry in censuring times and places to be altogether ungodly. 4.
No Elect shall be finally seduced; that is not possible, Matthew. 24. 5. That
impossibility of final seduction depends not on themselves, but on Gods
decree and care in sealing them and preserving them from it, which makes it
true always, Romans 11.7. the election has obtained, and none but they, for the
rest were blinded. 6. If it be asked, why these sealed ones, who are the Elect,
are called Servants of our God? I answer, It is a description of the Elect from
their Holiness, a fruit and effect of their Election; and to clear it, there
is a twofold seal, 2 Timothy 2.19. one, known to God, He knows who are His by
decree. The other, is the fruit and evidence of the former, and in these come
to age, never separated, Let them who name the Lord depart from iniquity. In
this last respect, they are called servants of God, for these reasons, which
are so many grounds of Doctrine,

1. That wherever Election is, there is, or will be, holiness and obedience,
as a fruit of it; holiness and obedience is a proof of Election as to men, or
to ones own conscience; they are of equal extent. Hence ( Ephesians. 1.4.) we are
Elected to be holy: let not these things that God conjoyneth be separated. 2.
None but these who are servants to God in some real manner, can promise to
themselves any benefit of Election, or freedom from any plague, and especially
from this plague: Ezekiel. 9. these are marked only who were mourning for the
abominations of the rest, and keeping themselves free. Losing a good conscience
makes shipwreck of the Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19. Let none plead for any benefit of
Election whatsoever without this. 3. All that in some measure honor and obey
God, are kept from evil, and may promise to themselves immunity, as far as is
requisite, when others cannot; 2 Timothy 2.21, If a man purge himself from these
things, he shall be a vessel of honor, reserved for the masters use. 4.
Holiness has many advantages; it is the best guard against Errors, to receive
the Truth in love: it has often an outward protection, as in Lot, Noah, etc.
Psalm. 34. The Angels pitch their tents about them. Obs. 5. Christ and we have
but one God, Ioh. 20.17. I ascend to your Father, and my Father; and to my God,
and your God. Lastly, God has still a care of His Servants. The sum of all is
this, If Christ's care be much worth to souls, and it be advantage to have it,
Be stirred up to holiness as ye would be sure of it; and, as ye would be
kept free from the sins and judgments of the time, and have peace in your
selves, Be servants of our God, and give up your selves to Him.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 4. And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were
sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the
children of Israel.

5. Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand.

6. Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Nephthali
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve
thousand.

7. Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve
thousand.

8. Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve
thousand.

THe fourth Verse contains the particular number of these that were sealed, a
certain number in both the reckonings for an uncertain: The scope of it, is the
more effectually to bear out the consolation for strengthening the Faith of
Gods People by such a particular numeration. 1. It is summed, verse 4. whereof
is spoken before. 2. It is distributed amongst the Tribes, verse. 5, ^, 7, 8.

The scope of the distribution, beside what is said, is, by continuing the
manner of speech, used under the Old Testament, of Israel, Tribes, Jerusalem,
etc. to hold forth the Gentiles privilege of being ingrafted in the Jews room,
and that God kept the same way with them as with Israel, having admitted them
to that same Covenant.

It will not be meet nor needful to enquire after mysteries in the number or
names; it is like, the Lord, giving His Church the title of Israel, follows
the reckoning of twelve Tribes, and multiplieth that by twelves, which comes
in whole to that number one hundred forty and four thousand. We shall only
touch these things as considerable,

1. That in the order, the age is not kept, and children of the bound and
freewoman are promiscuously named; to let us see, that in Christ Jesus there
are neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free; and that external privileges are of
no value, Gal. 3.28. 2. Judah is preferred and first named, and Reuben, though
the firstborn, passed by, 1. To show that relation to Christ, who was of the
Tribe of Judah, and of whom David was, casts the balance and is the main
privilege. 2. Reuben lost his birthright by defiling his fathers bed; and
Simeon, by his killing the Sichemits: whence it is clear, that guiltiness
cuteth men off from privileges, and has a broad and long tail of curses for a
long continuance, Genesis 49.3, 4. 3. Neither Dan nor Ephraim are mentioned; but,
for Ephraim, Joseph is named; Dan is also omitted, (1 Chronicles. 1.3, 4.) when all
the other Tribes are reckoned in their genealogies; so also Ephraim and
Manasseh, in Deuteronomy. 33. It would seem for these reasons, (for, that conceit of
omitting Dan here, because Antichrist is to come of him, is a groundless
fable, and rejected by Bellar. lib. 3. de Pontif. cap. 12. who expounds the
Scriptures ordinarily alleged, for proving that in a different sense,) 1. To
show, Gods Sovereignty, manifesting it self especially in His passing-by of
some and reckoning others in His roll, no less guilty. 2. To conform the
number to the ordinary reckoning of Israel by twelve Tribes and no more,
wherefore still one is omitted in the former reckonings. This number had not
been kept, if Dan had been numbered when Levi also is mentioned. 3. Dan was
soon overtaken with Idolatry, so was Ephraim, Judges 1.18. therefore not meet
to be mentioned among these, or as types of these who were to be kept clean
from that sin. 4. Levi is mentioned here, though not in the dividing of the
land of Canaan; to show, that though God allow not much temporal estate on His
Ministers, yet will He not prejudge them of His protection under straits either
spiritual or temporal; nor of the victory over them.

These are all who are sealed of the numberless multitude; and this equal
number amongst the Tribes, is not to be understood, as if all were equal in
respect of the effect; But, 1. to show it is indifferent to God to take of this
or that Nation now, as there was to Him no difference amongst the Tribes of
Israel. 2. That there is need of a special and particular care, and that He
conformeth His care so, not in gross and common, but particularly taking
notice of them to a definit sum. Hence Observe,

1. From the complexnesse of this sealing and number, and from the name that
these sealed ones gets, to wit, that they are called the Tribes of Israel,
That Believers, under the New Testament, are Gods Israel, ingrasted in their
room and served Heirs to all their essen^tiall privileges and promises, and
Heirs of Abraham, as Believers were under the Old Testament; whatever typical
promises were peculiar to that people, we are not to claim, yet, certainly
these privileges or promises that belonged to their eternal well-being, or
were necessary to their spiritual growth and happiness here, Believers under
the New Testament are served Heirs thereunto, Gal. 3.29. If ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. Obs. 2. Folks may be
partakers of many outward privileges, and yet these not secure them from an
approaching plague, if they be not partakers of Spiritual privileges beside.
Israel were all Gods people and children; to them pertained the Adoption and
Covenants in respect of external administration; and so it was with the Church
of the Gentiles which succeeded: but, Romans 9.6. They are not all Israel, who
are of Israel; neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all
children, neither is he a Jew who is one outwardly. Obs. 3. That Christ's care
is very special of His Elect, wherever they are He takes notice of them, in
all their difficulties He has a special and peculiar eye over them, He does
not gather them by heaps, but one by one, Isai. 27.12. not by guess, but by
special designation, He sees to their preservation, Ioh. 10.3. He calls His
sheep by name, and leads them out: the most inconsiderable of them are
provided-for, and sheltered from this storm. This is much for the consolation
of Believers, and it is the very end why this numbering and sealing is set down
here, to tell, that not only Christ has a care of all Believers in general,
but of every one of them in particular. Obs. 4. That sealing and defending
against declining or defection in Error, is no common privilege; they are
marked, here one and there one, who are made partakers of it, a few of some
Tribes, and of some none, to show the singularity of this mercy, and to point,
as at our Lords care, so also at His Sovereignty who pitcheth upon whom He
will, to preserve from the trials of the time: it is not because they are
better than others, but their through-bearing lies in His purpose about them,
and His sealing, discerning and differencing of them from others. Lastly, There
are but very few, considering the multitude that perishes, that shall be
kept free and saved in such a trial; it will be a rare thing to stand, when
the storm of Error blows; many shall follow the pernicious ways of false
Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1, etc. If it were possible, the Elect should be seduced.
Revel. 13. The world wondereth after the beast, So that it concerns us to be
humble, watchful and on our guard, that we be not led away with the Error of
the wicked.

LECTURE IIII.
Verse. 9. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands:

10. And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.


THe Lord, having described to John and discovered to him, in the beginning of
the Chapter, the hazard the Church was in by a coming storm, He lays two
grounds for confirming the Faith of His people. The first, is, the care of the
Elect under that storm, to verse. 9. The second, is, the happy estate the
Church should be in after that storm should be over.

For clearing the meaning of this part of the Chapter, we are to enquire in
these particulars, 1. Who are to be understood by these that are here mentioned
and left innumerable? 2. To what time it relates, or what state of the Church,
whether Militant or Triumphant? 3. What is the scope of it, and the reason of
setting it down in such expressions? Then we shall particularly open the words,
which have two parts, 1. What generally John of himself saw and heard
concerning the happy and comfortable state of that great company, to verse. 13.
2. What further was taught him by one of the Elders, inviting him to enquire
further concerning them.

For the first, what this company, that have palms in their hands, is? we say,
1. They differ from the hundred forty and four thousand mentioned before, 1.
in number, being more than they. 2. In extent, their reckoning was out of
Tribes, as it were, of one Kingdom; these are out of all Nations, Kindreds,
etc. 3. In respect of postour or place, the hundred forty and four thousand
are sealed ones on the earth, secret and hid; this company, is seen openly
professing, standing before the Throne, and it is not said on them they were
marked. 4. The former are sealed for a coming storm, to show the danger they
were to be in, and as having no commerce with others. Therefore it is said (
Chap. 14.3.) no man could learn their song but themselves. This great company
have palms in their hands, as an open sign of Victory, therefore are they said
( verse. 14.) to be come out of great tribulation, and their song is public,
with a loud voice. Beside, that by that transition, after these things, I saw,
is particularly holden forth a different company to represent a different thing
relating to a subsequent state of the Church in respect of its numerousnesse
and prosperity, opposite to the former.

This company then being different from the sealed ones spoken of before, we
say they belong not to that time, but they follow it. Which appears, 1. (as
we hinted at before) by that transition, after these things, I saw, importing
not only an order in what he saw as to his seeing, but as to the things seen,
that is, after a sealed company succeeded a great innumerable company, for
liberty and publicknesse of profession, not needing to be sealed. 2. They are
come out of great tribulation, verse. 14. but the former sealed ones were under
it. The sealed ones were strivers; these are victors, Therefore must succeed
them, as victory does to fighting. 3. More particularly, by these sealed ones
are understood the hundred forty and four thousand mentioned, Chap. 14. verse.
1, 2. Which belongs unto and is contemporary with the prophecy of the
trumpets, as appears by Chap. 9, 4. and 13.8. and 14.3, 4. But, by this
innumerable company, we conceive, are to be understood the same who stand on
the sea of glass, having gotten victory over the beast, having Harps in their
hands, Chap. 15.1, 2. The properties, exercise and case agree to both; which
number are after the everlasting Gospel is preached through the earth, Chap.
14. verse. 6. and the cry of Babylons begun ruin is proclaimed, and so
belongs to the prophecy of the vials.

Out of all which then, we conceive, that here is hinted at and held forth the
increase and liberty of the Church after the darkness of Antichrist shall be
over and the Gospel of new, as it were, sent through the earth, Saints then
shall be innumerable, and full victors and conquerours in comparison of their
paucity and restraint under Antichrists growth and height.

The second Question, is, To what time or state of the Church it relates? Ans.
For the time, it is signified before to belong to the vials, which hold forth
the enemies ruin and the Churches rising, yet, because there are three steps
or degrees of the Churches victory, 1. From Antichrists begun ruin, till by
degrees it be fully consummated. 2. From his ruin to the end of the world, in
the Churches trials with Go^ and Magog, etc. 3. The Churches entry into the new
Jerusalem: all which degrees, are begun, continued and perfected under the
vials. It may be asked to which of these degrees, or if to all of them, this
belongs? We think indeed it looks to all these, holding forth the happiness
of Gods people in their victory over Antichrist, and, in their outgate from
these troubles and trials, showing how happy they should be when these storms
should be over, which in part is begun here; but leaves them not till it put
them in Heaven, and Glory there. 1. Because that compleateth their victory; and
victories here, are but parts, types, and earnests of their victory there. 2.
Because that victory is the main and common consolation of all fighters; and so
suiteth well and best with the scope, as taking in all. 3. Because all those
steps of victories belong to the vials, and are one continued and pursued
victory from its beginning to its close. Neither, secondly, do we exclude, but
include the Churches happy and flourishing condition on earth, not only for the
former reasons, whereby it is clear they cannot be separated; but also because
of its scope, which is to show the Churches estate here in time; and the other
characters of its being subsequent immediately to the sealed company, as
succeding to them, as also its being contemporary with the vials in their rise
and progress, confirm this.

For the third Question, What is the reason that the temporal and flourishing
condition of the Church-militant, is set down under such noble expressions as
agree to the Church-triumphant? Ans. 1. Because it is one continued victory,
the begun happiness and flourishing condition of the Church and their happy
condition in Glory hereafter being divided in so many parts, and Heaven is the
last, longest, and fullest part of it. 2. Because it is ordinary in this Book
to describe and style the Church-militant, by Heaven; and the Beauty and Glory
of the Church, by that of Heaven; the happiness of the Church here, by the
happiness of Heaven hereafter. 3. The expressions of the Prophets speaking of
the Gospels flourishing, or of a flourishing estate of the Jewish Church after
the captivity, are thus large, as, Isa. 25.8. and 35.10. and 47.10. and 51.11.
which expressions may be borrowed (as many other) from the Prophets in this
Book; and are both to set forth the excellent estate of the Church in it self
during that time; and also being compared with its former obscure condition, it
is like heaven in respect of what it was. 4. The outward judgment on
persecuters ( Chap. 6.) was described by hell and the last judgment, the one
being to them the beginning of the other: so, upon the contrary, this happy
estate of the Church, is described by heaven in opposition thereto, as is
suitable.

More particularly the words hold out the begun happiness of the Church here,
after Antichrists begun fall, and her growing in that happy condition, never to
be so darkened again as formerly, till it be perfected in heaven. The
consolation has two parts, (as we show before,) 1. What John saw and heard,
from verse. 9. to verse. 13. 2. A more particular explication of the former, from
verse. 13. to the end.

The general description of what John saw and heard, has two parts, suitable
to Chap. 4. and 5. One is of the redeemed Church preceding. The second is of
the Angels going along with them. The former, verse. 9, 10. The latter, verse.
11.12.

The first of them, is set out in these three circumstances, 1. In the order as
they stand, After this I beheld, and lo a great multitude, to put difference
betwixt one thing and another in time, yet immediately following it: the
meaning is, when the former strait of the Church was over, and the hidden ones
kept secret under Gods stamp, I saw a great multitude come out and publicly
avow and profess Christ's Gospel. 2. They are described by their number, it was
great and innumerable, not to God, who has them all written by name in His
Book; known to Him are all from the beginning: 2 Timothy 2. the Lord knows who
are his. But, 1. It was a great multitude in it self, that no man could number,
as the stars and sand of the sea are called innumerable and Abraham's seed. 2.
Comparatively, or in comparison of the little number that was before under
Antichrists dominion; that might have been within men's reckoning, but this was
hugely beyond it. 3. They are described from their extent, of all Nations,
Kindreds, etc. in opposition to the former paucity of Tribes, which might be in
one Kingdom when the Church was as shut up, now there shall be an enlargement
as observable, as at the Gospels first spreading, to point at the spreading
that the rise of the Gospel should have after Antichrists begun ruin, it
should be such as was after Christ's Ascension. 4. They are described from the
place where, and the postour wherein, they stood; they are before the Throne of
God, and they stand there. 1. Before the Throne, that is, in the Church; here
they are brought in, that were strangers before, and in Heaven they shall be
completed hereafter: for we understand the Throne here, (as Chap. 4.) as
representing either the place of Glory or Gods favorable presence to His
Church. 2. They stand there: which points at two things, First, Their
dependence on God and Christ; they stand as servants attending their Master, as
verse. 15. presenting themselves before Him after their victories. Secondly,
Their public owning and acknowledgeing of Him for their victory and liberty.
Thirdly, They stand in white robes, well adorned, and palms in their hands:
with white robes, a sign of Glory, Chap. 3.4, and a sign of innocence ( Chap.
14.4.) and victory, 19.8. having a more beautiful luster upon them than
before; with palms in their hands, a sign of victory and joy in a full
measure, suitable to these who had gotten their heads above all difficulties,
Mat. 21.8. 5. They are described from their work and exercise, which is set
down, ( verse. 10.) in the matter and in the manner. 1. In the manner, they cry
out with a loud voice: To show, 1. the good reason they had to bless Him. 2.
The goodwill and heartinesse they had to do it. 3. The publicknesse of their
profession, and the spreading of it, whereas the Song of the hundred forty and
four thousand was secret; none could learn their Song, Chap. 14. this is
public and avowed, they care not who hear their Song. 2. The matter of their
Song, is in few words, but very material. In general, it is to ascribe to God
the glory of their victory, as to the author of it, and to Christ as Mediator,
as the great mean and procurer of it. It takes in the rise, progress, and
perfecting of their happiness spiritual and temporal, it is all Salvation,
and Salvation from all things that may hurt His people. More particularly, this
Salvation is ascribed to God, as the fountain and efficient cause, in whose
Counsel the work of salvation bred, and was concluded; and it is ascribed to
Christ; as the meritorious cause and procurer of it. To point out, 1. That
their Salvation is in Him, and belongs to Him. 2. That their Salvation is no
where else to be gotten: Isa. 43.1. and 21. appropriateth it to God, so as it
excludes all others. 3. It is an attributing not only Salvation in the general
to God, but this same particular delivery from Antichrists sin, snares, his
idols and ignorance, Psalm. 3.8. 4. It is the giving or ascribing the Glory to
Himself alone, and so an acknowledging of the freeness of it, that is was for
no deserving or worth in them. 5. Christ is joined with God, because all Grace
and Salvation is given in Him, and for Him to the Church, He is not misknown in
the administration of Grace, therefore neither should He be in His Peoples
thanksgiving. 6. His Salvation is mainly as He is a Savior to save from sin,
Mat. 1.21. therefore this loud cry in uttering and attributing Salvation only
to God and to the Lamb, is not in respect of the outward delivery alone, but in
respect of the Doctrine of Justification, which was before obscured and divided
amongst many merits and Mediators: now it is vindicated, and they publicly
and openly confess it, and ascribe it to God only, as the fountain and
efficient cause; and to Christ alone, as the meritorious, laying the weight and
the honor of their eternal Salvation on God and Christ alone, without parting
them among any other, or mixing in merit, purgatory, penance, or any other
thing of that kind, as formerly had been done.

This then is the first part of this general description, which is John's
describing the happy condition of the redeemed Church; Or, our Lord, to
strengthen the faith of His People, reveals the happy outgate ere ever the
storm come on. Hence, Observe,

1. The most sad and sorest storms of the Church and people of God, have a rest
and a victory at the back of them: The most sad estate of the Church, has a
happy and glorious victory following it. There was a storm spoken of before,
and what a glorious outgate is here^ This is a truth that holds good, whether
we expound the words of their temporal or eternal Salvation, it is a
comfortable conclusion laid for the comfort of Gods People, and fully proven,
Heb. 4.9. that there remains therefore a rest to the people of God; and let
it be fixed in us, the best estate of Gods people is ever hindmost; their last
estate is their best, just contrary to that the wicked have to expect: when the
temporal happiness of the wicked shall turn in a curse, then sighing and
weeping shall pass away from the people of God. 2. Gods proposing this outgate
beforehand for their comfort, shows, That there is no solid way to bear a
trial well without the faith of the outgate, and that the eying of the outgate
of a storm, while folks are under it, or, their thinking on the happy estate
that follows difficulties, is the best way to moderate one under
difficulties; therefore when the Lord threatened the captivity, He gave them
many promises in Isaiah concerning their return from it, ere ever it came on,
to arm and guard the faith of His people from sinking under it. This sustained
also Moses, Heb. 11.25. and Paul, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. There is an amiable sight
beyond all straits, if we would by the right prospect view them. 3. Heaven and
Glory is the complete outgate of Believers trials, and should be Believers main
consolation while they are under trials; for, though the temporal happiness
of the Church be holden out here, we seclude not, but include (as we show in
the exposition) their happiness in Heaven, where their victory is perfected:
If in this life only we had hope, of all men we were the most miserable. 4.
Heaven and Glory must be an excellent thing, a very happy, satisfying,
comfortable condition; a brave life, 1. Excellent company, God and the Lamb,
the congregation of the firstborn. 2. An excellent place, before the Throne,
beholding His Glory and sharing of it; and if a place in Heaven be more
Glorious, this is it. 3. Though many Angels and Saints be with them, yet they
are mainly taken up with beholding God, shining in the Lamb. 4. Their adorning
and ornament, they are always walking in white; pure, clean, and constantly
victorious; their vile bodies made conform to the glorious body of Christ. 5.
They have palms in their hands, triumphing and rejoicing. 6. Their work and
task, is, always to be singing; the song of free Grace makes Heaven ring, and
they weary not in it, but are always praising God, as there is always ground;
by praising, enjoying; and by enjoying, praising Him: If ye would have a happy
life, is there any life like this? Better stand here and look on, than sit on
the Thrones of the World. Look if ye have the faith of enjoying it. Is there
not a possibility of it? Or, think ye all this is spoken for naught? No,
believe it, they are the true and faithful sayings of God; John's testimony,
is, that he saw it in the spirit, and it is left on record to the Church for
confirmation of her Faith; and, if there be not a happiness beyond it, nor
comparable to it, choose it; it were begun happiness to be brought this
length. There are many of you who hear me that will miss this brave life; if
God help you not to stand before Him here, and here to begin your song, you
will not stand nor sing before Him hereafter; and a woeful miss will it be. 5.
Folks in Heaven are not silent; as many as are there, are praising; dumb
Christians are not Heaven-like, They that dwell in thy house will be still
praising thee, and it is a part of their blessedness so to be exercised, Psalm.
84. as the Saints enjoy God, so they praise Him; they speak to His praise, and
honor Him in their conversation; they have good matter of a song, and good
will to sing; and it is an ill token when folks presume to come to Heaven, and
yet have no good will to honor God here. 6. As this company represents the
Church Militant, Obs. That the enlargement of the Church and its thriving, even
in external profession, is a beautiful sight. To see a Church, 1. in
Doctrine, pure. 2. In the number of professors, many. And, 3. public in their
liberty and boldness. And, 4. In their Authority, weighty; It is like the
company of two Armies, and that with Banners, to see many professors and a
suitableness in their practice, pure Doctrine, and pure Ordinances, powerful
and fruitful: though folks call them forms, there is much of Gods beauty that
shines in them; and if it be a beautiful sight to see a Church thriving in
purity of Doctrine and Ordinances, and Discipline in order and decency, it
should be as sad a sight to see the carved work pulled down, Antichristian
darkness, or that which is no better, coming in, and confusion in stead of
order; as the one should refresh us, the other should weight us. 7. A
flourishing condition of the Church for number and liberty in profession, often
go together, as we may see by comparing this estate under the vials with the
former. The one is the ordinary mean of engageing men to the other, and the
marring of the one cannot but mar the other. 8. From the matter of the song, It
tells us what is to be gotten in God and Christ, even compleet Salvation of
all sorts, and from all fears and dangers. Needs any Believer then to fear,
seeing God and the Lamb have Salvation? Salvation belongs not to Armies of
men, to men of high place and power, nor to men of riches, wit and policy, but
to God, it is His peculiar property and prerogative; and what less then have
Gods people at one time nor at another, since He has Salvation at command? and
He can give it Commission when He will, and when He commissionateth it, it will
come, Psalm. 68.20. Our God, is the God of salvation: Salvation holds of Him,
and to whom but to Him belongs the issues from death? Let none then ascribe
it to any other, nor seek it elsewhere, nor let any be discouraged, when they
desire it, it is in a good hand, Isa. 43.11. He will not give His Glory to
another; He bestows it, and the Lamb purchases it. 2. Let it comfort Gods
People in an anxious time. The Faith of Gods having Salvation in His hand, may
guard the heart and keep from much perplexing anxiety that folks are put to
under difficulties, Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs to the Lord, thy blessing is
upon thy people. 9. Salvation to our God and to the Lamb: They ascribe it to
Him, that hold it of Him, Obs. That nothing is more Heaven-like, than a humble
holding of Salvation of God, and ascribing to Him the glory of it. This is
Heavens Song. Heaven is full of it, to denude our selves, and hold all of free
Grace, to ascribe Salvation freely to God and to the Lamb. And as this becomes
Glory well, so it glorifieth God, while folks are laboring under a body of
death, to say, it is not to them, but to Him, that the glory of their Salvation
belongs; to wash their hands of any good given them, or that they may expect;
to acknowledge His freedom in that which they are to get, as well as His riches
in that which they have gotten, This is the likest life to Heaven, to be still
praising free Grace. 10. Heaven, and the song that will be in Heaven, may
comfort Gods people, even in time, under these difficulties they meet with
here; the hope of what is coming, may alley and only can alley the bitterness
of what is present.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 11. And all the Angels stood round about the throne, and about the
Elders, and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and
worshipped God.

12. Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and
honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

13. And one of the Elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are
arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?

14. And I said unto him, Sir, thou know. --


WE told you that the scope of the Spirit in these words, is, to give a little
glimpse of the glorious outgate the Church of Christ should have after the
storms of Antichrist, and these corrupt Teachers that were coming to lay the
Church low. This outgate, is, 1. generally represented to John, from verse. 9.
to verse. 13. and then more particularly explicated by an Elder to John, from
verse. 13. to the end.

The first has two parts: The first whereof, is the representation of the
redeemed Church standing before the throne with white robes, and palms in their
hands, and a sweet song in their mouth, whereof we have spoken. In the 11. and
12. Verses, there is a further enlargement and explication of that glorious
estate of the Church, and the Saints happiness, by bringing in all the Angels,
admiring Gods goodness to His Church, and taking a share of the Song of
praises with them, it being such a glorious piece of work, as would serve not
only all the Saints, but the Angels also: so then in these two Verses, is set
down the Angels approbation of, and concurrence with, the redeemed Church.

The scope of it, is, to show, 1. The harmony that is among Saints and Angels
in their praising God. 2. To show how excellent and glorious a ground of
praise, a flourishing and victorious estate of the Church, has in it; and that
by it God gives evidences of His Glory to Angels, Principalities, and Powers,
etc. Ephesians. 3.10. 3. To show, that Angels delight in the Churches flourishing,
and in the thriving of the Gospel. Luke 15.7. there is joy in heaven at the
conversion of a sinner; so here, by holding forth the in-coming of many sinners
and the spreading of the light of the Gospel, all the Angels are made cheerful
at the news of it. 4. To show the excellency of the thing; the exceeding
greatness of the Glory of God, and the excellency of the work of praise, it
will and does take up Angels to go about it, it is a work becoming even them.
The glorious condition abiding the Church, shall furnish all the Angels in
Heaven matter of praise; and the hope of such a glorious outgate, might
exceedingly comfort John and others who were to live under those difficulties.

More particularly, This company of Angels is set out, 1. In their posture,
they stand; and they are set out in the same posture, Chap. 5. The reason of
their standing, is, to show not only their reverencing of God, but their great
dependence on God, as servants waiting for direction from Him, and their
readiness to obey what orders He gives them. It signifies also their
privilege to stand there, Deuteronomy. 10.8. 2. They are set out in the place where
they stand; it is about the throne, Elders and beasts (as we show, Chap. 6.) to
signify the end of their service; it is to watch over the Church that is
between Gods throne and them, they are without as a guard and wall to the
redeemed Church, they are ministering Spirits, all of them, for the Heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1.14. Therefore it is said, all the Angels; they surround the
Throne and the Church, keeping them in, and keeping out from them any thing
that may annoy them; and consequently, they are round about the innumerable
multitude mentioned before, verse. 9. who were before the Throne: yea, it would
appear, that these, being here omitted, (though that be their place, and
Elders, and Beasts mentioned to stand there where formerly they stood) must be
comprehended under the Elders or Beasts, seeing the place and guard is all one,
and the distinction that is put between them, is but as a difference of the
whole Catholic Church, signified by the Elders, from such a particular company
brought through Antichrists tribulation, verse. 14, and 15. and at such a time,
and in such a case as a part of the whole; and, in these respects,
distinguished from the whole, which strengthens the exposition we gave before
of these Elders representing the Church of God; for, probably they had not been
omitted, if they had been a party distinct from the Church, otherwise than a
part is from the whole: neither can any other reason be given, why these Elders
do not join in praise with the Church or Angels, as, Chap. 4, and 5, etc. when
the praise is so solemn, but because their joining, or praise, was formerly
expressed by the company mentioned, verse. 9, 10. For, it is not to be imagined
they were now silent as such an occasion. 3. They are set one in their
worshipping, or, falling on their faces; which is to be Spiritually understood,
seeing Angels have no bodies, and cannot be properly said to fall on their
faces. It is to signify their acknowledgement of the exceeding great distance
between God and them, the most holy creatures, and the reverence due from them
to Him, as, Isa. 6. they are said to cover their faces with wings, because of
the adorable holiness of God, to which even they wanted a proportionablnesse;
so here, they are said to fall on their faces, to show the exceeding great
distance that is between the Majesty of God and the most excellent creatures.
2. To acknowledge the greatness of the work they had in hand, to wit, the
praising of God for the enlargement of the Church. 4. They are described in
respect of their Song, which is set down, verse. 12. wherein we have three
things considerable; or, which we are to consider in these three respects, 1.
In respect of the matter, expressed in seven words, blessing, honor, glory,
etc. like the matter of the Song, Chap. 5. all to one purpose. 2. In respect of
its object. 3. In respect of its manner.

To show, 1. That words are wanting, and cannot be gotten, even by Angels in
heaven, to express the Glory due to God; they are swallowed up with it, it
goes beyond their conception and expression; for, it over-reacheth all created
expressions and apprehensions so far that it is no marvel it do so here. 2. To
show, that whatever is glorious, or a ground of thanksgiving, or the object of
praise, or the subject of commendation, it is in Him, and in Him alone, and to
be attributed to Him with all humility by the most glorious creatures; it is in
Him, and not in them, A consideration, 1. exceedingly upstirring, to praise and
admire Him. 2. To cry down in comparison all other things, as weak and empty.
3. Comfortable to Gods people, who have all these things in Him alone. There is
no ground of praise imaginable, not any thing which might have laid, or may
lay, any obligation on a creature to God, as having obtained a good turn, but
that is in God, and may be expected from Him. 4. To show our duty both in
dependence on Him, and thanksgiving to Him. 2. This Song is to be considered in
respect of the object of it: in which respect, it differs from the Song of
the redeemed to God and the Lamb, yet they meet in one; for, it secludeth not
the Lamb, but takes Him in with the Father and Spirit. This being divine
Worship, proper and peculiar to God, Christ in it is looked on as God; and God
here is essentially to be considered. Whence we may gather, how to interpret
their Song, Chap. 5. the one, no question, being of equal extent with the
other. 3. This song is to be considered in respect of its manner, 1. That it is
in generals, as most comprehensive; for, ( Psalm. 106.2.) Who can show forth all
his praise? His thoughts to in-ward pass reckoning, Psalm. 40.5. 2. That it
begins and ends with Amen, as consisting more in their affection and wish,
than in their expression, beginning with a conviction that it overpowereth
them, yet undertaking it, as Psalm. 106. and going on, and no more satisfied at
the close than when they began, but ending just so as always beginning, and
beginning so as never to end; An evidence of a good frame of these that praise;
they are as ready to begin when they have done, as when they began, rather
thinking their praise a consenting to praise, than actual praising.

Observe here, 1. what a God this is whom we worship, whom all the Angels do
thus worship and adore, and stand in such reverence of, that they cover their
faces, Isa. 6. They want words and are swallowed up through the deep
apprehension of the Majesty, Glory, Greatness, and Goodness of God: what a
God must this be that they reverence, stand in aw of, and are so affected with
the Glory that shines in Him? They do His will perfectly, and yet they fall
upon their faces before Him. What a dreadful God is this? and what poor
thoughts have we of Him? Little knowledge of Him makes us have so short and
low conceptions of Him; had we a glimpse of His Glory, sitting on His Throne of
Majesty, it would dazell us; and if Angels thus exalt Him, what should we do?
Obs. 2. These that are nearest Him, and partake most of Him, will press most
for exalting Him, and will be most taken up with the Glory that is in Him; it
is not good to be satisfied with our own conceptions of God; Angels are not so.

2. From the matter and occasion of the Song, Observe, That the flourishing
estate of the Church, is one of the greatest evidences of Gods Glory in the
world, and one of the greatest grounds of praise. By the flourishing of the
Church, I mean the multiplying of Professors, purity of Ordinances, backed with
power and some suitablnesse in the practice of Professors. This is it that
wakeneth and begins the Angels Song, and the Song of the Redeemed, and
carries it on; the glory of Wisdom, Power, free Grace and Love, shines here;
Ephesians. 3.10. That he might show unto the principalities and powers by the Church
the manifold wisdom of God. He makes them wonder to behold so much wisdom, in
suiting Grace to sinners case and need; so much condescendency, in pardoning
freely; so much power, in overcoming men's stubbor^nesse, etc. and shall they
wonder at this, and praise for it? and shall not we wonder and praise, and be
affected with it for our own good, who are partaking of that they praised-for
before hand, for that we have these pure Ordinances after the removal of
Antichristian darkness? It is a proof of this truth, and a part of the
accomplishment of this prophecy, and should stir us up to make this use of it.

Obs. 3. If things be well searched in God, there is nothing that can be a
ground of praise, but it is in Him, and may be expected from Him, blessing and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, etc. Blessing, is all matter
that may give occasion to bless Him for making us blessed; Glory, takes in
all glory, every thing that makes God glorious, or us to account Him glorious,
and Glory it self; and matter of thanksgiving, wisdom, honor, and the rest,
are in Him; nothing is meet for the end, or meet as a mids to bring about that
end, but it is in God, blessing being the end, there is wisdom, power, and
might to bring about that end; they have then good ground of praise, that have
God to be their God.

From the 13 verse. to the end, follows a more particular enquiry concerning
that number, which is followed with a more full description of them; and it
has three steps, or parts, 1. The Elders question to John, verse. 13. or,
rather, two questions, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and
whence came they? 2. John's reply, verse. 14. I said unto him, Sir, thou
know. 3. The Elders particular description to John of that blessed and happy
company, 1. From whence they came. 2. What they are now. And 3. How they came
at that happy condition. We need not stand here to dive who this Elder is: it
suiteth with the scope and form of this prophecy, thus to express it by way
of Dialogue, it being a question not of doubt or information to him who
propounded it, but for incitation to him it was propounded unto, to enquire
more in it, as a thing worthy to be known, and useful for opening the rest of
the prophecy. This is the scope of the Queree, to make John ask; yet
considering that John here personats one that is a Believer; and that by Elders
are understood (probably) members of the true Church, It is not impertinent to
look on it as signifying the help and usefulness of one member of the body to
another, it may be, of more abilities in many things than themselves, as we
show before, Chap. 5. It holds out, (in a word) four generals, 1. That when
the people of God are dull, He wants not means to waken and rou^e them up. 2.
That God will mak^ use of weak means and instruments sometimes to stir up these
that are more strong. 3. who personating all to whom this prophecy should
come, He would have him more particular in the enquiry after the knowledge of
these things contained in it, which should stir u^ up to search, and not
slight what he reveals. Yea, 4. it implies, that God will have many
precious things revealed, we, in the mean time, neither understanding them, nor
enquiring after them, till he stir us up.

John's reply, is, verse. 14. modest and short, Sir, thou know: wherein,
beside. John's reverend way of speaking, there is implied, 1. John's ignorance,
he denies that he knew, only he saw them, he knew no further concerning this
company. 2. A desire to be taught of him who knew what they were. It is a
reverend humble insinuation of His expectation that he should tell and answer
His own questions, which accordingly follows, as if he said, Sir, thou can
answer thy question thy self, and I expect thou will do it; it is no shame to
be ignorant of some things, especially in this prophecy, and to vent our
ignorance, so as we may have our knowledge helped. John has advantage by this,
He has a more full explication of what he knew not, holden out to Him. It were
good we walked in the sense of our ignorance, and made more use of the means of
knowledge.

For the Elders answer, it has three things it it, 1. What the former
condition of the redeemed Church was, great tribulation, probably relating not
to the common afflictions and tribulations that all that will live Godly must
suffer, but these trials signified by the trumpets under Antichrist. 2. What
their present estate was, exceeding prosperous, verse. 15. to the end. 3. How
they past from the one to the other, it was by washing their garments and
making them white in the Lambs blood.

Obs. 1. That the first view or representation of things, is not enough for us;
we can see, and hear, and understand little, till it be pressed on us. 2. God
loves that we be taught, and provideth means for instructing and upstirring of
His own so far as He thinks needful. 3. If it came not of Him, the best
would lie in ignorance, and, it may be, not endeavor to know, partly, thinking
it desperate and presumption to enquire into it, partly, negligent and not
thinking it needful, but curious, as many do, to enquire into these things,
and so abstain from the search of this prophecy. The best have need of
upstirring; and by these questions, not only John is stirred up for the time;
but in him, all that might after read these prophesies, to enquire in them. 4.
John's answer is humble and reverend, teaching us rather to acknowledge our
ignorance that we may learn, than to hide it and continue ignorant. 2. That
many may be and are ignorant in the matters of this prophecy. 3. That no
occasion of learning would be omitted, nor no instrument or mean excepted
against, but all made use of for learning. 5. Gods end in posing with hard
questions, is, to help to know what we understand not. This question propounded
to John, is neither to shame him, nor draw him in a snare, but to bring him to
clearness in that he was dark in.

LECTURE VI.
Verse. 14. -- And he said to me, These are they which came out of great
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb.

15. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night
in his temple: and he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them.

16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, nor any heat.

17. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and
shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes.


THat which we have now to speak of, is the Elders reply to John, wherein he
insisteth in the description of that excellent company; so that the words,
continue the description of the former innumerable multitude, in these three,
1. What was the condition they were brought from, or what had been their former
condition, These are they which came out of great tribulation. 2. By what means
they had come from, or had gotten victory over, or freedom from that great
tribulation, by washing their robes, and making them white in the blood of the
Lamb. 3. From the 15. verse. and forward, he insisteth in describing what their
present and happy estate and condition was.

For the first, verse. 14. they are said to have come out of great tribulation.
Tribulation is spoken of, Act. 14.21. in general, as the way to Heaven and
Glory. But this being spoken of as a great tribulation, in an eminent degree,
and that company somewhat singularly differenced from others, by this, that
they are come out of it, it would appear, that by it is meaned the tribulation
under Antichrists persecution, and by that company, these that are brought
through after his begun fall, and Chap. 15. are said to have gotten the victory
over him: for, that difficulty under Antichrist, is the main one after
Heathenish persecution, and that to which this former sealing relates, as is
said.

For the second, the mean of their through-bearing to this happy estate, is
mentioned also, verse. 14. not their own innocence, they needed washing; nor
their own sufferings or works, these made them not white; but it was the blood
of the Lamb, by taking themselves alanerly to his satisfaction, they attained
this righteousness, and were made partakers of this blessed estate, by which
also they are said to prevail, Chap. 12. That red blood can make bloody souls
white, it is of such an excellent virtue. These folks, when the rest of the
world were worshipping idols, and all that professed Christianity were
following a self righteousness, and absolution by penance, indulgences, etc.
fled to Jesus Christ for refuge, and they, by this righteousness and
satisfaction alone, are made white, pardoned of sin, and brought to this happy
condition, and not by any thing in themselves; though they kept themselves
free from the corruption of the time, yet this effect is not attributed to
that, but to their washing, etc.

For the third, Their present happy condition is enlarged in the last three
Verses of the Chapter, and set down only as a consequent of their suffering,
but flowing from their making use of the Lambs blood as the cause thereof;
Therefore, that is, not because they suffered such tribulation, but because
they washed their robes, and made them white in Christ's blood.

Their happy condition is set out in these following circumstances, or steps,
which show what a happiness they were brought unto, 1. In the place of
enjoying their happiness, before the Throne of God, and in His Temple, which
is in His Church here begun, by fellowship in His Ordinances, and in Heaven
completely, when they are presented before Gods Throne in Glory. 2. In their
service and work, and the un-interruptednesse of it, they serve Him night and
day, and have place among Angels that stand by, Zech 3. freed from selfishnesse
and a body of death; and not doing this service by fits, but constantly,
alluding (probably) to the Priests, which in their courses were admitted night
and day to be in the Temple, Psalm. 134.1. This is a special part of their
happiness, that enimity now in them, against the service of God, being taken
away, that their delight therein is not marred: and this is brought in, 1. to
show their privilege, that they did need no Priest, nor intervenient mean to
help them. 2. To show there was no intermission in their service, no whoring
from God; but, as the Angels in Heaven, so do they the will of God cheerfully
and delightsomly. A third step of their happy condition, is in the end of verse.
15. and is set out by enjoying of Gods company, which is the object of that
blessed condition, He that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them, that
is, they shall not be at a distance with God, nor He at a distance with them;
but He shall make Himself familiarly known to them, and there will be no
intermission of their sense and joy. They shall not have communion with God by
starts, but He shall constantly and fully manifest Himself as dwelling in one
house with them, and they in His company for ever. This word ^welling, is to
sojourn in a tent, spoken of Christ's being in the flesh, Ioh. 1.14 which may
look to Gods making Himself manifest in Ordinances, till this tent be taken
down; thus it agrees to the Church-militant, wherein no such interruption of
Gods presence shall be after that time, as had been before under Antichrist.
The fourth step or part of their happy condition, is in verse. 16. wherein their
happiness is set out by their freedom from all crosses and natural defects and
infirmities, and men's violence. There is neither hunger, nor thirst, nor
scorching heat of the Sun, that is, no persecution, if figuratively taken, as
Matthew. 13. nor distemper of air, or weather, nor any thing hurtful or noisome
to the body, if properly taken. There was by the former phrase no sinful
defect, and now there is no sinlesse defect, which Christ was subject unto
while He was here on earth, such as hunger or cold or weariness: there is
nothing of that kind in Heaven, nothing to distemper their happiness or to
impare their blessedness; not, the least blast that flows from their
natural infirmity within, nor from without by annoiance of the weather, as it
is here on earth. The fifth is, a main step of their happiness, and it is
given as the great ground and reason of all the rest, and serves to confirm
it, verse. 17. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, stall lead
them; it shall be so, and can be no otherwise; for, the Lamb Jesus Christ
Himself, who is God on the Throne, equal to the Father, His care over them will
be such as will admit no want, but will furnish all good: and this is set out
in these two, 1. He shall feed them; which comprehends all care over them and
tenderness to them in Him; and also takes in all provision needful for their
well-being in providing for them, and feasting them, and over-seeing them, to
keep them from any hurt, as a shepherd does his flock, Psalm. 23. He shall take
them in His special guiding, without interveening of O^dinances or Ministers.
2. It is set out in the excellent pastures He shall feed them in, not at
puddles or streams, nor every fountain, but living fountains of waters, which
dry not up, able to quench all thirst, and to cool from all heat: called living
fountains, 1. In opposition to all earthly consolations, which are but as
standing and dead puddles or cisterns, or streams at best; but there are at His
right hand fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. fountains and
living fountains. 2. To show the diversity and abundance of consolation that is
to be had and will be gotten in the presence of God, and of the Lamb in heaven.
And, 3. living fountains, to show the inexhaustiblnesse of them: it is closed
with a word to confirm the former, God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, that is, God shall put an end to all their misery, and there shall be
neither sigh nor tear there, nor cause of tears, though they have never been in
their life without tears on their cheeks; yet no sooner shall they enter in
that blessed place, but Gods presence, and a glimpse of His favor shall so
wipe them away, that none of them shall ever stick there any more, nor be seen
there again. There are none among that happy company, that either actually
weep, or shall have cause or occasion of weeping or sorrow for ever.

There are some of these excellent expressions applied by Isaiah to the Church,
after its captivity, as may be seen, Isa. 49.10, etc. and 25.8. and 35.10. and
51.11, etc. whereby it may not be inconsistent with the scope, to look upon
this description as pointing at the begun victory of these Saints here, but
perfected in Heaven, as we show you at the entry on this part of the Chapter;
however, more literally, it agrees to heaven: and therefore we shall draw our
Observations most from that consideration of them, and only apply them to the
Churches happy estate here, 1. As begun. 2. As comparative with former straits.
3. Because in it self excellent and eminent by these privileges it enjoyed.
Hence,

Observe 1. Gods people in difficult times, would be acquainting themselves
with, and confirming themselves in the Faith of the happy estate of glory; for
this end, it is so studiously proposed, much pains is taken to reveal and hold
it forth: and the Lord stirs up John, and in him other Believers, to look
upon it and to believe and comfort themselves from the happy estate they shall
meet with when their suffering shall have an end, 1. To prevent their fainting,
in as far as heaven makes an end of all their difficulties. 2. To make them
submissive, because that time is coming. 3. To make their life lively and
comfortable by the knowledge and faith of it, and the frequent meditation on
it. This makes a cheerful, comfortable and submissive way of living under
crosses and difficulties; this makes Believers long for heaven, and to comfort
themselves in their abiding empty handed for the time. 2. These are they that
come out of great tribulation] Then tribulations, and great tribulations are
the way to glory to them whom God loves most: Jesus Christ Himself drank of
the brook by the way, Psalm. 110.7. and was made low before He was exalted, and
His Members follow the Head in a conformity of suffering, Romans 8.28. Acts
14.22. Suffering could not look so grim and terrible-like, if what were on the
back of it were well looked to. Let none think the worse of Glory, or that the
happiness of Gods people is of less worth, because tribulations are in the
way to it; neither let any prize an easy life in this world with Gods curse,
This is far better with all the tribulations that accompany it. 3. They have
washen their garments in the blood of the Lamb, who came through tribulation]
Observe, These that are most righteous, whether in active obedience, in keeping
the Law and Commandments, or, in passive obedience, in yielding their bodies to
be burnt, they have need of Christ's satisfaction to make them white: These
Worthies kept themselves free of the pollutions of the time, and shunned no
suffering; and yet upon this account they appear not before God. Holiness is
good, but in our seeking to appear before God, we are to seek to be found in
Christ, Phil 3.9. Or, take the Doctrine thus, No merit of ours can bring
through neither temporal nor spiritual judgments. These were free of common
guiltiness, and shunned not, but endured all tribulations; yet, none of these
are grounds of their through-bearing, but the washing of their garments in
Christ's blood. 4. As the greatest tribulations have an outgate; and the greater
the tribulation be, the greater and more glorious is the outgate; and the
greater the fight be, the victory is the more remarkable, Therefore are all
these singularily pointed at here. So the blood of Christ is the best and only
outgate from tribulations; fleeing to Christ for refuge, is the only best way
to escape all tribulations temporal or spiritual: for, we suppose, this
coming out of tribulation, looks to temporal affliction as well as delivery
from eternal wrath. And indeed if the misknowing of Jesus Christ by a people
that hear the Gospel, be the great cause of their temporal ruin, trouble and
overthrow. Luke 19.42, 43. O that thou had known, in this thy day, the things
that belong to thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. Therefore the
days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee;
If the neglecting of Him, hasten judgment on the ungodly world, Then fleeing
to Him, must be the best way to shun judgment, to take away the controversy,
and to get an outgate from tribulations when they are lying on. And there is
nothing that we would more take notice of in this time; there are none but they
would know how to be rid of the trial and trouble that is lying on, This is the
best way that can be taken. Jesus Christ takes away the controversy, and
makes the sufferers white; we are conquerours; yea, more than conquerours
through Christ who loved us, Romans 8.35. 1. He strengthens to stand and fight.
2. He hides sin and removes guilt, which is the rise of the controversy. 3.
He gives peace and a settled outgate; and outgates from tribulation any
otherway, whether by outward means, as armies, friendship, etc. or inward, as
in our own holiness or satisfactions, are but the passing from one snare to
another that is worse, and from one plague to a greater curse: and folks can
never be said to come out of tribulation, while they lie under the wrath and
curse of God. Micah 5.4. only this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian
shall come into our land. 5. From the happy condition of Christ's followers,
Observe, That it is an excellent and unspeakable happiness, an excellent
condition, delightsome and lovely, that Believers are to look for in heaven,
when the tribulation shall be over: it is not only an outgate, but an excellent
outgate. We cannot speak of it to you, only, (beside what was said of it, verse.
9, 10.) take a short view of what is said of it here, 1. For its place, It is
here before the Throne of God, beholding Him, to have a place among them that
stood by in Gods Temple: this is the first step of their happiness. 2. Their
decoring, is, white robes and palms in their hands, as so many conquerours and
triumphers. 3. Their company, God and Christ, Angels and Saints, meaned by the
Elders. 4. Their work, is, to sing and praise cheerfully. Again here further,
it is set out in these properties. 1. It is a sinlesse happiness; no
back-drawing from God will be there, but a doing of His will with delight, and
without interruption or weariness night and day, that is, continually; for,
there is no night there; it is a part of their glory and the first step of it,
to be quit of sin; there they will not he put to pray, Let thy will be done on
earth as it is in heaven, but there will be an actual doing of it so. 2. That
day is coming, when there will be no more crying out under a body of death; the
body of death will not then rebel, there will not be one law against another,
not an inward man or mind and flesh, but perfect holiness, without a sinful
defect; no reluctancie, no sin nor misery. 3. To do this in His Temple, is, to
signify their dignity and eminency, and the dignity and eminency of their
service; they need no Priest now to go in to the most Holy; all are there
admitted thus to minister. 4. The great object of their eternal blessedness,
is, God; they enjoy Him fully, familiarly, and constantly, which is meaned by
His dwelling with them; they are ever in his company, God and they in one
house, and upon one Throne, and to have common society with Him* It is
wonderful, and the height of all. 5. There is no sinlesse defect there, nor
any cross either of infirmity or heat of persecution, no violence nor cry in
these straits, no complaint of plundering or oppression, no sequestration, no
quarterings there, no poverty, not a poor person among all that company, entry
into heaven puts a close to all these, none of them are admitted to follow a
Believer further than the ports of the City; It must then certainly be good to
be there. The Lamb His sweet company, and the enjoyment of Him, compleateth
all; we hold both Grace and Glory of Him, we have a special relation to Him,
He is in our own nature there, God-man in one Person, the greatest glimpse of
the Godhead will probably be attained in Him, and all tears will be wiped way;
whatever may comfort a Believer, will be given; and what disquiets a Believer,
will be removed. There are three things that disquiet a Believer, that will not
be in heaven. 1. Sinning and interrupting of Gods service, and neither ^in nor
tentation will be there, no devils nor corrupt nature, flesh and blood enter
not there. 2. The interruption of the sense of Gods favor, which is now but at
starts, as He is pleased to let it out; but no interruption of favor there; as
they serve Him day and night, so He dwells among them, the communion is
constant. And, by the way, Obs. That an uninterrupted serving of God, and an
uninterrupted communion with God and enjoying of Him go together. 3. Outward
persecutions and wants, pinches and straits, none of these do follow the Saints
into heaven; and, in opposition to all these, they enjoy God in a most
excellent way, and the company of the Lamb, and are feasted by living
fountains of water; and if any thing be more delectable than another, they have
it, and that in abundance, freshly flowing for ever.

Use 1. Long in a holy and warrantable way to share and have experience of this
happy condition, and labor to entertain clearness of right and interest in
it. 2. Back your longings with endeavors to be at it. It is to be feared that
many of us, when we shall yield our breath and soul, do find that we have
looked on Heaven as a story. 3. Mortify your members which are upon the earth:
what are all Idols when they are laid in the balance for-against this
happiness, in its highest degree with its soul-sweetning circumstances? What
happiness so desirable as this? or, to be compared with the enjoying of God,
wherein there is perfect holiness without sin, and complete happiness without
stop or interruption? 4. Be comforting your selves from, and confirming your
selves in the hope of this happiness, all ye who are fled to Christ for
refuge: suppose ye be under tribulation now, there is a time coming when ye
will get out of it: and though a body of death trouble you, and wants,
oppression, poverty, hunger, nakedness, etc. keep you at under; yet, when ye
come to Heaven, ye shall be troubled with none of these things; none are poor,
but all are rich there; none are naked, but all are clothed with white robes;
none are hungry, but all feasted and well fed: and suppose ye have a heartlesse
time here, yet then there is no fear, no sin, nor sorrow, nor cause, nor
occasion of it.

The result of all this, is, to commend to you these two directions, 1. Seeing
all this happiness comes through washing in the Lambs blood, Think much of
Believing, make that knot sure, it is that upon which Heaven hangs; loose
that knot, and Heaven will fall by from you. This carnal security that is
among the most part of you is not believing; search and try your condition,
make sure your calling and election, and seek to know that it is sure and out
of question. 2. Seeing Heaven is such a happy life, and there is a resemblance
of it here, aim at the beginning of it: and we will find something of it in
these words, as they relate to the Church-militant, 1. By serving God, and by
holiness, ceasing from sin. They that serve God most uninterruptedly, are
likest Heaven; count it your happiness to be worshipping and serving God
without intermission. The more spiritual, constant and immediate our service
is, the more it is like Heaven; thus we enter in Gods rest, Heb. 4.10. when we
cease from our own works and do His. 2. To be enjoying Gods company, though not
in that immediate way as in Heaven, yet by Faith in Him, and by His Spirit in
us, and by the having our conversation lift up to him, Col. 3.1, 2. This is the
earnest and first fruits of Glory, much nearness and communion with God makes
us like Heaven; the likest thing to it in the world, is to dwell in Him and
with Him. 3. To be in Christ's Flock under His care and tutory, fed by Him; and
led by Him, and feeding on Him, and yielding our selves up to Him. 4. A
contentedness with our present condition and lot in the world, as He is
pleased to carve it out to us, to learn in every estate to be content, Philip.
4. in the enjoying of God and Christ's care of us. 5. Wainednesse of affection
from carnal and worldly delights, not engageing in, nor thirsting after these.
Paul opposes a heavenly conversation to this, Phil. 3.19, 20. In a word, study
to reach a further length in holiness, and endeavor after a more full
communion with God, and in all other things give him His will. There might be
some more fore-taste of happiness had in these things. Lord make us serious in
seeking after them.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. ANd when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven
about the space of half an hour.

2. And I saw the seven Angels which stood before God, and to them were given
seven trumpets.

3. And another Angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and
there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers
of all Saints upon the golden altar, which was before the throne.

4. And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints,
ascended up before God, out of the Angels hand.


WE have heard how under the former six seals the Lord has been revealing, and
foreshewing the state of the Church here on earth till that first great change
of bringing Christianity in request publicly, and making it to be owned and
countenanced by Authority in the world, by reason whereof, Idolaters and
persecuter^ should be disowned and discountenanced; so far the sixth seal came
to foreshew and hold out the shaking and overturning of that Idolatrous world,
and bringing horror and trembling on persecuters; Before he came to prosecute
the opening of the seventh seal (which brings the history of the Church that
continues to the end of the world in two periods, one, of the trumpets,
another, of the vials) he hinted in the former Chapter at this sad storm which
was coming on the Church from all airths, and at our Lords stepping in to hold
these winds from breaking loose till He had sealed a number that He was to
preserve from being carried away with the errors of the time.

In this Chapter, and the three following, is contained the third vision, or
second general prophecy of this Book, to wit, the vision of the trumpets: and
because (as we said before in laying down the series of the story at our entry
to Chap. 6.) the seventh trumpet brings in the last plagues of the seven
vials, as the seventh seal brings in the trumpets, Therefore we comprehend
the second prophecy under the first six trumpets, which reaches from the
beginning of this Chapter to the 15. verse of Chap. 11. when the seventh
trumpet sounds.

This prophecy, or vision, has three parts, The first is preparatory, to the
seventh Verse of this Chapter. The second is executory, or the main body of the
prophetic vision, to the end of the ninth Chapter. The third is explicatory
of, and consolatory against the two last great woes in the ninth Chapter,
especially during the second unto which it is contemporary, as appears, verse.
14. Chap. 11. when it is said the second woe is past, Then, and not till then,
including all the former events, since the trumpet sounded, as belonging to
that time, and contemporary, at least, with these woes.

Before we enter particularly on the words, Be advertised concerning these four
things to be adverted to therein. The first, is concerning the connection of
this prophecy with the sixth seal, in the close of the sixth Chapter; for,
although the seventh Chapter interveen; yet, the series of the story leads us
to join the seventh seal after the sixth, as the sixth was after the fifth,
etc. Now, the sixth seal taking its beginning in Constantin's time, and taking
in the overthrow then given to the persecuters of the Christians, and the
change which was made in the Christian world, where the first period closed, it
will be about the three hundred and tenth year of Christ, or a little after,
taking in the peace that for a time the Church enjoyed then, whereby we may the
more easily count the beginning, and the rise of these trumpets, and the evils
prognosticated by them, to be the next ensuing evils after that intervall of
peace, or during the time thereof, seeing the intervall is not long, as
appears from Christ's cry, Chap. 7.2. 2. The second thing to be adverted to,
is, the issue, or close of these six trumpets; which is clear Chap. 11.14.
compared with 15. to be at the close of the second woe, at the blowing of the
seventh trumpet, which brings in the last woe and seven vials whereby
Antichrists Kingdom is overthrown, the everlasting Gospel preached through the
world, and Nations that were not Christ's before, now become His; which clearly
is at the time of Antichrists greatness so bringing him to this height, and
the Church low till the seventh Angel sounded, that brings the vials; the
first whereof, is poured out upon these who have his mark, Chap. 16. Which fall
of Antichrist, according to ordinary computation, begineth, Anno 1517. when
Luth^r first preached the Gospel, or Anno 1559. when the liberty of the
profession thereof was first confirmed; whereof we shall say more, Chap. 11.
This only points out the period to be at the fall of Antichrists absolute
tyranny. 3. The third thing, is, the contemporarinesse of these trumpets with
the beasts rising, Chap. 13. which belonging to one time, as appears by what
preceedeth and succeeds to both, and speaking also the same judgment, as
appears by this, that the same thing, to wit, Gods sealing protecteth from
both, and the same persons are hurt by both, to wit, these who were not sealed:
therefore a special respect must be had of clearing one of them by the other,
and making one of them agree with the other. 4. A fourth thing, is, That we
conceive the storm, spoken of in the former Chapter by the Angels holding the
four winds, to be the same mentioned in the trumpets. For, 1. if this seventh
seal be knit to the sixth, Then it comprehends this, mentioned in the seventh
Chapter, which was but by way of digression hinted at in the sixth, the better
to prepare for a full view of it afterward: for, that storm must belong to the
seventh seal or the sixth; but not the sixth, which described an event of an
other nature, and on another object, to wit, the Churches enemies: Therefore it
must belong to the seventh, which has two prophesies, of distinct n^tures, to
wit, trumpets and vials, answerable to the two different parts of that seventh
Chapter. 2. That storm was foreseen there, and restrained; but here, it is
executed. 3. It was then kept up till the Elect should be sealed against it;
and under the trumpets ( Chap. 9.4.) they are found sealed and safe: which
clears, that this is a spiritual ill threatened against formal and
hypocritical professors, which these trumpets bring; yea, the same with that
in Chap. 7.

The connection then is thus, That, after John saw the Church freed from open
persecutions, and the persecuters cast down, he saw Heresies and Errors ready
to break in from all quarters on the Church; yet, through Christ's care, a
little breathing time was given; they are commanded to sist till His people
were provided-for: now, this being done, John goes on in showing what came
when these winds were let louse; yet he casts in a word before, to v^rs. 7.
to show they came not precipitantly, but as they had orders from Him who had
laid the restraint on them, which is cleared in three or four circumstances of
preparation.

We shall shortly go through the words more particularly. When he had opened
the seventh seal: He, that is, the Lamb, who had opened six seals before,
opens now the seventh; which seventh, though divided in two periods
afterward, by distinguishing the vials from the trumpet^, Yet it comprehends
both. Therefore, Chap. 7. a view of both shortly was given together. The
effects that this brings with it, are a little suspended and some general
preparatory circumstances premitted, to show it was some strange thing which
was coming.

The first thing which occurreth, There was silence in heaven about the space
of half an hour. This is not so much the effect (for, that follows) as that
which accompanies it, and a definit time is put for an indefinite, It is a
very short while. To clear it more fully, understand heav^^ here of the visible
Militant Church; it is that Church whose stare is here described, and there can
be interruptions of noise and silence in no other heaven; so it implies, that
at this time, after persecuters were down, and the winds that were ready to
blow, kept in, there was a great quietness and peace in the Church for a
little short time; which indeed was true for some years in Constantin's days,
betwixt persecuters ceasing, and the Schisms and Heresies of the Donatists and
Arians arising, which was but a very short time; and this is not inconsistent
with the scope, as if he had said, I saw peace a while till all was made ready
for the ensuing blast and storm, which is in the words following, and till
fundamental truths were confirmed publicly, for keeping the Lords people from
the snares of these gross Heresies, which then immediately followed. Whence
Obs^rve, That the Churches outward peace is not long; she has but a short time
of it, half an hours silence only. The Church-story* Scripture, and experience
prove this. Therefore, 1. Folks would not promise to themselves nor expect long
peace. 2. They would improve the little time they have frugally, and not
mispend it; an hour, or half an hours time in peace in the Family, or
Congregation, is a rich mercy, and we know not how long we have it; few
Churches have had so long peace as we have had in this Island, Therefore see it
be improven well. 2. This half hour being a definit time, put for ^n indefinit,
shows that that rule holds not in the Revelation, that whole complete
times, as hours, years, etc. may be definit for indefinit, but not so broken
times, as half days, half years and half hours, etc. for, no particular
definite time can be rationally imagined to be understood by this.

Or, 2. understand Heav^n here, for that heaven, where all these things were
represented to John: silence in it, imports a new transition to a strange
matter, that for the stupendiousnesse and admirablnesse thereof, arrested the
attention and made all keep silence, as taken up with expectation of what might
be revealed, a little interim of time being between the opening of the seal,
and the appearing of any thing: which suspension of the Angels out-coming with
their trumpets, confirms the first exposition, as if thi^ prophecy began
with a little quietness; and the latter, is not to be slighted, because this
exposition holds out a preparation and attentiveness requisite in us for
hearing and receiving such mysteries.

The second circumstance, is, verse. 2. When all do wait what the opening of
this seal shall produce, something appears that prognosticateth a coming
storm. Seven Angels are seen standing before God, and they get seven trumpets.
The use of the trumpets and number, I shall forbear to speak much of them, and
what these Angels are, till I come to verse. 6. Only here, we conceive them to
be Angels that wait for Gods command, it may be, special Angels for eminency,
there being degrees among Angels; Or, the words may be read without the
relative the, as differencing them, or relating to any other, which we find not
before. These are the instruments, Angels, they are made use of to give the
alarm. 2. Their weapons or furniture, is, trumpets, to incite others rather
than to act themselves. Trump^^s had a twofold use, 1. To give an advertisement
of some imminent assault, sounding an alarm; so it relates to Gods people, to
stir them up to watchfulness and to be on their guard: 1 Cor. 14. If the
trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? 2.
To c^ll the Congregation, or Assembly, or Host, for acting or attempting
something; and so it looks to offending, relating to the letting louse of
enemies, as the former to defense, in guarding His people: however, they imply
Gods giving special orders. In these cases, Angels are ministering Spirits,
waiting on God for a commission, Therefore the trumpets are given them, to show
they are but Ministers and Servants in what is commanded them, and do by
orders. 3. They are s^ven, though there were but four, Chap. 7. because these
kept all airths, that the winds should not blow, till they were let louse:
these seven do proportion the out-letting of these winds by steps and degrees;
and this is done out of the Lords goodness, that lets not all blow at once
but one by one, that men may have warning and be armed for what comes after.

A third and main circumstance follows, verse. 3, 4, 5. Though now the seal be
opened, and trumpets be given to the Angels, yet these Angels are not yet to
sound till orders be given, which is not till Christ's intercession interveen.
His intercession (as it is set down here) has two parts, 1. His intercession
for His people, verse. 3, and 4. in reference to the coming storm, that God
would not impute sin to them, nor suffer them to be led away with Error, as
Luke 22.31, 32. Satan has sought to winn^w you, but I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not. The second part of His intercession, is, in reference
to His enemies; and it is a denunciation against the ungodly world and that
profane generation that received Him not, verse. 5. it is a piece of His
absoluteness, commissionating the Angels to go on and execute judgment;
therefore it is said ( verse. ^.) The Angel took the censer, and filled it with
fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, etc. and
then the sounding of the Angels follows: for, as He had given charge before
to the four Angels, Chap. 7. not to hurt the earth till His Servants were
sealed; so here He gives charge and commission to these seven Angels to go on
when His Elect are secured.

There is here an allusion to the high Priest under the Law, and Christ is
brought in, using these ceremonies that the high Priest used when he went into
the Temple and Sanctuary: so we take it for granted, that this is Christ and no
other, that comes and stands at the altar with a golden censer, etc. 1.
Because of His work; for, none can claim to this Office but Christ alone, to
offer up the prayers of all Saints. 2. Because of the efficacy or effect of
this His offering up prayers; it was effectual both for His peoples^ being
accepted of God, verse. 4. and also against enemies in being terrible to them;
yea, it was not the prayers of themselves, but the incense which was offered
with them that made them acceptable; which can be no other thing but Christ's
sacrifice. 3. Because all the ceremonies here used have reference to the high
Priest, and there being no high Priest for the time but Christ, He who was the
antitype being come, and that levitical service being abolished, it must needs
be He. And though it be said incense was given Him, which Christ has of His
own, (which makes some expound the words otherwise) it militateth nothing
against it. For, 1. Christ's whole Office is given Him as Mediator, and His
qualifications for it. 2. He is here speaking in the terms agreeing to an high
Priest on earth, as to have an altar, censer, etc. all which are not literally
to be understood of Christ; for, there is no altar nor incense in heaven, but
as such may be figuratively applied to Him as the antitype signified by the
high Priest; for, none other was typified by these Priests intercessions, but
Christ who was Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar: and all the Spiritual things of
the Gospel, are spoken of under the types and terms of the Old Testament.

Without insisting further in needless mysteries, the scope of this
intercession and the interposing of it between the opening of the seal and
sounding of the trumpets, we conceive, is, to hold out these things, which are
Doctrines.

1. Christ's care of His Church and Saints, that, while there is a coming storm
to blow on the world, and a hypocritical generation to be plagued, He steppeth
in and interceedeth for them; in coming trials and storms, He is ever mindful
to pray for them, that they be not hurt by them: and we conceive it is for this
end brought in here, to let the Church and all see the care of the Mediator,
His compassionatenesse and sympathy, and that He is as careful for preventing
their sin, as for preventing their hurt and judgment; now in heaven, as tender
as when He was on earth, Luke 22.32. 2. It is supposed here, that a time of
trouble is a special time of praying; then all Saints pray, there is no
standing in a trial without praying: Or, praying is a special duty or mean of
defense for a trial, the prayers of all Saints are spoken of here; which in
many places, are compared to Incense and Sacrifice, Psalm. 141.1. Hos. 14, etc.
Yea, that all Saints pray here, it shows, they deserve not that name who pray
not, especially in difficult times, when a storm is come or coming on the
Church; there is no Saint, but He is a praying Saint, especially at such a
time, and these Christ offers to the Father, though with His own incense* it
is made the mark of a Godly man, Psalm. 32.6. For this shall every one that is
Godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou may be found; and it is made the
mark of an atheist, that he calls not upon God, Psalm. 14. This is clearly
holden forth here. 3. That there is no efficacy in the prayers of all the
Saints without Christ's intercession; they are offered by Him, the sacrifice is
laid down before Him, By Him we come to God, Heb. 7.25. and 13.15. He is the
high Priest, who only can enter the most Holy, and through whom we have access
to God; there is no prayer acceptable to God as it is offered up by us, but as
it is put in His hand, in His censer only it is acceptable: for, there are
defects in the prayers of all Saints; the most holy Saint is faulty, and has
need of a Mediator to make his peace, and preserve it, and to present his
prayers: both the persons and the prayers must be accepted through Him, and
whatever we expect as the return of our prayer, it must be expected upon
account of His satisfaction, and on no other ground; and nothing must be
suffered to stick to our prayers of the conceit of our worth, or of the worth
of our prayers. This is much acknowledged, but as much slighted; and most pray,
as if access were to be had another way, and without being sensible of the
defects of, and guilt that is in their prayers. 4. That Christ offers and
perfumeth all the Saints prayers less or more. There is no prayer in no Saint
that He refuses, whether they be weak or strong, whether they be faint or more
fervent, with less or more spirit and life in them, whether shorter or longer,
well ordered or confused, if they come from Saints, be warranted in the Word,
and grounded on the promise and put up in His name, they are by Him offered,
All go in one censer, and all go up as the smoke of sweet incense, and through
Him are accepted of God; He takes the least sigh, and puts it in His
censer, and it has a good savor to God out of His hand, He refuses no Saints
prayer, nor sends it back unanswered: Whatsoever ye ask in My name I will do
it, Ioh. 16, 23. and the Father hears Him always, Job. 11.42. What an
encouragement and direction how to pray is this? and a comfort in praying? 1.
That our blessed Mediator receives the prayer and puts it in His censer,
puts incense with it, that it ascends not alone but in His name, by virtue
of His right and in His blood it appears? many right carnal poor fecklesse
prayers are savoury to God on this account, and none upon another; He is our
dayes-man, this should encourage us. 2. It directs us to employ Christ in our
prayers, which is to have respect to His sufferings, and satisfaction and
intercession allanerly, both in making the prayers acceptable, and i^ our
expecting the return of what is asked without re^pecting our selves or our
prayers, except as beloved and acceptable in Him. 3. It is matter of
consolation in and after prayer, and ground of quietness, that how-ever our
prayers be not much worth, yet Christ's incense makes them savoury. This, being
well considered, would teach us to make more conscience of praying than
anxiously to dispute whether we be heard or no. 5. There is an excellent
conjunction here between the Saints praying and Christ's interceeding as being
both useful and necessary to the obtaining of the Believer^ point. Their
prayers and His incense go well together, as if none of them were profitable
without the other, at least for a conscience to quiet it self: a praying man
may expect a benefit by Christ's intercession while he improveth it, which one
that prays not, cannot expect; both are necessary, but not in a meritorious
way; the merit comes alone from Christ, but both are called-for in the
command, and in the promise God has knit them together. It is true, God is
sometimes found of them that seek Him not, which is His own Sovereign way; but
when we look to the promises, and the ground of our expectation, we will find
them all qualified with seeking, Ez^k. 36.37. Notwithstanding I will be
enquired of by the house of Isra^l for all these things. Let all these be
joined together, and separate not what God has conjoined; seeing He has bidden
us pray, and pray in Christ's name, Follow that way and order: for, these who
either pray none, or pray not in His name, cannot expect a hearing; these are
knit together as well as His satisfaction, and our faith.

Concerning Christ's Intercession.
THere is no piece of the fullness of our blessed Lord Jesus that is more rich
in consolation than His intercession is; and yet it is often suffered to ly
beside even the Believer, not being emproven to the excellent use which does
flow from it, as if there were no such treasure therein; seeing therefore there
is so fair an occasion in the first part of this Chapter to speak thereof, we
may essay it a little in His strength: not as if we could unfold this mystery
and satisfy curiosity therein, nor yet as if we were to debate speculative
questions that are raised concerning the same, intending only to lay open the
practical part, as it tends to the Believers consolation. We shall therefore
endeavor shortly to speak to these points, 1. in general, to what intercession
imports. 2. How our Lord Jesus may be conceived now to execute this office in
Heaven. 3. If our Lord was intercessor before His incarnation. 4. What is the
consolation that does flow therefrom, and wherein it does consist. Lastly, How
this consolation ought, and may be improven, by a Believer.

To the first, we conceive there are four expressions in Scripture, which being
put together, serve much to illustrate this of intercession. The first, is
that, (1 Timothy 2.5.) where Christ is called the M^diator, or Mid-man, betwixt
God and man; in which place, express respect is had to the making of our
prayers acceptable before God. Now, this word Mediator, does import these two,
1. A suitablnesse in the person interposing, to both the different parties, so
that he cannot be said to be stated on either side. 2. It imports a work and
office, that is, to tryst betwixt these two parties, that the prayer and
petition of the one may by His Mediation find favor before the other; thus is
the phrase so frequent, of our coming to God by Him. The second word is the
same of Intercession, or Intercessor; which does indeed import a guilt on their
part, who are interceeded for; yet does imply also the interposing of a worthy
party to interceed for such persons and to deprecate wrath, and that upon His
own account, without respect to what is in them. Upon this ground ( Romans 8.34.)
a defiance is given to all accusations, because Christ Jesus makes
intercession. The third word, is, that He is called (1 Ioh. 2. verse. 1.) and
Advocate; if any man sin, we have an Advocate: which looks to Christ's
undertaking the cause of the Believer, even in a Legal and Judicial way, and
to make it out in way of Justice, whereas the former word of intercession, of
it self does look more like a friendly intre^ty. This title Advocate, imports
His undertaking of their cause, and that not only to solist it, but to plead
it; yea, and by office to do so. A fourth expression, is, ( Heb. 9. verse. 24.)
where it is said, Christ has entered into Heaven, there to appear before God
for us, which is yet more than the former, because this shows the purpose of
His entry, which is, as it were, to be Agent or Solicitor, wait^ng on and that
in our name to answer and vindicate any thing that is imputed to us* or, as an
Ambassador that sustaineth the room of such before God; and so His appearing
for us, having the perfect commemoration of His bypast death, cannot but
effectually answer for, and vindicate all in whose name He appears.

If it be asked, in the second place, how may our blessed Lord Jesus be
conceived to go about this work of interceeding or advocating for sinners? It
will not be enough to say, that His merit and suff^rings, do continue to
deserve such things, as if His pleading were only the virtue of His merit,
which figuratively might be said to plead for good to His people, as Abel's
blood is said to plead the contrary to Cain, even after his death. This is
indeed true; for ( Heb. 12. verse. 24.) the blood of sprinkling does yet speak,
and that far better things than the blood of Abel; but this does not constitute
His intercession to be any part of His Office, but does rather overturn the
same.

Neither is it to be thought, that He interceedeth with such gesture and verbal
expression, as men use with men, or as He Himself did in the days of His
flesh, when He offered up prayers with strong cries and tears, which did become
the state of His humiliation, but not of His Glorification. Though this be a
mystery, yet we may humbly and soberly conceive it in these particulars,

First, There is in this intercession a sympathy, and fellow-feeling in our
Lord, which is the very great ground of this intercession. For, Jesus Christ,
though glorified, is yet true Man, having the real and true properties of the
humane nature, which make Him capable to be in another way affected with our
afflictions and griefs than formerly; yea, not only so, but He was in H^s own
person a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and learned obedience by
what He suffered, whereby not only is He man to sympathize with us simply as a
man, but He is a man experimentally acquainted with grief, and for that end
that He might be the more fit and able to succor these that should be in such
a case, Heb. 2. verse. 17, 18. and 4. verse. 15, 16. Again, our blessed Lord
Jesus, being God and Man in one person, by virtue of His Godhead He cannot be
ignorant of the least affliction of His people; and by virtue of His Manhead,
personally united to His Godhead, He cannot but be affected therewith,
especially considering His being taught by experience, for this very end, that
He might be a compassionate high Priest and the sooner touched with the
infirmities of others: Now, this sympathy does not only rise from the ba^e
speculative knowledge which He has of the afflictions of others, but it is
wakened and entertained by that union of the Spirit betwixt the Head and the
Members, whereby they become one; so that He that persecuteth the one,
persecuteth the other, as is frequently asserted in the Scripture. From all
this, there does arise, in the Mediator so considered, an inclination, and (to
say so) a natural propensness to have these evils redressed, so that He cannot
but desire the removing thereof: and this His desire, being of great weight
before God, may be well counted intercession.

Secondly, This intercession of His, may be conceived to consist in His
^pp^aring in heaven in our name: whereby the Son of God, being now Man, ^^steth
Himself as ready to make appearan^^ for such and s^^^ sinners, So His very
being in our nature there, speaks His purpose in reference to this end, and
Go^s accepting of it according to appointment.

Thirdly, It may be conceived to take along with it His declared willingness
to have such and such prayers granted, etc. This was a part of His
intercession, Ioh. 17.24. Father, I will that these thou have given me be with
me, etc. where His declaring that to be His will, is a prime part of His
intercession: now, it cannot be thought but that He has a will to have the
same things executed, which were engaged to Him, and these particulars, which
the necessities of His people shall call^for from Him, granted; and that the
Mediator should will such a particular for such a person, and, in an
inconceivable way of His adoring the Father, present the same before Him, is no
little part of His intercession.

Fourthly, ^n all this, there is an holy and reverend (though inconceivable)
adoration, whereby the M^diator, now at the Fa^hers right hand (and being, in
that respect, less than the Father) does in all His appearances for us, as
being the head of the body, adore the Soveraignity, Goodness, Wisdom, etc. of
God, with a respect to the Covenant of Redemption: His saying to His Disciples
oftn^r than once, I will pray the Father for you, does imply (to say so,) some
address to God, though we cannot conceive the manner thereof, even in
reference to some particular persons, and some particular cases; and He being
set at the right hand of Majesty, cannot but adore that sovereign Majesty.

There are some other words in Scripture, which seem to import something in
reference to this intercession, as that, Heb. 10. verse. 13. He is expecting
till his enemies be made his fo^stool, and that* in His prayer, Ioh. 17. Father
I will that these that are given me may be where I am, etc. where He may seem
to be longing to have His body perfected; which desire, certainly He has not
yet laid down: But these and others, may be reduced to some of the former
branches, therefore we shall propose no more.

It will be some difficulty to clear, if Christ, before His Incarnation, did
execute this part of His Office, and with what difference He does it now. The
Scriptures indeed of the New Testament do speak of Christ's Intercession, as not
only posterior to His Incarnation, but also to the whole state of His
Humiliation; which is often spoken of as that which does qualify and fit Him
for this Office: yea, the Scriptures do ever presuppose His Resurrection and
Ascension; yet as it cannot be denied that Christ was Intercessour on earth,
though He was not in the forementioned manner appearing in heaven* so it cannot
be denied, that Christ did execute this O^fice before His being man* for, He
was Mediator, King, Priest, and Prophet before His Incarnation; neither can any
warrantably say, that Believers then did want this consolation; and in
Scripture we will find some grounds bearing forth all the essentials of
intercession, as first, in that parable of the Wi^e-dressers interceeding with
the Master, Luke 13. we have the Mediators reverend interposing represented to
us, and that before His Incarnation; beside, what is holden forth by the
typical services, as praying toward the holy Temple, the holy Oracle, the high
Priests making intercession as well as offering sacrifice, and such like, do
evidence, that respect is had to Christ's intercession. Secondly, We will find
His sympathy and being aff^cted with the condition of His people: that is a
great word, Isa. 63. ver. 9. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and in
his love and pity he red^emed them, and he bare them and carried them all the
days of old: This speaks a sympathy, flowing from a Covenant Relation, even
before He was Incarnate. Again, Prove. 8. verse. 31. He speaks of His delight
and rejoicing in the habitable parts of the earth, that is, in these that were
given Him, and even in the places in a manner where they were to reside: which
sympathy seems to flow from the very appointment of Him to be Head to such a
number. Thirdly, He being then Mediator, could not but be Advocate, and have
His Judicial appearances (to say so) for His people, there being no less need
then than now. Fourthly, As what concerns His willingness to have His people
well in that time, cannot be denied from that one place of Isaiah, just now
cited, so neither can His intercession be denied.

If it be asked, where the difference lies? We answer, especially in these
three or four, First, in the ground of the intercession: it was then done in
virtue of the sacrifice to be offered; now it is performed by, and grounded
upon, the virtue of the satisfaction that is already given and finished upon
the Cross. Secondly, there is a difference in respect of the blessed
Intercessor, who, being then God, has now taken a new relation to Him, by
assuming our nature in one person to His Divine Nature; whereby He is not only
capable in a more suitable way to sympathize, but actually has submitted
Himself to suffer, for this very end, as was formerly hinted. So that though He
cannot have larger bowels, than formerly He had; yet has He now a new
experimental way of being affected with our griefs, and of being provoked to
heal the same. T^irdly, There follows a difference in His manner of
interceeding, which is now done in our nature, for in it He appears before
God; also touches of our ill^, and His sympath^e with us, are more suitable to
our nature, and do more exp^rimentally impresse and affect Him than before.
La^tly, There is th^s difference, that though before there was consolation to
H^s people from H^s intercession; yet it is much more now, and therefore it is
so often and fully insisted on in the New Testament, beside what was hinted,
that then His sympathy flowed from His deputation and appointment, but now
from His humane Nature and the experience thereof.

To come then to speak of that consolation and the grounds thereof, There is
need here of a spirit d^pped therein for fitting to conceive and speak aright
thereof: However, that it cannot but be ground of great consolation, may appear
from these considerations.

First, From the consideration of the bl^ssed Intercessor Himself, whom we may
look upon as the Fathers fellow and equal, who, though condescending to take on
Him the place of a Mediator or Mid-person, yet, is He the brightness of the
Father's glory and the express image of his person, Heb. 1. And this
excellency of the person, cannot but be comfortable to the poor base sinner.
Again, we may consider Him as man, and so as our Brother, yea, as an afflicted
man acquainted with griefs and tempt^d; and so we may conceive Him as our
Physician, who has not only learned (to say so) some skill, in an
exp^rimentall way, how to guide these that are tempted or a^flicted; but also
as fitted with the more sympathy, affection and tenderness, to improve that
skill for their good. Hence, ( Heb. 2.18.) He is said to be able to succor
them that are tempted, He Himself having been tempted in all things, yet
without sin: where His being tempted, is supposed to be a furnishing with
excellent abilities, tenderly to supply and succor such as may be in the like
case: The same also may be gathered from Heb. 4.15.16. Now, He who is thus
diversely considered, being yet but one person, what more can be imagined for
comfort? for, though He be high, yet have sinners access to Him; and though He
be man for emboldning them to appro^ch to Him, yet being God-man, He is able to
stand before Justice and plead, when no mere creature durst appear.

Secondly, We may consider the grounds of this Office and the ends thereof: to
speak with reverence of our blessed Lord Jesus, it is nothing that is
occasional or accidental; but it does ^low from the Fathers appointment, who
has constituted Him, and that by oath, to be a Priest for ever, Psalm. 110. and
for thi^ end does He sustain this Office and live for ever, that He may save to
the uttermost all that come to God by Him, Heb. 7.25. Now, that this
intercession is a thing of old determined i^ the counsel of God; and, that ^t
was determined for this end, that sinners, who were banished, from Gods
pres^nce, might again have access, and find grace to h^lp in the time of need,
Heb. 4.16. and 10.19, etc. this cannot but be exceeding comfortable.

Thirdly, We may consider the comfort of this intercession in respect of the
extent and reach thereof: which we may point at in these four, First, In
reference to all cases: it is a great word ( Isa. 63.) in all their a^^^iction
he was a^^^icted, etc. and this was even in the days of old before the Word
was made flesh; and therefore it must be conceived to be much more fresh and
lively in so far as concerns that sympathy which the humane nature has with
it. Secondly, This extent appears in respect of persons; for, all that will
make use of Christ and come to God, are admitted; neither was there ever a
sinner that offered to make use of Christ in approaching to God, or sought to
have peace with God through that mids, but this intercession did bear Him
through, as that great word is, Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost
all that come to God by Him, s^ing he lives for ^ver to make intercession for
them. And if men will not make use of Christ, they do in this forsake their own
mercy. Thirdly, The reach of this cons^lation may be considered as to the
degree; it is a perfect salvation that comes by this intercession; it is from
ev^ry thing, and that to the uttermost, so that more cannot be imagined, as the
same word is, Heb. 7.25. He saves to the uttermost, or, unto perfection.
Fourthly, I^s extent may be looked to in respect of the parties against whom
Christ interceedeth. There is no party but this does give a dash unto it,
whether devil, challenge, tentation, or what else; upon this the triumph
proceeds, Romans 8.33, 34, etc. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? which is a defying word to all; and these are the grounds, it is God
that justifies; it is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again,
sitting at the right hand of God, where this of making intercession closes the
triumphall defiance given by the Apostle. All which, being put together, can it
be but comfortable, that there is such a complete delivery whether from sin or
misery, and that of whatsoever sort?

Fourthly, The consolation of this intercession may be considered in respect of
its efficacy: for, as Christ can refuse no cause put on Him, but must
interceed, being employed; so He cannot but be heard always, as He said
Himself, Ioh. 11. and so His prom^^e is, what ever ye ask in my name, it shall
be done unto you, Ioh. 14. verse. 13*14. yea, what ever ye ask in my name, I
will do it: where the Intercessor being the Executor of what He pleads for,
it cannot be but comfortable, and it is suitable to the terms of the Covenant
it should be so.

Fifthly, We may consider the Soveraignity and freeness of this intercession,
which tends not a little to the consolation of Gods people: for, in the
exercise thereof, our blessed Lord Jesus has not tied Himself to wait on our
prayers, or on our sight and sense of, or weightednesse with, our own evils
either of sin or misery, but often His way appears to be very gracious and
soveraignly condescending, that He answers before we call, Isa. 65. verse. 24.
and that He interposeth, even when we are like fruitless trees troubling the
ground* Luke 13. and when we are secure, not minding the snares the devil is
laying for us, as Luke 22, 32. He prays for Peter that his faith fail not, He
in the mean time not knowing any such snare. Hence in the Scripture, grace i^
exalted, and sinners are invited to come with boldness thereunto, upon this
ground of Christ's intercession ^s much a^ any: so ( Heb. 4.) when the
compassionatenesse of this high Priest has been spoken to, this conclusion is
drawn from it, Let us therefore approach with boldness unto the thr^n^ of
grace that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in the time of need: here
grace has a Throne; and He that seeks upon this account, may expect to find
mercy and grace as that which abounds most under thi^ Dominion and about this
Throne. It is from this ground of His intercession, that so many evils are
prevented and kept back from the people of God, which have even been at their
door: and were the mercies which we obtain, and that without any direct
petitioning of the Lord for them, and the many evils which we are liable to,
and might and would come, if the Lord prevented not, we our selves in the mean
time being but little watchful to have them prevented: were these (I say)
considered, how much? O how very much would we find our selves obliged to the
Intercessor, from whom His people have all these? yea, if we will consider this
freeness more nearly, we will find, that this Intercession and sympathy is
not broken off and made less because of the Believers sin; but is in some
respect the more stirred and provoked, because this sympathy flows from the
relation that is betwixt Head and members, which sin does not cut off; and it
is as with a tender natural parent, who cannot but be aff^cted with the child's
straits, even though he has shamefully brought them on himself; yea, his very
failings do touch and affect: so our high Priests sympathy, is not only in
crosses, but it is to have pity on the ignorant, and compassion on these that
are out of the way, Heb. 5. and thus the very sin of a Believer affects Him
so, that He cannot but sympathize and be provoked to sympathize with him. O
what a wonder is this, the more sin, the more sympathy ^ which ought to make
Believers humble, and yet exceedingly to comfort them under a sinful
condition; for, it is written, if any m^n sin, we have an Adv^c^te* 1 Ioh. 2.1.
whereby, in some singular manner, Christ^ intercession is suited unto,
appointed and d^signed for sinners.

The last thing wherein we shall consider the consolation of this intercession,
is, the sympathy from whence it flows, and which it carries along with it,
This is a main ground of consolation, which does sweeten all the rest. We may
consider this humane sympathy, either as it gives a ground of consolation to
us, or as it does someway make us more capable to conceive of the consolation
that does flow from the consideration of the bowels of Jesus; both which tend
to our actual comfort.

That there is an humane sympathy in the Man-Christ with the Believer, cannot
be denied, the Scriptures (whereof some passages have been cited) are so clear:
only we shall give some properties thereof, for helping to understand the same
so far as we can reach, First then, we say, it is a real and humane sympathy:
when we say it is real, it does not only import, that He knows the
affliction^ of His people, nor only that He mind^th help to them, which two do
agree to the Lord JEHOVAH; but it imports a sensible, native, and (to say so)
a natural touch of these evils; for, He is not one, that cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4. This is as one brother is affected
with the straits of another, especially straits that himself has formerly
felt; This must needs be asserted as that which follows the reality of
Christ's Manhead, who, as such, cannot but be supposed to have what properties
are belonging to a man. I called it humane sympathy, to distinguish it from
that figurative sympathy which was applicable to Him before His incarnation.
This sympathy is really for kind such as one friend has to another, a father
or mother to their children, as frequent expressions in Scripture do hold
forth; and it is the believing of the reality of this humane sympathy, that
opens the door to all the following consolations, to wit, that our Lord Jesus
has a humane heart stirred and affected in that same manner, (yet
unconceivably holy) as ours are toward our friends and children in their
necessities: and though Christ be glorified, yet cease He not to be true man,
and so not to want this sympathy.

Secondly, This sympathy is sinlesse in Him; it has much muddinesse and
byasse in us; yea, through sin it is much obstructed and cooled, so that
selfishnesse drowneth much of this, or miscarrieth it in the exercise thereof;
but with our Lord Jesus it is not so, He is every way pure, who knew no sin,
not was capable to be tempted therewith. Therefore His sympathy must be the
more excellent, in that it cannot mistake, or miscarrie in reference to any
object it shall have occasion to act upon.

Thirdly, His sympathy is perfect^ and though while He was on earth, there was
a purity beyond what we can conceive; yet, being now exalted to Glory, even in
His humane nature as all, that is in Him, so His sympathy and bowels, must be
much more shining and glorious, as being now at the height of all the
perfections that may make a true man in the most excellent manner to sympathize
with others. Therefore if we would conceive the earning of bowels or sympathy
of a hundred natural fathers or mothers toward their children in
difficulties, yet all is nothing to this of our exalted Prince and Lord Jesus
Christ, whose affections stir Him, though more inconceivably, yet with more
tenderness, faithfulness and dear respect to the good of His people.

Fourthly, This sympathy is the sympathy of a man, who is God and man in one
Person, having both Natures personally united; and what can be more for
consolation and for the commending of this to Believers? for so His
qualifications cannot be but at the height of perfection; So there can be
nothing hid from Him, and He will not Fail to be touched with their
necessities; and which is wonderful comfort, He is touched with them and
sympathizeth whether they themselves be touched with them or not, whether they
know them or not, or whether they make address to Him or not, even as a tender
mother will be affected with her child's hazard, though it does not complain.
And by this, the Believer has not only affections to be warmed by the
consideration of Christ's sympathy, and humane bowels; but also has a ground
to stay his faith in dyving in these, and comforting himself in these, because
they are bowels of a Person who may be lippened to, and rested upon, as no mere
man can be.

Lastly, This sympathy of the humane nature Man-christ, is agreeable unto His
divine will; for, though there be two Nature, yet there is but one Person; and
though He has different wills, yet He cannot have opposite wills; and
therefore what He may be conceived in His will and pity to will to us as man,
that same must be conceived to be made effectual to us as He is God, which is
the conclusion of this consolation.

Again, we said, this humane sympathy may be considered as it puts us in a
capacity to conceive of the consolation that comes by Him; for, the more
Spiritual an object be, the less do we conceive of it, and when the Scripture
speaks of the Lords bowels and sympathy, that is not easily reached or
conceived: but when we have the bowels, or sympathy, of a true man spoken of,
we are more able to reach that and know what it is, and so are more ready to be
affected with the consolation that suiteth so with us: we conceive it is no
little part of the Believers consolation, that in Gods condescension, this
sympathy is so molded as to keep full the properties of the humane nature:
now, the Believer has Him as it were His brother, that sucked the breasts of
his mother; now he has Him as his friend, having the same affections and
qualifications that he himself has, yet sinlesse; now he may sometimes gather
from his own affections within himself, the earning of the bowels of Christ or
a resemblance of what is in Him, and may conclude, O what vast bowels an
sympathy must be in Him! and yet all this is but a poor hint of the excellent
and strong consolation that this part of our Lords Priesthood furnishes. What
must Jesus be, when known and possessed? and what might His people be in the
triumph of a comfortable life, if the breasts of those consolations were sucked
by them?

The last thing to be spoken to, is how this consolation is to be improven by
Believers? and though this be the main use of all, yet how great difficulty is
it to get hearts up, seriously to be in love therewith, and to be longing to be
made dexterous in the improving of it? The truth is, except that One Spirit
touch our hearts with some impression of that sympathy, and kindle something
in us, it will want its native luster.

The first general that we would propose, is, that men would study to know the
fullness that is in Jesus, and that they would consider the high Priest of our
profession, Heb. 3.1. and endeavor to be acquainted with His excellency; and
in particular, with this, that so there may be a throughnesse in the faith of
these truths, whereof I fear there be too much ignorance and unbelief in the
visible Church. O that men were truly convinced, that Christ has such an
Office, and that now as man He does with a humane sympathy perform the same! I
suppose there are even many, not amongst the worst, who yet all their days
have been without the benefit of this, because they have never known Him, nor
considered what use should be made of, and what benefit does flow from the
Mediators being Man, but do still carry in every thing, without respect
thereto; and it is like, that even many very gracious souls have but little
Spiritual skill and dexterity in this matter.

Secondly, In our addresses to God, Faith would be exercised on Jesus Christ,
even in respect to this part of His Office, that is, that as there is a resting
by Faith on Christ's satisfaction, for attaining of pardon or what else is
needful; so there ought to be a resting on Christ as intercessor, for the
obtaining of what we are petitioning for before the Throne. This puts the
obtaining of what we seek off our selves, and gives the credit and glory
thereof unto Him.

Thirdly, Faith would not only respect Christ simply as an intercessor, but as
an intercessor who is man in our nature, who has experience of infirmities,
and tender humane sympathy toward us. The neglect of this, makes Christ look
like a stranger, and makes the soul anxious even in its addresses to Him.

Fourthly, Upon this consideration there ought to be access with holy
boldness, the heart exulting in its approach to God, that it has such a new
and living way, as the vail of his flesh, to approach to God by. It is often
not only spoken of, but commended in the Scripture, especially in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, upon this ground, as Chap. 4. verse. last; and 10. verse. 19;
etc. Were this considered, it would banish the drouping, heartlesse approaches
that Believers make to God through Christ, as if they were coming to stranger,
whereas they approach to a brother, to a brother really and sunsibly touched
with their infirmities and affected with them, as any brother on earth is with
the infirmities of another.

Fifthly, The heart would keep confidence on this account, as to the event,
however it be for the time: can it be but well with one with whom Christ so
sympathizeth? and ought not they then to comfort themselves in the hope of an
outgate? Paul triumphs upon this consideration, Romans 8. that though there
should be persecution, nakedness, sword, etc. yet they should not hurt him,
nor separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus, but that over all he
should be a conqueror; yea, more than a conqueror. This were well becoming a
Believer in straits, and were suitable to this ground of strong consolation;
and this confidence is to be humbly extended unto all sorts of things which may
mar the Believers consolation here.

Sixthly, It is even requisite to have the exercise of Spiritual senses for the
right improving of this consolation, so that Believers would carry upon
themselves a little copy of that sympathy that is in Jesus Christ, and have
still upon their spirits an impression of the reality thereof, that by
meditating thereon, in lying down, rising up or walking etc. the heart may be
refreshed, and that excellent box of ointment may cast a savor; neither can it
be, that poor believing sinners should without unspeakable refreshment and
consolation conceive Christ Jesus the blessed Mediator, to have such thoughts
of them, such care of them in their straits, such a touch of an fellow feeling
with them in their infirmities, as that a reproach upon them, a cross or
strait, a hazard to sin, or an actual fall does touch and affect Him, as the
fall or strait of the child does affect a tender mother; and that we may with
as great boldness approach to Him, and have as con^fident expectation of a
hearing with Him, as children may to their most dearly loving mother: who can
think of these things and not be affected? and were Believers more in the
thoughts of these, there would certainly be more comfort.

Seventhly, This would be to the Believer the last refuge, and whatever come,
it is never to be loused or reteired from; but when all looks dark about, He
is here to anchour, and on this intercession and sympathy to cast himself, and
that not without hope that He who is a compassionate high Priest will give
proof thereof, and even in the same particular. In a word, this consolation
might be improven against want and private straits, against public
difficulties: for, He sympathizeth with His Church, and every member of it; it
is most fresh in straits, because then His bowels are awake, most stirred and
warmed; and it is a fortress against the terror of death, seeing He died, and
therefore has the fresher sympathy in that choke. It were even good,
believers were acknowledging themselves defective in this, and would endeavor
the amending of it wherein there is hopes that this compassionate high Priest
would further them and furnish them with other sort of helps and directions. To
Him be praise for ever.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 5. And the Angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar,
and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and thundrings, and
lightnings, and an earthquake.

6. And the seven Angels which had the seven trumpets, prepared themselves to
sound.

7. The first Angel sounded and there followed hail, and fire mingled with
blood, and they were cast upon the earth, and the third part of trees was burnt
up, and all green grass was burnt up.


IN the beginning of this Chapter we find our Lord Jesus taking off the
suspension and restraint, and making way for the breaking loose of that
Judgment, which in the former Chapter He had restrained. Our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great Angel of the Covenant, has a double end in these three
Verses, to wit, the 3, 4, and 5. 1. To provide for His people, and to make them
and their prayers acceptable to God as the best guard against the coming storm:
and this is past in the former two Verses, to wit, the 3. and the 4. 2. To give
the word and sign for the Angels to sound the alarm, that these Judgments
restrained by the four Angels, ( Chap. 7.) might fall on; this is performed in
this fifth Verse, wherein are two things, 1. The sign given. 2. The effects.

1. The sign is, that he fills the censer with fire of the altar, and
casts it into the earth: whereby both the sign is given (as if he had now
done that, for which he had inhibited them to hurt the earth, till it was
performed, Chap. 7.) and the nature of that Judgment pointed at in three
things, 1. In the object of it, it is cast into the earth; by the earth, we
understand the visible Church here, or that part of the earth where the visible
Church sojourneth, called ( Mat. 13.) the field, or world; because as the world
contains all creatures, so it contains all professors good and bad. It is
the same earth the winds were not to blow upon, Chap. 7.1. now they are let
loose: and it is such a Earth, as has trees, grass, and green herbs growing
in it; some whereof do wither, and are hurt, and carried away with this storm,
some are still lively and kept safe under Gods seal from it, as Chap. 9.4.
whereby it is clear, that by trees are meaned men sealed and unsealed, which
are no where but in the visible Church: and this is to be remembered in
application of the trumpets afterward. 2. The sign, expressing the nature of
the Judgment, is set out to be fire casten, etc. Casting of fire (Ezekiel. 10.2.)
is holden forth to be a denunciation of Judgment coming, and the Lords
departing from His Themple; and so we take it to signify here some sad
Judgment of a spiritual nature coming on the Church. 3. It is said to be taken
from the altar; to show, what sort of fire or contention it is, or, whereabout
it should rise; not about external civil things, but spiritual, according to
Christ's word, Luke 12.42. I came to send fire on the earth, etc. which being
compared with Mat. 10. is clear to be divisions and variances about Religion,
kindled by a mistaken and misguided zeal in some, and by passion, pride and
enmity in others; it is kindled in the Church, and sloweth from the altar, and
these that serve at it, and spreads in others. This is otherwise expounded by
some, as Christ's sending forth His Spirit, and Grace, like fire in the hearts
of His people. But, 1. this agrees not so to the scope; for, immediately the
Angels prepare themselves, as taking the word to be given them by this. Nor, 2.
does it agree so to the event or effect, which certainly is terrible, and
expounded so through the Book, Chap. 9. and 11. ult. voices, thunderings, and
earthquakes set out Gods terror, especially consideirng how they are linked
together with Judgments. And, 3. It agrees best to the sign of casting down
fire from the altar, which is opposed to His gracious sending up incense added
to the prayers of all Saints, in the Vers^ before; and this follows as His
rejecting and casting back such services (as it were) of others beside His
Saints, there being a great difference between incense ascending and fire
descending: and Christ's using the same instrument (as, the censer) for both,
shows, His doing it as Mediator, having all power in Heaven and Earth; and
therefore it is said, Luke 12. He came to send it, not only occasionally, but
by His overruling, guiding and timeing of it; and expressly (as it is a
Judgment,) it is said (2 Thessalonians. 2.) He will send them strong delusions, etc.

2. The effect of this, is answerable, in the close of the Verse, There were
voices, lightnings, etc. which show some terrible effect and stir that
followed; for, though thunderings, etc. may sometimes be as an evidence of Gods
hearing prayer, 1 Samuel 12.16. Yet, considering how other ways it is taken in
this Book, (See Chap. 11.14. and 16.18.) and that they follow the casting of
fire on the earth, and that the Angels immediately sound, who till now were
restrained, we cannot but look upon it, as a word given to them to make ready;
immediately upon the back of this sign, the seven Angels prepare to sound, upon
which, fire and other judgments followed, etc. And if it be asked, why not
before? it is insinuated, they waited for orders, and the sign and command
which now they get. 2. Further Observe, There is in these effects a gradation,
and the sharpest and sorest is hindmost, and these steps may be for a little
sum of what was to follow by the sounding of the first four trumpets
especially, as will appear.

Observe, 1. In this with its order, comparing it with what went before Christ's
intercession, and the Saints praying, That Judgments, even spiritual
Judgments of Error, Schism, Division, etc may follow a praying time and a
praying frame of Gods people, I mean on the visible Church, while the Godly are
serious in prayer, and hypocrites but dissemble. There may follow very great
spiritual Judgments on a Church after a praying spirit has been on the Lords
People in that Church. All the Saints have been praying before, though they
were not acceptable, but through Christ's intercession; and yet, upon the back
of that, follows this Judgment. Experience has proven the truth of this;
and it flows partly from the malice of the devil, that works and rages the
more, the more instant and earnest they be with God; partly, from the Judgment
of God, plagueing godless and formal hypocrites, who in a praying-time join
with the Godly, but (as it is, 2 Thessalonians. 2.) have not the love of the Truth, nor
a practice suitable to it; and the more that such pray, they draw on the more
guilt accidentally, and there is the more giving up to be discovered; and
partly, God may be forewarning, and forearming His people by such a frame
against such a storm. What marvel if after our purity and praying, such a
Judgment come to discover a multitude of graceless, profane hypocrites and
counterfeit dissemblers, and to give them a fill of their own ways that were
not in love with His? Beside, Gods peoples praying for Christ's Kingdom
flourishing and His peoples prosperity, will hasten judgment on them who do
not grow in it. Often inward enmity at the right way, when it is not received
in love, though it may be in profession, is plagued with outward outbreaking in
wrong ways, more than if there had never been profession. 2. This fire comes
from the altar, Observe, That there is a fire that comes from the altar, that
has ^ight terrible eff^cts, i.e. by such instruments, concerning such a
subject as belongs to the altar, and followed that way. Or, thus, Contention
and strife about spiritual things amongst Churchmen, and flowing from them to
others, is a very sad Judgment and has very terrible effects; it most marreth
the beauty of the Church, it obstructeth the spiritual growth of Gods people,
and burns up all their spiritual life. Lord, save us from this Judgment,
and make all His servants and people warrie of the kindling of it, and make us
more earnest in prayer, that God would quench what of it is begun, lest it go
on to consume us. Observe, 3. That these spiritual Judgments are ordered and
timed by Christ, who sets bounds to them: His soveraignity reaches these
things, the fire comes not till He cast it; the trumpets sound not till He
give them orders; 2 Thessalonians. 2. He sends strong delusion; Luke 12. I came to
send fire on the earth: though the sin be lying on them, and others be
isntrumental in it, yet the delusion comes not by guess; and when God in
Judgment plagueth, He has His own way of ordering and timing it, as He
thinks meet; and were not His bridle is in the mouth of this Judgment, we
had been more consumed with it ere now.

The 6. verse. shows to what purpose this was; and in it, it is said, the
seven Angels prepared themselves to sound: Why not at first when the trumpets
were given them? Answ. Because (as we said) they waited for orders: and now,
orders being given, they delay not, but fall to do their duty: Yet, 1. by
preparing either themselves, or their instruments for it. 2. By keeping due
order and not confounding their commissions, and the timing of these, neither
precipitating without commission, though furnished with gifts; nor rashly, and
confusedly going about it, but with preparation and order: which things are
certainly mentioned for imitation, that these who pray for grace to do Gods
will on earth as it is done in heaven, may take this as a pattern, especially
such as are instrusted to be Heralds and do sound His trumpets.

1. They are set apart and designed for this office; so should Ministers, they
should look well they be designed for this office, and have their calling
clear, as these seven Angels were separated from others to this work. 2.
Trumpets are given them, that is, they are furnished with gifts; whomsoever He
designeth for an office in His house, He furnishes them, and gives trumpets
to all whom He calls to sound. 3. When they have gotten trumpets, they will
not blow while He command to sound: it is not gifts that warrant men to Preach,
but they must have particular orders when to do it. The Word must be taken from
his mouth, when, where, and how He shall order it. 4. They are prepared,
advised and warrie in going about the work when they are called to sound: Gods
giving of gifts and orders to exercise them, is not enough except men prepare
themselves for the work, and be advised and warry in going about it, as Paul to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift that is in thee, etc. 5. They are
diligent and faithful in their execution when they have gotten orders and are
prepared; although the message be heavy, faithfulness and diligence is a good
property of a Minister of Christ, 6. They keep an orderly way of proceeding in
discharging their duty, every one in their station, and not in a confused way;
so it becomes Ministers: and Ministers, being resembled to Angels; and their
giving of warning, to the sounding of the trumpet, Their office and duty may be
thus pointed at here. Lastly, Sounding of a trumpet, implies distinctnesse, 1
Cor. 14. and stateliness and power in the manner of carrying their commission,
giving alarm convinceingly and plainly, which notably agrees to Ministers.

Follows, from the 7. verse. and forward, their sounding: where there is in
every trumpet, 1. The sounding. 2. The effect or consequent of the sounding;
and that is the judgment that followed. 3. The object of the judgment, the
earth. And, 4. the extent, fruit and effects of the judgment.

To understand more particularly this prophecy of the trumpets, which is an
hard place, and needs Gods special direction in it (which we humbly desire)
we premit these considerations or observations, which may in some things fix us
in the opening of it.

1. For its beginning, rise, and close, it is cleared before, to rise after the
breaking of that little peace the Church enjoyed under Constantine, and to
close at Antichrists begun fall, when he is brought to a height, and the vials
begin to be poured out.

2. It is not only contemporary with, but has respect unto, the prophecy of
the beasts' Chap. 13. and Chap. 11. verse. 7. as also the rise and close of that
prophecy of the beasts' will fall under the same times and marches: whereby it
appears (considering also Chap. 7.1, etc. and what was said there) they do
most directly belong to the Church, and that in Spiritual trials.

3. Consider, that the fifth trumpet looks clearly to Antichrist and his
discovery openly, as appears by comparing, verse. 4. Chap. 9. with verse. 8.
Chap. 13. The same persons and by the same mark, are kept from the spiritual
hurt of both; as also, that the sixth trumpet brings the Mahometans upon the
back of that, the Turks being raised as a scourge for the Idolatry of the
former, which are the first two great woes; and the first four are lesser in
comparison of these. Now, this discovery of Antichrist, will be about the six
hundred year, or a little after: the first four then must preceed that time,
and continue the state of the Church from the three hundred or thereby (where
the seal is closed) till that time.

4. Consider, that the main drift, is, to discover that defection of the
visible Church in declining by steps from purity in Doctrine and simplicity in
Worship, which ends in Antichrists height; and also consider it, as it is
penal, every step of their sin and defection being (in Gods righteous
judgment) penal, including in it some Spiritual plague, and carrying,
along with it, or on the back of it, some temporal judgment on the world,
and exercise or trial on the Godly, especially under Antichrist.

5. Consider, that it does not so much point at particulars either of things or
persons, as to show the general state of the Church in these successive times
by whatsomever instruments or events of all sorts, having influence on her
declining, and especially as they make way for Antichrists growth, by weakening
the Church or shaking the Empire: which being the main scope, is more clearly
insisted on in the 11. Chap. and in the vision, Chap. 12, 13, and 14. therefore
may they in part, be of a mixed nature as they stand in reference to this scope.

6. It is observable, That as in all the other changes of periods, so in this,
the overturning of the visible Church is compared to the overturning of the
world, and plaguing the Earth, Sea, Rivers, Sun, Moon, etc. There are three
worlds mentioned, which successively are defaced by the three principal
prophesies of this Book, 1. The heathen world, it is overturned together, Chap.
6. and under the sixth seal. 2. To it succeeds the Christian world, when
Religion has liberty and the countenance of the Roman Authority; this is
defaced successively under the trumpets, by that worlds declining to be
Antichristian, and by his getting Authority and Power on his side, and bringing
the Church witnesses and Saints low. This Popish, or Antichristian world, is
destroyed under the vials, in the the same expressions of Sea, Earth, etc. All
which states of the Church in the Empire, are compared to different worlds, and
their overturning or defacing to the changing of the world, while it is only
the Church or Religion in the world which suffers change.

7. If we will look to the trumpets, as the effects follow them, and to the
vials and their effects; There is a great suitablnesse between them in all. The
first trumpet is on the Earth, and so is the first vial poured out on it; the
second on the Sea; the third on the Rivers, in both; so the fourth on the Sun.
The fifth trumpet brings out Antichrist as on his throne, the fifth vial is
poured out on the seat or throne of the beast; the sixth trumpet louseth the
four Angels at Euphrates, the vial dries up that River: whereby it appears,
that God destroys Antichrist in that same method he grew, and clears His
Church, as she was in several steps darkened, obscured and troubled; that as
Antichrist brought in a new counterfeit Church or World by degrees, overturning
what was before, So shall he be destroyed. And therefore, as the destruction of
Antichrist and his world, is clearly intended by the vials; so this world,
which is overturned here, must be understood of the visible Church, on whose
ruins that Antichristian world was erected, seeing the rise of Antichrist
infers the defacing of the Church, and that by the same steps and in the
same method, as his ruin follows by the vials. Neither can there be any
other reason given of the accurate resemblance which is between the trumpets
and vials, which yet cannot be thought to be without reason; neither can there
be an overturning of the Antichristian world, till it be built; nor can it be
thought to be builded, but under the trumpets, to wit, after the Heathenish
world is past and the Christian built; yea, after the Christian world begins
to decay: all which fall under the trumpets; for, two of those worlds cannot
stand together, yet still one of them follows upon the back of the other, so
as the overturning of the Heathenish world, supponeth Christianity to succeed;
and as the destroying of the Antichristian world by the vials, supposes purity
to succeed, So here the decay of the Christian world, supposes the
Antichristian to succeed. All which, being put together, 1. It is clear that
the declining of the Church from purity, and that the rise and discovery of
Antichrist, is the main scope of these trumpets. 2. That we must expound Earth,
Mountains, Waters, Sun, etc. to be something in the Church, bearing an analogy
to these things in the world.

8. Yet we say, these trumpets are not to be so bounded, as if the first were
contemporary with Antichrists discovery and sensible rise, which is in the
fifth; for, then there would be a great void in the prophecy, in passing over
many considerable events in the Church during the second three hundred years,
wherein Truth and Christ's Kingdom were much concerned, which we conceive could
not be omitted in this prophecy; and yet no where else can be thought to be
set down; we are therefore to look on them as they hold out the Churches first
storms after the world became Christian, and whereby she was exercised during
the time of Antichrists secret and unseen working, who took occasion from all
these to fix himself; and by all which the world was by degrees disposed to
receive him, who after the first four trumpets is found to step out under the
fifth; and this we conceive to be the reason why the first four trumpets are
distinguished from the last three, which contain the story of Antichrist after
his full manifestation.

From which considerations, we suppose it is clear, 1. That these trumpets
denote the state of the Church with some order of time. There is certainly
order in the three last trumpets, in respect of themselves, and in respect of
these which preceed; and therefore it is not for the clearing of them, to
expound them of kinds of heresies in a confusion, as agreeing to any time. 2.
That they do not principally intend temporal changes on the Roman Empire, as
the object of these mutations, or as vindictive on them for their former
persecutions, (though these spiritual ills be set out in expressions suiting
temporal judgments, even as the Churches disputes with Heretics, are set out
by fightings, and such like) for, the Saints and witnesses especially, suffer
temporally here, when all the world otherwise rejoices, Chap. 11. It remains
then, that the object is the Church-visible; the nature of them is Spiritual
principally (as is said before) with temporal exercises on the Church and
judgments on the Empire.

The order and sum of the trumpets then we conceive to be this. The four first
trumpets (which comparatively with the other three following, are the lesser
woes) hold forth the Churches declining and weakening from under Constantine
(as was touched before) about the three hundred and twenty year or thereabouts
when Antichrist had his working under ground, till his discovery, which is in
the fifth trumpet, about the year six hundred and some odds, holden out in
these steps, 1. What was set upon in all these beasts, and in what order? 2. By
what means? 3. With what success and fruit?

1. Enemies publicly set upon the very foundation of Christianity, without
which a man is no Christian, as, if Christ be by nature God (if He was (...),
in opposition to Arius) of the same Essence with the Father, though a different
Person, which who believed not, in the Primitive times was justly accounted no
Christian. This was done by discovered and open Heretics, such as Arius,
Macedonius, Eutyches, Nestorius, etc. striking all of them at the Person and
Natures of our Lord Jesus. This was a violent storm, striking at the
foundation, and took away many Professors of all sorts, yet the earth it self
stood like a Rock, though trees on it were burnt up. All these Heresies were
rejected by the Church, and condemned by the first four famous general
Councels. The first whereof was conveened at Nice by Constantine about the year
325. wherein was condemned the heresy of Arius, who denied the Godhead of
Jesus Christ, or that He was by nature God, as the Father was, though he
accounted Him more than a man, and so differs from Photinus. The second was
at Constantinople by Gratian and Theodosius, Anno 380. In this was condemned
the heresy of Macedonius, who denied the personality of the holy Ghost, the
third Person of the blessed Trinity: His followers therefore were called (...).
i.e. fighters against the spirit. The third, was at Ephesus, under Theodosius
the second, Anno 431. It condemned Nestorius, who made Christ to have Persons
as two Natures. The fourth was at Chalcedon, under Martianus, Anno 451. This
rejected the Doctrine of Eutyches, who, in opposition to Nestorius, attributed
to Christ but one Nature, thus confounding His Natures, as the former had
divided His Person. In the computation of these times, it is not to be
expected, that we can be so peremptory, there being some little difference
amongst Authors according to their various timing of events, yet without any
material prejudice to the truth of the story. This is the first trumpet.

2. This storm being by discovered enemies, Satan comes not so good speed; he
assayeth, next, the corrupting of government, by removing of which, he might
have fair access to what he pleased or intended to bring in afterward. To
effectuate this, he inflameth the Churchmen with pride, and from it, for
precedencie, wakeneth contention (as once he did amongst the Apostles) whereby
the work of God was much retarded, and poor souls stumbled, and the Ordinances
of Christ (especially government) corrupted. Who would see this, may read
Plessaeus mystery of iniquity about the four hundred year, and what dealing
there was with the east Church and falsifying of votes of Synods, as that of
Nice, proven from authentic Copies, for that end, sought and found by the
fathers of Africa, may be seen, C^nt. Magdeburg; yea, also in Baronius. This
prevails, the mountain takes fire, and becomes low in its grandour and
spiritual weight and credit, and all are infected with this, to be more about
outward pomp than inward power, about earthly things more than spiritual. This
is the second trumpet.

3. The devil, (having prevailed this much by Churchmen) sets on, next, to
poison fountains and rivers which men drink of and live upon; Doctrines were
somewhat clear before, and fundamentals were not easily overthrown while
government and unity were in force, Now he poisoneth sound Doctrine in the
mouths of Ministers; and free will, Justification by good works and external
holiness, merit, dispensations, pennances, purgatory, sacraments, opus
operatum, especially traditions, are brought in: whereby the wholesome Word was
corrupted in many places of the world, and its native purity lost; and
instruments were made use of in this, who once seemed to shine in the Church,
as Pelagius, Origin. etc. This is the third trumpet.

4. In the fourth trumpet, the light is further obscured, and the beauty of
pure Doctrine in the Church darkened, the Scripture is veiled and kept up,
ignorance fostered, tradition is brought in place of Scripture, will worship
and ceremonies for the practice of holy duties, etc. whereby the glorious light
of the Gospel and of the Church was darkened and grew dim, making way for
Antichrists rising, though it increased much more under him, yet even then men
were more taken up with Monkishnesse and these toys, than with things which
were more profitable, out of which darkness Antichrist at last start up, and
took it on him, in the fifth trumpet: whereupon follows Mahomet in the sixth,
as his and the worlds scourge, until the vials make a turn, and this height of
Antichrist be brought down even as he rose; which series of the vials, begineth
with the seventh trumpet.

This series agrees well with the types and also with the truth of the event
in the matter of fact, as afterward succeeded, and so the Church is wasted,
blasted, and way made for Antichrist by th^se first four; and therefore there
can be no unwarrantablenesse in speaking thus of them. It agrees also well
with the scope, in showing Antichrists rise by these steps: Only, take that
advertisement which we gave on the seals, That though there be an order in the
rise of these things one after another, yet neither would we be peremptory in
timeing it, or ascribing it to particular events, nor yet think, that one
ends, or goes away, when the other comes; nay, they continue together, and
do complete the Churches darkening, as it was with the dispensations under the
seals; the first continued till the last, but had order in its rising, so here.
And though something of the latter trumpets might be working, even as soon as
the former, and no doubt the fifth began to work soon, yet the trumpet looks
at such a thing in a height or its discovery, and so the second was working
under the first, but did not break out till the first was some length proceeded.

We come now particularly to the Angels sounding. The first foundeth in this
seventh Verse, Where we are to consider, beside the sounding, these three
things, 1. The judgment threatened, or the sign of it, fire and hail mingled
with blood; a very great storm. 2. Its object, the earth. 3. The effect, the
third part of trees and all green grass was burnt up: it is like it alludeth
to one of the plagues of Egypt, whereby much desolation was wrought; here it
signifies a spiritual storm, called hail, partly, because of its cold,
blasting and terrible nature, especially in these Countries, it being the great
cause of barrenness and unfruitfulnesse then; partly, because of the
hurtfulnesse of it; so it signifies that which heresy (in general) flows
from and carries with it, to wit, coldness in practice of Religion toward
God, and affection toward others, making men cold within, and barren and
unfruitful without; but this hail is more than an ordinary blast and storm,
coming impetuously, though not lasting long. 2. There is fire, in terrible
tempests, they were mixed; and this signifies the rent of unity in practice
and affection by contention and passion, as the former the defacing of Doctrine
by some terrible Error. So, Luke 12.42. I came to send fire on the earth, and
James 3. it is said, the tongue is set on fire and kindles others. This fire
of division, is a companion of heresy; and heresies do often more hurt to the
Church by their contentions and schisms than by their Doctrins, it being the
kindling of this fire that in the judgment of many denominateth one an
Heretic, which he would not be by his simple adhering to an Error, if nothing
were of this. As also it is observable, that hail, which is cold, has fire
with it, like Ephraim, Hos. 7.8. who was like an unturned cake, hot beneath,
and cold affections above, these go together, much zeal in an erroneous opinion
and heat for that, which is ever accompanied with coldness in more
fundamental things; the colder men be in the one, the hoter are they in the
other, as the Pharisees were for their own traditions, zealous, but in Gods
commands indifferent. 3. It is mingled with blood: which holds out the bloody
nature of heresy and of this meaned here; which we think rather to be
understood of their putting faithful opposers to suffering for withstanding
their Doctrine, than their suffering for it: this also is a fruit of the fiery
spirit, that when words prevail not, and their falsehood is discovered, they run
to open violence; and their is no cruelty like this of Heretics.

2. The object of this judgment, is, the earth, And 3. the effects, are, the
burning up a third part of trees and all green grass.

1. By earth, we understand, 1. either indefinitely the visible Church, which
is set upon and defaced in its most clear and plain truths, Chap. 7.1. Or, 2.
more especially, the foundations of it, such truths as are most solidly to be
believed, without which the visible Church cannot stand, as that, concerning
the Person, Natures and Offices of the Son of God, as the earth in the Pagan
world, Chap. 6. and in the Antichristian world, Chap. 16. may and does signify
their foundations, and what seemed most strong in them, and essential to them,
when their foundations were shaken they must fall; so here the right confession
of Christ and pure Doctrine of Faith in Him, is called the foundation or rock
on which the Church is builded, Mat. 16. Or, Thirdly, it may show the spreading
of this plague, or sore, over the very face of the Church in respect of its
extent, there being no part of the earth free of it.

3. The burning up of trees and all green grass holds forth, 1. The
dreadful effects of this judgment on eminent professors, some for gifts and
knowledge; some it may be for grace, and withal, some eminent for place and
authority, called trees, as taler and stronger than others; and upon all
grass, as if an utter barrenness followed it, and a pleasant land were turned
to a burnt-up wilderness, that nothing almost was free from the hurt of that
plague. 2. Yet it is limited, and a third part but of trees burnt up; many
eminent men are kept free.

Now, if we come to particular application of it, it is done, 1. (as some
think) in respect of temporal judgments on the Empire, which in this time
followed by the Goths, Vandals, etc. 2. As others think, in respect of
particular heresies, to wit, of the Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Pelagians,
etc. Or, 3. as others, in respect of Antichrists rise, as something creept in,
tending to his bringing forth in the Church by several steps. But, 4. They may
be generally applied to the state of the Church in such a time under them all;
(yet, ^looking more especially to some remarkable particular) which we think
safest, Because it is most comprehensive, and yet not inconsistent with, but
agrees best to the scope, series, and order, and to the effect) it shows the
d^clissi^^ state of the Church in respect of time, which also has its tendency
to Antichrists heightening. For, 1. Heresy makes way for him who still was
fishing in troubled waters; and Rome, by its Authority and outward greatness,
had too much influence in these debates, as an Umpire amongst dissentients. 2.
The Empires diminishing proved a taking him out of the way, which withheld, and
so made still a more open door for, his rising, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

Yet we think the Arian heresy, and what followed, accompanied and depended on
it, is especially holden forth by this first trumpet: and we account the
Macedonian heresy a branch of the same, for these reasons, 1. Because this
change and danger of the Church by it, was so great, that it is not like other
storms would be mentioned, and this past in silence; and no other place can be
assigned so pertinent for it. 2. It agrees and suiteth well with the series
and time of this storm, which is the first after that calm the Church had in
Constantines time.

3. The nature of it agrees with it, 1. It was violent, and that against the
most substantial and fundamental points of Religion, to wit, the Godhead of
Christ and of the holy Ghost, without which, there can be no Christianity, this
being the rock upon which the Christian Church is built, Mat. 16. And there was
never more fire nor blood in a storm; the Church was undone with contention, so
that no general Synod (even that of Nice) could remove it, but they burst out
more; and Constantines sad regrates and serious ^xpostulations with Bishops
because of this, and the many contrary Synods (some whereof sided with Arius)
confirm it.

4. Much blood and persecution followed thereupon by Constantius, Valens, and
other Arian Emperors and Governors (beside what was committed by the Vandals
in Africa) than which was there never persecution more cruel and barbarous.

5. There were not only many, but exceeding eminent men, both Civil and
Ecclesiastic, led away with that Error; sundry Emperors, as Constantius,
Valens, before named; many Kings of the Goths and Vandals, were favorers of
it; many Bishops of great r^^e in the Church, did propagate it; yea, sometimes
whole Synods of many hundreds, did establish it and condemn the truth, and the
defenders thereof, as that Synod at Tire, Anno 336. did condemn Athanasius
under pretext of turbulency, murder and adultery. A Synod at Antioch, Anno
337. deposed Eustachius the Bishop thereof, under the like pretexts. Such was
the Council of Millan, Anno 354. (at which it is written, that Constantine
being now aged, was present) which did condemn many worthy men because they
would not subscribe to the condemnation of Athanasius, such were Hilarious,
Osius, Paulinus, etc. Another was at Syrmia, where Osius was whipped till he
did subscribe. The great Council, (for number being accounted 1000. Bishops)
met at Ariminum and Seleucium, did at last establish this Doctrine, and decree
that the word (...) (whereby Christ is signified to be God, of the same Essence
with the Father) should be laid aside, and the word (...) (whereby is signified
that He is not of the same, but of the like substance or Essence) was brought
in. In which two words, though there be little difference in letters, yet much
in substance, concerning which there was much debate in these days. After
Macedonius arose, a third word was brought in by His followers in the place of
both, to wit, (...), whereby he would neither call Christ of the same substance
and Essence with the Father, as the Orthodox did; nor of the like substance or
Essence to the Father, as the Arians did (who did therefore in that Synod of
Syrmia condemn Photinus for asserting Christ to be a mere man and not God, as
they did Osius for asserting Him to be God co-essentiall with the Father) but
simply to be like the Father, without mentioning either the unity or likeness
of His Essence.

6. Many eminently Godly men were out of infirmity at last (by the violence of
persecution) brought to subscribe to their way, and to condemn Athanasius, as
did Liberius Bishop of Rome, and the foresaid Osius Bishop of Corduba, etc. who
long had suffered for the truth and afterward came to the acknowledgement of it.

7. This storm, and the defection under it, became so universal, that almost
all the world was become Arian, that it became a proverb, Totus mundus factus
est Arianus; and Jerome says in Chronicis, omnes pene toto or be Ecclesiae,
nomine pacis and Regis, Arianorum consortio polluuntur.

8. Then brake in the barbarous Nations, Goths and Vandals; and the Religion
they had was Arian, both in Kings of Italy and Africa, though some of them
were more civil to the Church than others.

9. This contributed much to the rising of Rome, 1. Many distressed men, as
Athanasius, and others, because that Church was long pure and in Authority
(when others were infected and less able to help) made address to it, to
implore their help for vindicating them, and the truth they maintained, by
owning it and interposing for it; also Heretics when they were condemned,
appealed to Rome, to draw them on their side, as Eutyches, Donatus, and sundry
others in Africa which the Bishop of Rome made use of to incroach on others. 2.
Some acts of Synods were made to prevent unjust oppression of honest men from
corrupt Bishops which abounded in the East, during the intervalls of Synods,
whereby too great weight of hearing differences for that time was drawn from
the east to the w^st, a^ being more free of that corruption, which was Hosius
overture in the Council of Sardic^, Anno 347. which was occasioned from the
overspreading of Arianis^ in the east, even after the Council of Nice: from all
this, Rome took much advantage. 3. By the Emperors too much liberality, they
grew to pride; and by the diminishing of the Emperors Authority in the west,
the Bishops of Rome grew: so that what pride, covetousness and usurpation this
age brought forth in them, may be seen at large in Pless^us mystery, page
4.44. C^ntur. Magdeburg. C^nt. 4. by all which they did wind themselves
someway in to be Umpires or Arbitrators of differences in other Churches, which
afterward they drew to a debt and obligation on them. 4. At that time he being
desired, did interpose brotherly by his Commi^^ioners with other Bishops and
Churches; which being for a cause, upon the matter, good, and from an eminent
Bishop, had much weight with it, and was much esteemed and regarded, though not
as Authoritative, which his successors abused in after tim^s. So then the
Churches estate betw^xt the 300. and 400. years and thereabout, will be found,
as its here foretold to be. Inwardly the Church, undone by Heretics, heresies,
contentions, backed with pretended Authority Civil and Ecclesiastic. The
Bishops of Rome working their Supremacy in all these troubles, and he taking
occasion to insinuate himself as Moderator among them, though yet under ground,
and that but on the earth and low. Doctrine began even then to be in many
things corrupted by special men in the Church, especially concerning freewill,
ceremonies, etc. By which may be gathered, what great storm this was, and how
answerable to this type; so that its easily applied to it. Observe,

1. In general, what a terrible thing it is to have error, heresy, division
and contention letten louse on a Church; it is terrible as fire, hail and
blood, and terrible in the effects, a third part of the trees and grass are
burnt up: few believe this^ yet these plagues are less terrible to bodies than
error and the effects of it are to souls. 2. See the nature of heresy, 1. It
is violent, cooling love, and obstructing practice whereby the soul is kept in
life, but in contentions for it self and things belonging to it self, fiery,
bloody and cruel. The first word looks at the impurity of the Doctrine,
striking at the very foundation, ^ail. The second word, fire, looks at the
breaking of unity. The third word, blood, looks at the destroying of lives;
such were the false teachers of old, such were they in Christ's time and after
His time. 2. It spreads on many for number, on great men and good men
sometime for quality, all green grass and a third part of trees. Who would
have thought so many famous able men would have been carried away with it, that
(as we said before) it became a proverb, the world is become Aria^; many
Bishops and Synods, many eminent in parts, partly through terror, partly
through weakness, came to verbal acknowledgement of the error, and to condemn
some honest men that spoke for truth? This should make us be watchful and
humble: would a^y think that the Godhead of Christ or of the holy Ghost should
be denied? and yet this is of late revived: for, the S^c^nian error is the same
in substance, and has many followers. 3. Many trees are spared, partly as a
testimony against others, partly to give themselves time to repent, they are
not taken away altogether. Let us arm against such a storm and become more
warrie and watchful.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 8. And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning
with fire was cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood:

9. And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life,
died, and the third part of the ships were destroyed.


YE may remember when we began to speak of this prophecy of the trumpets, we
told you that in them was contained the story of the Church from the
int^rrupting of the peace that it enjoyed under Constantine till Antichrist was
at his height, and God by pouring out of the vials came to demolish his Kingdom.

The prophecy of the^e trumpets is divided in smaller and greater woes, the
last three being the greatest.

The first four do continue the History of the Church from the peace it enjoyed
under the sixth seal unto the discovery of Antichrist upon his seat and throne.

Ye heard, in the former trumpet, how hard the condition of the Christian
Church was, and by what means it was weakened, 1. By outward inbreaking of
cruel barbarous Nations, merciless enemies, to the defacing of it. 2. By
enemies from within, such as Arians, Macedonians, N^storians, and also
Schismatics, as Luciferians, Novatians, A^daeans, etc. that would not keep
unity, as the former would not keep purity. 3. By corrupting of the Doctrine,
many unsafe and unsound Doctrines attended with pernicious practices, were
creeping in amongst famous men in the Church. 4. It was also weakened by
contention^ and ambition amongst Bishops and Ministers for their precedence:
out of all which, Satan's design of raising Rome, and bringing in Ant^christ,
was wo^king, and took rooting, springing and spreading it self more and more
till it came to the height. We shall say no more of the first trumpet, but
proceed to the rest.

This second trumpet advances and carries on the same scope: and if any ask,
why these trumpets blow not together, and yet one succeeds another? I answer,
there is some interim, to see how the former may work; and if any will repent,
God takes that time of trial. 2. When it works not, a greater comes, then
He plagueth seven times more: there are degrees even of spiritual judgments,
Romans 1. When alarms work not, there are worse coming.

For opening the meaning of this sad judgment, we must consider in it these
three things, 1. The mean made use of, or the rise of the judgment, it was as
a mountain burning. 2. Its object, it is cast into the sea. 3. The effects that
follow upon it, the waters became blood, and many ships are destroyed.
Generally, it shows that this judgment extended further than the former, 1.
The former was on the land only; this takes in the sea. 2. It alters quite
the nature of these seas; the former destroyed but trees and grass that were
growing, This is more infectious.

1. It is said, as it were a great mountain, to show it was something
figuratively to be understood and not properly, like a hill, such as Aetna in
Sicilie, or Hecla in Island, are, which burns within it self, and dissolveth
it self.

By mountains in Scripture, are understood figuratively Powers or Authorities,
Zech. 4.7. Who art thou, O great mountain? before Z^rubbabel thou shall become
a plain. He means the opposition of that Monarchy which then oppressed them.
Ier. 51.25. Babylon is called a destroyed mountain, and a mountain that shall
be made a burnt mountain: So by mountain here we understand eminent men in the
Church and her Authority, or these placed in Authority in her, who by their
place are eminent above others; it being the Church here that especially is
spoken of, this mountain must be their Judicatories and these in power.
Therefore the Disciples, and in them Ministers, are said to be as a city set on
a mountain, or hill, Matthew. 5. these being mountains for eminency in the
Church, as civil Governors, or Governments are in the State. 2. This mountain
is said to be burning; which we conceive to be kindled with pride, and
contention flowing therefrom, as Christ says, He came to send fire on the
earth, and it was already kindled, which is to be expounded variances amongst
these in nearest relations: so also fire, it is taken for contention in Iothams
parable, Judge. 9. compare verse. 20. with verse. 23. which is the more clear
here, that it follows upon the former trumpet, as taking fire from it, and it
seems to be the Church Governors that were kindled by it. This fire having
kindled within their bowels, breaks out and infecteth others and spreads
this division under this trumpet at the back of the former heresy and sad
state which the Church was in, having to do not only with open Heretics, but
with pride and contention amongst Churchmen themselves, whereby exceedingly
the Church was wronged, and way was made for the in-bringing of more corruption
and Antichrists rising.

2. The object, it is cast into the sea, 1. By the sea, in Scripture among the
Prophets, is understood a numerous people, as, to fit on many waters, Revel.
17.15. By this then we are to understand, that though this infection began
among the Churchmen, yet was it cast in the sea, that is, spread far off
amongst the people. So it was in this time, and so it uses to be. 2. By sea,
is understood in Scripture, Nations beyond seas; often the west part of the
world, because they were by the sea divided from Judea, as by the earth or land
is understood the east part, Isa. 60.5, etc. and thus it may well here look to
Rome, Africa and the west, upon which this storm mainly did fall, as the first
did fall on the Church in the east chie^ly, which was called the earth. 3. By
sea, in this prophecy, is understood the Ordinances, in Discipline, Worship,
and Government of the Church, and exercises of Religion, because in these, and
by these, Christians in this World of the Church do converse together,
traffic one with another, communicate one with another, as men do by seas and
ships, who otherwise are at a distance. So, ( Chap. 18.) in the Antichristian
world, their Churchmen are compared to men in ships, or Merchants, who
(amongst other things) trade for men's souls, which can be meaned of no other
but their Churchmen, verse. 15. and their going about their superstitions, is
compared to trading in Ships and Seas: Whereby it would appear, that here
especially a storm upon Ordinances, Worship and Discipline, is signified, as in
the former, the Doctrine was set upon; yet Discipline and Councels were in some
vigor, both having some Authority from without by Constantine, unity and
respect from within, as at Nice, foundnesse and solidity in proceeding; but in
the succeeding ages, all was changed. First, Emperors became Arians, Councels
became heterodox, unity was broken, partly by Schisms amongst themselves,
partly by the Pelagians and Donatists, which at this time came to a height:
separation from Churches, flowing from pride, under the pretext of the
unholinesse of the Churches Members, began and continued long, troubling
especially the west part of the world, which formerly was free, and the
preaching of the Word was foisted with humane inventions by men who were not
Heretics, the government of the Church spoiled, broken, dissolved and burnt;
pride consumes all and makes it contemptible. So it is said of Babylon, Jer.
21.25. I will make thee a burnt mountain, when the dissolution of her authority
is prophesied of.

3. The effects of this mountains casting in the sea, recorded here, are two,
the one the effect of the other, 1. The waters are turned into blood, showing
they were corrupted; that being the great evidence of corruption in them,
alluding to the plague of Egypt, Exodus 7.19. which shows, that by that
foregoing rent, Discipline was weakened, Ordinances corrupted, and the nature
of them altered; they were before useful, now they are hurtful, as being
abused by this fiery mountains falling into them. So the Synods, Councels and
Ministry in many places became such as were rather for destruction than
edification, and Churches were rent and divided, and stumblings laid before
poor people, whereby the second effect followed, that is, as in waters turned
to blood, fishes cannot live, so by these errors in Doctrine and Worship (which
both now continue together) poor souls are destroyed, simplicity of Worship
corrupted with ceremonies and traditions, and all Church men, almost, who trade
in these ships, are undone and destroyed with this ambition; for, blood
signifies any death, even spiritual death, Ezekiel. 3.18. His blood will I
require of thee, etc. which is His spiritual killing of them; and here we are
to understand their being killed with self-seeking and pride, and so to be dead
while they were alive, 1 Timothy 5.6. and deadly to others also. In sum then, by
the second trumpet we are to understand the corruption of the Government and
Governors, who heightening their places beyond Christ's order, and exercising
that power, not for edification, but for destruction (contrary to its nature)
in fiery contentions flowing from their pride and ambition, by which the
eminency of the Church in that respect was dissolved in its Authority, and
became low (as a mountain does, which is consumed by fire from within) whereby
many dreadful effects tending both to the wronging of the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, and exceeding hurtful to all the members of the Church who lived under
them, were brought to pass, and so the Churches life (as it were) brought into
greater hazard, than under open Heretics.

For application of this, we will find it suit well with the contentions that
followed on the Council of Nice, and then burst out amongst Churchmen,
exceeding hurtfully unto the Church: for clearing whereof, we may observe these
things from the story of that time, 1. Divisions and contentions abounded, as
is clear from the many complaints of Emperors and Fathers, especially
Gregori^^ Nax. who therefore took a prejudice at Councels, because so much
contention followed that of Nice.

As also by the many contrary Synods and contests for precedence in them among
Churchmen, who continued till the Bishop of Rome carried away the title of
Universal Bishop, as will appear more under the fifth trumpet. 2. The time of
these contentions will agree to this; for, this fire of pride was kindled, and
the foundation laid for carrying on these contests to that height from the
former heresy; some acts were made, whereby some Bishops, especially they of
Rome, were preferred to others, because they were more free of that infection,
and were more able to help the truth and these who were persecuted for it in
the East, as particularly that seventh canon at Sardica, overtured by Osius for
that end, from which Rome took advantage afterward. 3. In these Councels upon
this occasion the precedence of some Seas was established, and a foundation of
the Ecclesiastic hierarchy was laid. First, The Council of Nice appointed
four Patriarchs, at Alexandria in Egypt, at Antioch in Asia, at Jerusalem in
Syria, at Rome in the West, over all Metrapolitans, who yet were independently
of equal Authority within their own bounds, as is clear, Can. 6. Secondly,
After that Rome was preferred in order to the rest, and Constantinople made
second, not by any dignity of these Seas, but because they were the seats of
the imperial Authority, as appears from Can. 3. of the second Council at
Constantinople, confirmed, Can. 28. of the Council at Chalcedon, and the 36.
Can. of the Council at Trulos, where Constantinople is made second to Rome,
because it was new Rome, and had the same civil privileges with old Rome:
which shows the reason why both these Seas were preferred, was built merely
upon civil privileges, which also Balsamon upon the foresaid canons confirms
from Iustinian's Laws, Novel 130. 4. Rome took much occasion to plead its
supremacy, partly from these constitutions, partly from the practice of men
who still endeavored to have that Bishop on their side as a great help to
their party, and therefore fled to it for succor whether they maintained Truth
or Error; partly, from this, that their interposing had great weight with
others upon the former considerations, which they endeavored afterward to
impose upon other Churches as of due belonging to them, and therefore first
opposed that act whereby Constantinople was equal to them, and afterward
pleaded for appeal unto themselves from the Churches of the East and in Africa,
as appears by their letters to the Council of Antioch, and their propositions
made in the Council of Chalcedon, but more especially by their ambassages and
letters to the Council of Carthage, where these things are observable,

1. That one Apiarius, Bishop of Sica, justly censured by a former Council at
Carthage, did appeal to the Bishop of Rome. 2. Three Bishops of Rome, Zosimus,
Boniface, Caelestinus, one after another, did so far own that appeal, as to
admit the sentenced person to their communion, and to send Faustinus and others
their Ambassadors to the sixth Council of Carthage (where were conveened 217.
Bishops, among which was Augustine, and Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, who
presided, and is called Pope by Balsamon) desiring the former sentence to be
repealed. 3. They grounded their interposing in these matters upon the Council
of Nice; some pretended acts whereof, their Commissioner Faustinus produced,
wherein it was alleged to be decreed that a Bishop in any place might appeal to
the Bishop of Rome. 4. It is observable that these Fathers acknowledged no such
act, neither was there any such found amongst the canons of the Council at Nice
which any of them had seen, and therefore did suspect the design of the Roman
Bishop, as aiming to stretch his power too far; whereupon they directed
messengers to the Bishops of Antioch, Canstantinople and Alexandria, for
obtaining authentic and unsuspected copies of the canons of the said Council,
which afterward they received from Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, and Atticus
Bishop of Constantinople, without any such acts in them for Romes Authority, as
was alleged.

It is true, this supremacy was not pleaded from any divine institution (which
at that time they did pretend unto) but only upon Ecclesiastic constitution;
it is true also that whatever privileges Rome claimed by Constantin's
donation, or any canons of the Council of Nice and Sardica, are also attributed
unto Constantinople by the Councels of Constantinople and Chalcedon, whereby
its Authority and privileges are every way equal to Rome in things
Ecclesiastic, as it was equal to it in Civil things by the Emperors Laws; so
that appeals were as warrantable to Constantinople as to Rome (as Balsamon also
upon the former Councels alleges; and therefore shows the privileges of
Constantinople and its Bishop out of the gift of Constantine, as it is called,
to the Bishops of Rome.) 3. It is also clear, that there was no just ground,
even from Ecclesiastic constitutions, for that which was pretended, and that
these Fathers foresaid did neither credit the Bishop of Rome in asserting his
own Authority, nor yet cede to him in the least measure when they had evidenced
his allegiance to be false; but, on the contrary, maintained their own
Authority to be independent of him, and therefore do enact that from
thenceforth none of their number should appeal beyond Sea, (to wit, to Rome)
Can. 31. and that none should cite another of their number thither, Can. 126.
under pain of Excommunication; and did write back to Boniface, and after to
Caelestin ( Zosimus being dead ere the answer from Egypt returned)
expostulating with them for the marring them in the exercise of their due
Authority, and pleading that none, censured by them, should be heard by him, or
received into communion with him; and did also refuse to louse the sentence of
the foresaid Ap^arius (whereupon he afterward left his dependency on the Bishop
of Rome and submitted to his own Synod) I say, though these things be true, and
it might be thought that the supremacy of Rome had no great advantage from
them, yet from this we may see that Church Authority was abused by the pride of
Churchmen, even at that time; and that, upon the occasion of the former
heresy, grounds were laid, from which the Bishops of Rome drew encouragements
to prosecure their supremacy, and upon which they continued to build it up,
till it came to its height; for, still there were debates about it, especially
between them and the Bishop of Constantinople (who, in the Emperor Mauritius
his time, assumed first to himself the title of Universal Bishop and precedence
beyond Rome, because then the Emperor lived at Constantinople) until
Antichrist was discovered. By which we may see, how hurtful that contention
was to the Church, and how far it contributed in the event of it for the
advancing of Antichrist, which is the main plague intended in these trumpets,
and therefore not unsuitably taken-in under this second trumpet, as being
agreealbe with the scope, type, time, and other reasons alleged in the
application of the former trumpet,

Observe, 1. What an evil thing pride is, especially when it enters among
Churchmen: O how evil a thing is it! it is the inlet of all confusion, it
opens a door to it and every evil work, and has a special hand in
overturning of whatsoever is beautiful in a Church, James 3.14, 16. Therefore
it is no wonder Satan seek to destroy government and unity, when he would
destroy a Church; and no wonder Christ so much commend humility and unity to
his followers. 2. The more eminent folks be in place or power, they are the
^ooner kindled with the fire of pride; the higher men's places be, they are the
readier to grow proud; mountains sooner than valleys, men of gifts sooner than
others, they have fuel to this fire that others do want, and are more
obnoxious to blasts; partly, the things being excellent they have in their
hand; and partly, they being eminently and highly planted, pride has the more
matter to work upon, and Satan has the readier access, and occasion to blow
them up; it is a rare thing to be eminent and humble; to be great and in
prosperity, and yet to be lowly: prosperity and gifts are a snare to many; it
had been advantage to many they had never had them, considering how they have
been abused by their pride and other corruptions. 3. Pride is especially
incident to Churchmen: which might be cleared both in the Old and New
Testament. They are as cities set on an hill, Mat. 5. The Church is a mountain
that is eminent, and Church Governors are eminent above others; and therefore
liable to maniest tentations, being about the most eminent things, the devil
sets on them most, knowing what advantage he has, when he has gained
ground among them, and Christ had to do even with His Disciples in this, Matthew.
18. verse. 20.4. It is a great plague and judgment, and brings great hurt to
the Church: when this fire of pride and, contention enters and kindles among
the Officers of the Church, it spreads, marret^, and corrupts all; it is
the rise of much ill, and abusing of the power that God has given: Diotrephes,
loving the preeminencie, put all in confusion; it began soon in John's days, 3
Epist. Ioh. and it is opposed to receiving of the Gospel, and accounting of the
Apostles. This is no matter of laughing to you, however ye look upon it as if
ye were not concerned; no, it is your plague, as if a fiery mountain were
tumbled-over on you. This should make us all respect unity and peace in the
Church, and watch against pride and contention that marreth it. 5. There are
four ills in this text that follow on pride and contention among Churchmen, 1.
It weakeneth and brings down Church Authority; when this mountain takes
fire, it falls. 2. It spreads, infecteth, and kindles others, it goes
among the people, I am of Paul, and I Am of Apollos, and they become carnal
and factious, 1 Cor. 1.12. and 3.1, 2. and the life of Religion is eaten out
amongst them, seeing from the Priests profaneness spreads through the whole
land, Ier. 23. and so do pride and contention; kindle the Officers, and the
whole Church will be in a fire. If we looked on it rightly, we would think the
rise of contention a terrible plague, and people would beware of adding fuel
to this fire, and labor by all means to quench it; because it is hard to know
where it may end. 3. It corrupts all, first, the Doctrine; secondly, the
Practice; thirdly, Discipline and Order, and then comes confusion and every
evil work. 4. Many are stumbled and Spiritually slain when these waters become
blood; so that corrupting of Government and Governors is no small judgment,
whereby we may know why Satan aims so much at this, and why we ought to be
the more watchful against it.

6. This plague, or stroke, on the Church, does often accompany a spirit of
error and defection, partly succeeding it, partly going before it, either
causally inferred, or at least occasioned, or in Gods righteous judgment
trysted with it, that the trial may have the greater extent and efficacy to
discover many Hypocrites and rotten Professors. Tremble to think on it, and
adore Gods holy Justice in the measure it is met out to us in our time; when
the outward mean of Discipline and Government is so weakened, there had need to
be the more watchfulness and dependencie on God to be helped and sustained by
Him, when outward means are not so frequent nor in such vigor as they wont to
be.

LECTURE IIII.
Verse. 10. And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great Star from heaven
burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and
upon the fountains of waters:

11. And the name of the Star is called Wormwood, and the third part of the
waters became wormwood, and many men died of the waters, because they were made
bitter.


THe Church being before defaced by gross Heretics and Errors, and kindled
within by pride and contention: for, the Government amongst its Governors, is
now set upon by an other mean, the rivers and fountains that were a little
clear before, and these streams whereby the waters of life were conveied, are
made biter, and, in stead of life, they convey death by being now corrupted.

In this trumpet we are to consider these three, 1. The judgment or ill that
followed the Angels sounding. 2. The cause, I mean the isntrumental cause, or
rise of it, whence it flowed. 3. The effects of it.

1. The judgment or ill, is, The corrupting of a third part of the waters,
fountains and rivers. By fountains and rivers (which are the object) are
understood the Doctrines of the Gospel, or the Covenant of Grace and Christ's
Offices, and the way of conveying and communicating the same to sinners by the
Ordinances of the visible Church, called the wells of salvation, Isa. 12.3. and
called springs, or well-springs, which God has placed in His Church, and which
are no where else, Psalm. 87. ult. because th^^^, and by it, the righteousness
of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17. And in E^eki^ls vision these
waters are said to stream and flow from under the altar, and out of the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.1, etc. and may well be compared to fountains, as the
Church is called ( Cant. 4.) A spring shut up, a fountain sealed, and a
fountain of Gardens, because of these waters springing in it, and because of
the nature of them, which is clear, single, sweet and refreshing, as useful
and necessary to spiritual life, as waters are to the bodily; and as having
that use in the religious world, (which this is) which waters have in the
natural; and also in respect of the manner of dispensing Grace in the Gospel
so largely and so freely, wherefore it is compared to an open fountain to all
Nations, Zech. 13.1. and so, frequently folks are invited to drink freely, Isa.
55.1. and Rovel. 22.17. and to wash. By rivers, we understand the preaching and
dispensing of this Gospel, whereby it is holden forth, and (as it were) flows
to others: which two, are often put together, when the spreading of the Gospel
is prophesied of, I will open rivers in the wilderness and fountains in the
deser^, Isa. 41.17.18. probably referring to the spreading of the Gospel
amongst the Gentiles: so, corrupting of this word, is compared to mixing of
liquor with something that is not of its kind, nor so good, as Vintners do
adulterat wine, 2 Cor. 2.17. opposite to the single and pure preaching of Christ
which Paul used.

2. The isntrumental cause of this which makes the waters bitter, is set out
three ways, 1. It is more generally called a Star, and a great Star, burning
like a lamp. 2. It is shown from whence this Star fell. 3. And more
particularly, the name of the Star is called Wormwood.

By Stars (as we heard, Chap. 1. verse. 20.) are understood Ministers in the
visible Church, who, by receiving light from Christ, should hold it forth to
others: a great Star burning like a Lamp, is, one eminent for parts, gifts,
place, or in estimation for holiness, making a great show, yet not having much
reality, but (as it were) a glancing counterfeit light, no^ proceeding from a
right principle, as that of the Stars does from the Sun, but kindled from some
external thing as that of a Lamp is, nor so solid as the former, though
having more glorious and pompous appearance. 2. This Star fell from Heaven,
that is, made defection from the visible Church and the straight and pure
preaching of the Gospel, and corrupted these fountains and waters; Error
brings folks low, even from Heaven to Earth, as prof^nity does; when this
wildfire of self-seeking is by pride kindled, and by parts and gifts without
grace entertained, it soon brings down the greatest Star that takes not its
light from Christ. The word is, it was falling, not altogether fallen, as is
spoken, Chap. 9.1. to signify a begun decay, or fall, which afterward John
discerned more clearly when it was fallen and come to its height, or rather
lowness of a full decay: by it is showed, that this plague is promoved by such
as by their parts or former estimation have been eminent in the Church.

3. The name of the Star, is, Wormwood, given him from the effect which it
produces, it having influence to corrupt the sweetest things and to make them
partake of its nature. Deuteronomy. 29.18. It is spoken of a man that has a root that
bears gall or wormwood, one that walked not straightly by Gods rule: and Act.
8.23. Simon Magus lo said to be in the gall of bitterness for his corrupt
thoughts of the grace of God; and it may well get this name, which has so much
influence upon fountains and rivers, that it may make them bitter like
wormwood, that is, alters their swer^ nature, bringing-in free will, the
de^ection of the Saints, the inefficacy of Grace, the Doctrine of merit and
predestination upon foreseen works, or Faith, etc. whereby the nature of the
Gospel is quite overturned, and that Doctrine which was healthful to be
drunken in, is now like the Prophets pottage, having death in the pot, that
none who would be unpoisoned dare drink of it, more than the Egyptians might
drink of their rivers when they were turned into blood.

It is said to fall on a third part of the waters; either, 1. Because it was
not a full defection from all truth, some were by Gods goodness kept clear.
Or, 2. That this gross error, or this heresy, though it spread far, yet it
did not infect all men; some prime men and Churches were kept free of it. Or,
3. De^ection in these truth^ was ^ot then at its height, but growing. The
effect is, many men died, etc. which is to be understood of spiritual and
eternal death, following on the former corruptions, by which many were
destroyed, like that which is mentioned in the former trumpet.

To come to the application of this, We, 1. take it for granted, that some
Church-defection is signified by this, rather than the overtturning of the
civil state of the Roman Empire; for, the falling of the Roman State is not
actively the cause of its own bitterness, that State being passive in its
being overturned; and the bitterness flows not from it as an agent, yet it
is clear here, that this falling Star is the active agent, or instrument of
imbittering these waters, as the hail and the burning mountain was in the two
trumpets before: also the title Star, and the effects (as they are used in this
prophecy) will agree best to Churchmen and affairs, beside the scope whereof
we have spoken.

2. This judgment differs from the former two, 1. In its object; more
immediately it strikes at the way of the Gospels manifesting grace. 2. In its
rise; it is from some eminent preacher carrying it on with more rational
eloquence, seeming reason, and pretext of holiness, or, by more preachers
together. 3. In the manner of it: not by blood, no^ mixing in persecution, as
the former two had waiting on them, but by making the waters bitter, turning
them into wormwood, which was by the infecting of them with the error it self.
4. That it falls not on the earth, as Chap. 9.1. because yet it was but
working, and that Star not fully discovered as yet by this fall: and so here
its a great Star; but ( Chap. 9.1.) a Star, only because he lost much of his
splendour by the first fall, though we think it is the same fall begun here, and
perfected there.

3. We take it for granted also, that this trumpet in its rise belongs to
that time that succeeded the former contentions in the Church, when the Bishops
and Clergy of Rome especially, were kindling both the Churches of the East,
and in Africa, for their supremacy. This will be in the fifth Century a little
after the 400. year: we^ may apply it generally to the state of the Church
during that fifth Century, or, particularly to ^ome Heretics in it: generally,
Doctrine then was corrupted, not only by Pelagius, Anno 413. N^storius, 429.
Eutyches, about 448. and other gross Heretics, and these errors exceedingly
fomented by the powers of the world, especially that of the Eutychea^s; by
Anastasius the Emperor, and a second Council at Ephesus, called pradatoriu^,
because of its ^nfamous proceeding against Flavianus and in favors of
E^tychet, by Dioscorus means Bishop of Alexandria; for which it was protested
against as no Synod by Anatolius, and Severus, Bishop of A^tioch. But, which is
more, though there were many eminent men who stood against these Errors, yet a
great decay of true Doctrine crept in amongst good men, that never did wear out
again, but grew still more in the Church, to wit, about satisfaction, penance,
fre^-will, merit of works, possibility of fulfilling the Law, holy days, etc.
This application, in this last respect, we suppose safest, as fore showing the
Church, or Churchmen generally to fall from true light, and to be kindled with
zeal for superstitions; and though it did not in this age uniersally corrupt
the Church in that height that followed, but a third part, i.e. many were
kept free; yet, way was made to it, and the Churches declining, and fall was
begun, which stayed not till afterward it came to its height. This agrees to
the story, considering the Doctrine of the Church at that time; and to the
scope, which shows the Churches decay by degrees, and Antichrists graduall
rise, his Doctrine (though not his Supremacy) got much footing in this age; and
also with the type here. 1. of a Star falling, which we will find was fallen,
Chap. 9.1. 2. It corrupts fountains and streams, insensibly, not striking so
directly at the foundation as the former particular heresies did, but keeping
the Doctrine of the Trinity and Person of Christ pure, as Gregorius Roma. did,
but miscarrying in the nature of His Offices, and His executing of them: it
corrupts mainly by adding unto, and mixing somewhat with truth, yet such
addition as alters the nature of them; such are the Popish additions of
merits, pennances, indulgences, mediators, and intercessions of Saints, and
Angels, etc. whereby that which was, is not removed, but by this addition
corrupted. 3. It comes from Stars in Heaven, and rises more from within than
the former: thus being applied, it relates to no particular heresy, but to
the general decay of the Church. If it be necessary to be applied to one, I
incline to apply it to Pelagius and his heresy more than any other, for these
reasons. It agrees, 1. in the time; he began under Arcadius and Honorius,
about the year 415. or according to some, 405. 2. He was of great parts, and
was once thought a good zealous man, and was advanced to Ecclesiastical
orders. 3. The nature of that heresy was not against Christ's Person, but His
Offices, teaching corruptly of Nature, Sin, Grace, Faith, Justification,
Election, etc. subtly undermyning grace. 4. It spread exceedingly through
Italy, Britain, France, Africa and the eastern Empire, etc. yet, some were
kept free of it, and great Lights set themselves against it, as Augustine,
Hieronymus, Prosper, Optatus, etc. 5. It entered and continued in a great
measure in the Church of Rome; and the dregs of it sticks to the Popish
Writters in their free will, perfection of righteousness, etc. to this day:
for, though the natures and person of our Lord be kept free by them; yet
their Doctrine e^ervateth His Offices, and makes them bitter to all that would
drink thereof, which are the special springs of Grace in the Gospel; they put
in other satisfactions, other mediators, others with Authority, to add and
diminish from what He has commanded, other Officers to teach, and other matter
to be taught, than He has instituted, as traditions, etc. which being the rise
of much Antichristian Doctrine still retained by them, it agrees best with the
scope to be thus applied. Hence,

1. See here the nature and usefulness of pure Doctrine, and what men ought to
think of it, and how to use it; to drink it in as fountain water, and to wash
and make clean a^ it, it is as profitable to souls, and they cannot live
without it; and when they want it, they want that which both purges and makes
them grow. Observe, 2. the ill of error; it corrupts the Truths of the
Gospel, and makes the sweetest and best things bitter, it removes them not
professedly, but poisoneth them so, that it is better to forebear, than drink
in such waters. 3. See what the nature and native office and place of Ministers
is, and what advantage they are, while they keep their station; They are like
Stars and great Stars, exceedingly useful and profitable in their place. And,
upon the other hand, what a sore judgment and plague is it, when Ministers
fall from receiving light from Christ, and are infected, they are most
hurtful. 4. The more parts and the better men's life be that are infected, they
are the bitterer, and do the more wrong: as the corruption of the best things
is worst, so is the corruption of eminent men, 2 Cor. 2, ult. 5. Error venteth
not still after one way; now it corrupts more subtly than it did in the
former ^rumpets; there is no blood nor fire here, though it be as dangerous:
often, contentio^s for dominion in Government have more fire and he^t tha^
dispures about more fundament^l truths. 6. There may be much glancing, false,
and counterfeit light, both among Ministers and Professors, where there is
little solidity: it is not all gold that glisters in them; It is good light
that comes from a right principle within; It is good when a man's works shine,
as his gifts shine. This would teach us not to admire gifts; many make a fair
show in the flesh, and if their light and parts were well tried by the effects,
they might be called wormwood that imbittereth the waters; torches that do
glance, but not Stars. Ob^. 7. That men of great gifts, fair professions and
blamlesse lives, may fall very foully, while they are not solid and sincere,
they may fall as it were from heaven, so may particular Churches: there is no
state, nor degree of any state exempted when error breaks in. Therefore the
more gifts and parts men have, they have the more need to be humble and to fear
and tremble, considering many experiences both of former ages and of this,
which should make us take heed lest we fall, and infect or be infected: such
were once Pelagius, yea, Soci^^^, Swenk^eldius, and Arminius, thought to be. 8.
Error when it infecteth Ministers, or Professors, brings death with it, as
well as profanity; when this Star falls from heaven, and poisoneth the
waters, many die: he that teaches men to break the least command, shall be
least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5. O that men in this time thought on
this, that error brings to hell, as well as Adultery, that it is like
rebellion and witchcraft; It is like the grossest evil, and worse; it inciteth,
teaches and encourages to break the Commands of God, and there is much
cruelty done to souls in tolerating of these. 9. The Church sustaineth no
greater prejudice often, in corrupting of her Doctrine, than by the falls and
slips of eminent men: these spots are hardly removed, because they sink deeper.
10. Every corruption and plague has its degrees and steps. 11. It is a sign
of a decaying Church, when eminent men fall, and it is a great judgment to
others.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 12. And the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun was
smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars, so as
the third part of them was darkened: and the d^y shone not for a third part of
it, and the night likewise.

13. And I beheld, and heard an Angel flying through the midst of heaven,
saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth, by reason
of the other voices of the trumpet of the three Angels which are yet to sound.


THe fourth Angel with his trumpet, brings the last of the four lesser woes
(it is greater than the former, yet lesser than these that immediately ensue)
which clearly does relate to that age immediately going before Antichrists
discovery, and so falls betw^xt this time andthe sixth Century. This is set
down, verse. 12. And the 13. verse. is a preface and introduction to the three
great woes, which the last three Angels bring.

There are but two things mentioned in this fourth trumpet. 1. The judgment or
type, it is a smiting of the third part of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. 2. The
effect of this judgment, is, a following darkness suitable to it, and the day
shone not for a third part of it, an^ the night likewise: because the Sun that
gives light by day, and the Moon and Stars that give light by night, they were
all darkened and ^mitten. There is no word of any particular cause, or mean,
where by the Sun was smitten, as under the former trumpets wasmentioned. By
Sun, Moon, and Stars, we understand, and comprehend under them, light of all
sorts, such as is the purity of Doctrine in the Word, compared to light, Psalm.
119.105. And, 2 Pet. 1.19. the word of prophecy is called a light that shines
in a dark place: and so it may be, seeing Christ who is the Sun of
Righteousness shines therein, Mal. 4. And by the spreading of the Gospel, is
said to arise, for the direction and comfort of His people, (See also, Matthew.
4.16.) Or also, the light of order, comeliness, and a good conversation in the
power of Godliness, as Phil. 2.15. and Matthew. 5.17. So the Church ( Cant. 6.)
is called fair, as the Moon, and the Ministers compared to Stars, and the
general beauty of the Church is prophesied of in these terms, Isa. 30.26. The
light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as
the light of seven days: and consequently, the diminishing and contracting of
these lights, must be the declining and decaying of light in the Church, both
in respect of purity of Doctrine, when it is da^kened, and simplicity of
Worship and Power in practice; these by humane traditions and ceremonies and
superstitions, are quite dimned, ecclipsed and darkened. A third part is but
smitten and darkened, and shines not, which is in comparison of the total
eclipse following under the fifth trumpet, when the Sun is wholly darkened,
Chap. 9 verse. 1. This is higher and of larger extent than the former, yet less
than these that follow in degree, but little odds in kind from the fifth. It
differs from the former as being of larger extent, affecting the Sun and
light in a greater degree; also, in respect there is no particular instrument
named; the reason is, because it relates to no particular heresy, or
defection, different from the former, or that which follows, nor to no
particular Heretic, but is a further and higher degree and step of that same
declining, ^lowing not from without, but from within, insensibly growing by a
general declining, till it come to the top in the following trumpets.

The reasons why we apply it to the sixth Century, are from considering of the
story, where it is clear, that in that age light was exceedingly (though not
fully) darkened: and many things remarkable suit this type, As, 1. that there
was no particular heresy, nor prime heretic in all that Century, though
former heresies (as that of Arius, Eutyches, etc.) spread more, yet there was
no particular heretic that arose to be isntrumental in this darkening, as in
the forme^ there was, to wit, Pelagius, Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople and
Eutyches. See Cent. 6. Preface, and Cap. 1. 2. That though there was no
heretic, yet there was a great and general decay of simple purity, both in
Doctrine, Worship,

Government and practice (as in that Century may be seen, and in (...)
Gregorius, (...) his life by Platina) monasteries, superstitious days,
doctrine of works, and traditions increased, etc. See Cent. 6. cap. 1. and 7.
where the building of Abbacies, deserting of Marriages, even by Kings and
Queens for devotion, is mentioned. 3. That light and knowledge was very low now
in the Church; few able men are marked to have lived in this Century: which
certainly shows great decay of light, they being lights to the world: There
are but two eminently marked, Fulgentius and Gregorius Magnus, who though in
some things against the Arians and Eutycheans* etc. they do well; yet in many
things their infirmity and declining from purity, especially of the last,
appears, and yet never was there in Rome be far such a Bishop after him in
any respect; he is called the worst of these, who went before him, and the best
of these who followed. 4. That old heresies by that occasion did thrive well,
the Eutycheans especially. 5. Anastasius the Emperor he countenanced this
heresy, and though before his coronation he subscribed to the Nicean and
Chalcedon faith, whereby this heresy was condemned; yet after he retracted,
and became a great persecuter, banishing and cutting off many able honest
Ministers, especially Euph^mius who crowned him (because he refused to give
back his subscription, and would not admit him to Communicate, as infected with
heresy) and also Macedonius his successor and sundry others, for not
admitting the (...) he had appointed; some acriter impugnantes, alii
imprudentius defendentes Concilium Nicaenum, says the story. He would not have
had that Council mentioned, because it condemned his tenent. 6. This age is
remarkable from the pride and practice of John Bishop of Constantinople, who,
by the consent (as it seems) of Mauritius the Emperor, and the Bishops of
the East, took on him the name of Universal Bishop and Patriarch: and what fol^
lowed upon that, may be seen at large in the writings of Gregorius Bishop of
Rome, Where these things are clear, 1. That there was a decay of zeal and
humility amongst Bishops, by their bussying themselves in things of the world.
2. That the title of Universal Bishop, was accounted a sure mark of Antichrist,
derogating from all other Bishops, as if one only were a Bishop, and a style
that no Apostle, even Peter did ever assume. 3. He concluded, that Antichrist
was near, seeing a Priest so exalted himself, and (which is hard to be said) he
should have an Army of Priests ready to advance him: for (says he) what is
Antichrists exalting himself above all that is called god in this world, and
sitting in his Temple as God, but a Priest lifting up himself above all his
fellow-priests, which is to take Christ's Chair? as by considering these places
is manifest, 4 Epist. 32, 34, 36, 38. ad Iohanne^^ Constant. where these words
are, Rex superbia prope est, and quod dici nefas est, Sacerdotum praeparatus
est exercitus, quia cervici militant superbia, etc. And again, lib. 7. Epist
30. ad Mauritium Aug. Ego autem fidenter dico, quia quisque se universale^
Episcopum aut Sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat in elatione sua,
Antichristum praecurrit, qui superbiendo se caeteris praeponit. And (as he
said, Epist. 34. lib. 4. ad Constantiam Augustam) he imitateth the devil in
seeking to be above his Colleagues. These things belonging to the same time that
the series of the prophecy falls into, and agreeing so well to the type in
the Text, and to the succeeding trumpet, It seems clearly applicable to it,
especially considering that these debates made way exceedingly for the Bishop
of Rome, and his stepping up where the Bishop of Constantinople would have
been, and endeavored to be.

In the 13. verse. before the fifth Angel sound, there is a little interruption
made to John, to prepare him for it, An Angel flying through the midst of
heaven, that is, so as he might be best heard, having a sad proclamation Woe,
woe, woe, repeated thrice according to the number of the Angels that were yet to
sound, that every one of them were to bring an harder and greater woe to the men
of the earth, than any thing that had befallen them under the former four: and
whether we take these woes, as denouncing judgment, or as lamenting over the
earth for what was coming, as if he did say, Alace, alace, alace, it turns to
one thing, there were great woes coming. It is clear here, 1. That
interruptions for John's clearing, are not inconsistent with this prophecy. 2.
That there is an order of time in the woes of the trumpets; these three have
order, and follow the former four. 3. That the next trumpet is not the
Saracens; neither do the former look m^inly to the Goths, etc. because it will
appear in story, that the Empire suffered more from the Goths, and these other
barbarous Nations, than it did from the Saracens, as they are distinguished
from the Turks: so in that way of interpretation, there is not that remarkable
and palpable gradation to be found, which is employed amongst these woes. Some
apply this to Gregorius, because of his prediction foresaid, and the words
agree well to his time: but this Angel foretells three woes, and he did but
foretell one at most. It is like therefore that no person is signified by this
Angel in particular; but, the Lord by it gives John, and by him, others,
warning, that there were sadder things coming after the first four had come.
Hence,

Observe, 1. The nature of Truth and Error; the one is like light, the other
like darkness; the one comfortable and profitable, the other comfortless and
hurtful. Obs. 2. The nature of declining among Ministers and Professors in a
Church is such, that, when once begun, it grows. Obs. 3. The nature of
judgments, when once inflicted they ordinarily pursue a person or people, and
the greatest come last: when people abuse the light, it draws on the
darkening of it by degrees, and it rests not till it come to a height.
Unthankfulness for the Gospel, and not receiving the Truth in love, provoke
God to give up to strong delusion, to believe lies, 2 These. 2.11, 12. Obs. 4.
Gods way of dealing with His people, in giving warning before the judgment
come, that these three great plagues come not on them unawares; He warns,
that folks may repent, and His own may be armed ere judgment come. 5. The
Angel pronounces a woe thrice, Observe, That spiritual judgments or offenses,
have many woes in them; and warnings against them would be doubled, and
tripled, and cried with a loud voice: for, when once such judgments sease upon
people, they get not easily out from under them, and are not easily affected
with them, Therefore is the woe proclaimed thrice and so loud.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. ANd the fifth Angel sounded, and I saw a Star fall from heaven unto
the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless-pit.

2. And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit,
as the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the Air were darkened, by
reason of the smoke of the pit.

3. And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth, and unto them was
given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power:

4. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the
earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree, but only those men which have
not the seal of God in their foreheads.

5. And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they
should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the torment of a
scorpion, when he strikes a man.

6. And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall
desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

7. And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses, prepared unto battle,
and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as
the faces of men.

8. And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth
of lions.

9. And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron, and the sound
of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle.

10. And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their
tails, and their power was to hurt men five months.

11. And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit,
whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue has his
name Apollyon.


THe fifth Angel sounds here, where the first of the greatest woes is brought
in; of what dreadful nature it is, the woes that are prefaced to the sounding
of it may declare. It will concern the opening of all, to consider of what woe
this judgment speaks particularly, and to what it relates. It is more
largely described than any of the former, because the tentation of it was most
dangerous, and the effects thereof of more concernment to the Church.

1. The object of this judgment, is, the same Church, or Christian world,
whereupon the effects of the former trumpets did fall: for, these last three do
signify greater degrees of wrath upon these who had despised and abused the
former lesser woes.

2. The Christian world is obscured by the trumpets, and the Antichristian
brought in its place, as was said at the entry to the trumpets: for, the
Antichristian world is in being after the sixth trumpet, when the vials begin;
it must therefore have attained that being under the trumpets, and especially
under the immediate foregoing trumpets; seeing the seventh fi^deth it at its
height: and so consequently, the Christian world ( i.e. the pure Church) must
be decaying under these trumpets, where the Antichristian comes to its being
(seeing two of these worlds cannot consist together) yea, the Church must be
lowest, and decline most under these trumpets, wherein Antichrist grows most,
and comes to the greatest height, as under these first two great woes it must
be. Whence we may gather, 1. That the Church is here the object of this plague.
2. That Antichrist must grow under these trumpets, and particularly under this,
it being a further step of the same kind of plague, and the sixth finding
Idolatry under Antichrist at a height, which it plagueth, it must then grow
here. 3. This first great (...), brings spiritual plagues and tyranny upon
this world, by this King and his Armies, who advance that Idolatry. The sixth
brings temporal judgments on the same persons, for whoring from God, and
receiving this idolatrous worship.

For further clearing of this, we say, 1. It is not any temporal judgment by
Armies (such as the sixth trumpet holds forth, to wit, one of a mixed nature)
such as came by the Saracens; for, that would not be so far greater than the
former woes of that kind, as is said. 2. These locusts are but called as
horses, or, like horses, verse. 7. not horses themselves, (...) is expre^ly said
of these under the sixth trumpet, thereby giving us to know that there is
something of their nature signified, rather than what is literally expressed.
3. Their power is not to kill, as in the sixth trumpet, but to hurt men and
torment them spiritually, and not to kill them bodily, as verse. 3. 4. These are
secluded and exempted from this plague, that were sealed and marked, to wit,
the Elect, Gods servants; but these were not excluded from temporal plagues,
(as appears, Chap. 11.) nor from that of the Saracens: often they share most
under these, and these marked ones are all such as were written in the Lambs
Book, Chap. 13.8. who yet did partake deeply of outward afflictions. 5. These
troubles ( Chap. 11.) belong expressly to this trumpet, though continuing under
^he sixth, and contemporary with it; yet they belong not to it, but to this:
for, these troubles are upon the Saints by way of persecution: the sixth has
judgment on ungodly professors by way of justice. 6. All the circumstances
will clear this further, as the mean by whom, a Star, his opening the
bottomless pit, the darkening of the Sun, etc. as after will appear: for these
locusts do darken light, and obscure truth; which shows it is a spiritual
evil on Religious things, springing up from within the Church, which also
answers the scope of these trumpets best, as is said.

2. We say further, the rising and discovering of Antichrist and the fall of
the Roman Bishops, from Heaven to Earth (though not at first at their height is
the very thing foretold here, and must be so, 1. Because it is clear, that the
beasts (mentioned Chap. 13.) are to be understood of him, and speak of the rise
of Antichrist particularly, as may then be made out; but this agrees to that,
and is the very same War, and event, though in different expressions: For, 1.
The very same persons are overcome by both, to wit, these that are not sealed.
2. The same persons are exempted from both, to wit, these sealed ones, Chap.
9.4. Chap. 13.8. and 14.1, etc. 3. The same mark keeps both free, the same
seal of God. And, 4. The number is the same, comparing Chap. 7. in that number
and Chap. 14.2. 2. That the 11. Chapter and these troubles do belong to the
Antichrist, it is clear, verse. 7. the witnesses are to be killed by the beast,
and what beast but that, Chap. 13. (which ascends out of the bottomless pit,
as the locusts do here) and that, Chap. 11. belongs to this trumpet,
appears from verse. 14. where it is said, the second woe is past, and the
third* woe comes quickly. Then all preceding that, belongs to the first* or
the second woe; But not to the second; as has been said, Therefore to the
first, which indeed in this event is contemporary with the second, to wit, the
sixth trumpet. It may be also further cleared from the circumstances,
considering the time, rise and progress, and by comparing it with the fifth
vial, which is poured out ( Chap. 16.) on the beasts seat: and this order is
observed in all, what is builded of Antichrists Kingdom by the trumpets, is
overturned by the vials, and in that same order. It would then appear, that
seeing the fifth vial overturneth his throne, that it was settled by the fifth
trumpet.

A third reason, is, if that storm against which the one hundred forty and
four thousand ( Chap. 7.) are sealed, be the spiritual defection of the Church
under Antichrist. Then that which is holden forth by this trumpet is so also;
for, both relate to the same storm; but that ( Chap. 7.) is to be understood of
Antichrists reign, as the greatest evil the Church was to meet with, after
Heathenish persecution, Therefore this must be so also. What was said upon
Chap. 7. for clearing the scope of that place, will confirm both these
propositions.

4. This spiritual Kingdom, described here, must either be applied to the
Kingdom of Antichrist and that Hierarchy, or it must be applicable to some
other; (seeing it is some spiritual plague arising within the Church) But there
can be no other thought of, to whom this description can agree, and in whom
this spiritual woe, (exceedingly beyond any mentioned by the former trumpets)
can be fulfilled, but the Kingdom of Antichrist; Therefore that must be
understood here.

Again, it being clear, that it is one and the same world or Church which is
ove^rturned by the first six trumpets, and it being clear, that the sixth
trumpet following finds Idolatry in the visible Church, (which is the world
plagued by it) It must therefore follow, that this defection to Idolatry (which
is a character of the Antichrists defection) must have increased under this
fifth trumpet immediately preceding, seeing it was not during the former four.

Lastly, It may be confirmed further by comparing this Chapter with 2 Thessalonians. 2.
by which we will find, that this plague mentioned here, is the same spiritual
Antichristian delusion prophesied of there: for in every material thing they
agree. As, 1. the instrument, there is one sitting in the Temple of God, as
having place in the Church of Christ; here is a Star falling from Heaven,
intimating the same thing. 2. There, he is called (...), as opposite to Christ,
and (...), or the son of perdition; here he is called (...), or the destroyer,
as opposed to Christ, who is called a Savior; as also ( Chap. 17. of this
prophecy) he is said to go (...), or to destruction, himself; for, Antichrist,
as Chrysostom observes in that a These. is called the son of perdition,
because he shall occasion the destruction of many, and shall himself be
destroyed. 3. They agree in respect of these whom they plague: 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
it is also these that shall be damned, whom that delusion carries away; here (
verse. 4.) it is only these who are not marked, that is to say ( Chap. 13.8.)
who are not written in the Lambs Book of life; and so also it seaseth only
finally upon the Reprobate. 4. There, they are given up to strong delusion to
believe lies; here, they are carried away with fornications, idolatries and
other errors, and are so hardened therein, that although they be plagued for
these by the sixth trumpet, yet they repent not. 5. That delusion (2 Thessalonians. 2.)
has its rise from the devil, verse. 9. and is carried on with mighty signs and
wonders; here, it comes from the bottomless pit, and is carried on by the
devils special minister, who therefore is said to have the key thereof, and is
not without mighty signs and lying wonders, as is clear from Chap. 13.
following, where the same Kingdom is under another consideration described.
From all which considerations we may gather,

1. That each of these trumpets does not contain the story of an equal time, or
number of years; for, the matter contained in any of the last three trumpets,
will be found to be of longer continuance than all the first four, which (added
to the greatness of the matter contained in them) may be the reason why they
are differenced from the former four, as the greater woes.

2. It appears also, that by the fifth and sixth trumpets we are to
understand different evils and enemies; and so they cannot both be applicable
either to Antichrist only, or Mahumetans only.

3. We may gather also, that this Kingdom and Army, with the furniture
wherewith they are provided, and the effects which follow upon their tyranny,
are not properly to be understood of external battles and bodily evils, but
figuratively, as representing some great spiritual hurt on the Church and her
Ordinances. These expressions, they are like horses, and had breast-plates, as
it were breast-plates, etc. whereby they are expressly differenced from the
trumpet following, wherein expressions that are properly to be understood, are
used, and do intimate this.

4. Supposing (which afterward from Chap. 11.13. and 17. will be more clear)
that the Roman Hierarchy, complexly taken, is the Kingdom of Antichrist; and
that the deluding of the world by them, is the very delusion prophesied of, 2 Thessalonians. 2. It will necessarily follow, that this Romish Antichristian Kingdom
(whereby the visible Church has been long brought in bondage) is the very same
set forth by this trumpet.

To come more particularly to the description of this Kingdom (for, a Kingdom
it is) as it is set down in the words, in its rise and growth, we will find it
many ways insisted upon, 1. A Star falls from heaven, and becomes earthly;
upon that again follows corruption of Doctrine, whereupon does arise a rabble
of superstitious Churchmen, whose work is to propagate and support the
dominion of their King, as his care is to strengthen and increase them, there
being such mutual concernment in the standing or falling of each to other.

Verse. 1. The first particular described, is, the fountain and great instrument
of all this spiritual plague, that is, I saw a Star fall from heaven unto the
earth. That by Star is meaned some person, the words after do clear: To him,
that is, to the Star was given, etc. That it must be some Church Officer, is
also clear from Chap. 1.20. from our Lord Jesus His own exposition: and
considering what power this Star has in the world, it must hold forth some
eminent Church Officer. By Heaven, is understood here (as frequently in this
Book) the visible Church, which is the Heaven wherein Christ has placed
Apostles, Pastors and Teachers as Stars to give light, because the Church is
furnished with heavenly privileges, heavenly light of Doctrine, and ought to
be of heavenly conversation in respect of the rest of the world. By Earth is
understood earthlinesse, or the rest of the world, as contradistinguished from
the Church, which the opposition clears; and thus, Earth signifies worldly
designs, worldly grandour, corrupt doctrine, liker to that of Heathens than
that of Christ, carnalnesse in conversation, and such like: for, this Earth is
something contradistinguished from, and opposed to, the Heaven formerly
mentioned. To fall here from heaven unto earth, signifies a declining from the
one to the other. And so in sum, the meaning of this part of the Verse will be,
I foresaw the defection of some eminent Church Officer (who once had place in
the visible Church) from Christian simplicity, purity and holiness in Doctrine
and Conversation, to a Religion and way of living by superstitions, Idolatries
and external pomp, becoming rather the men of the world, and liker their way
than a Minister of Christ.

By this phrase also ( I saw a Star fall, etc.) is implied, 1. Not only a
declining and defection, but such a declining as makes him that was before a
Star in Heaven, to cease from being considered in that relation, and afterward
to be accounted as but eminent amongst the men of the world, because of their
worldly earthly-like Religion and Worship. Upon which ground, the followers of
this Antichristian Kingdom, are called Gentiles, Chap. 11.2. 2. This phrase
imports a visible and palpable step of this defection: the Star is not now
falling, as was in the former Chapter; but it is fallen. And I saw it fallen,
says John, implying an observablnesse in it. 3. It imports, that after the
fall of this Star, and defection of this eminent Church Officer, he continued
still in the account of a Star among the men of the world: he is called a Star,
even after his fall, though indeed, and in John's account he be but a fallen
Star and earthly, as having indeed forfeited his former Church-relation.

The second thing described, is, the power given unto this fallen Star, And to
him Was given the keys of the bottomless pit. Keys signify in Scripture,
Authority and Power. By the bottomless pit, is meaned Hell, as is
unquestionable, Chap. 1.18. Christ is said to have the keys of Hell and Death,
that does signify His supreme Authority: Chap. 13.2, 4. the devil is said to
have power, and to give it to the beast; because, in Gods secret Wisdom and
Justice, the execution of His judgments in part is committed to the devil, and
he is employed as supreme head of the wicked therein, and for that cause is
said to have a throne, and is permitted to rule over the children of
disobedience: here, this Star partaketh of this Authority, not as Christ has
it (for now, being fallen from Heaven, he has lost relation to Him) nor in
that same degree as the Devil does; but as deputy and leiv-tennant to Him, who
in Gods secret Justice furnishes him with this power, as from Chap. 13. 2, 4.
is clear. In a word, while he was in Heaven he exerced Christ's Authority, and
in that respect had the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Now, being fallen, he
continues to exercise Authority, and to retain a key, but of a quite contrary
nature, to wit, of the bottomless pit, and to serve another master, to wit,
the devil, as the exercise of his Authority tending now to the advancement of
ignorance, darkness, superstition, and Idolatry in the Church, and being
assisted with the power of Hell for that end: for, as Christ's Ministers are
said to have keys from Him, and when they warrantably exerce them, it is the
opening of Heaven; So promovers of heresy, being Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor.
11. (though they think it not) of whom Antichrist is the chief, he has the key
of the pit, that is, an Authority not allowed by Christ, nor from above: and
the opening of the pit with the key, is the putting of that assumed power in
execution; such is spreading of corrupt Doctrine, called therefore doctrines of
devils, 1 Timothy 4.1. and authorizing men to propagate these without Christ's
call, who are therefore called Ministers of Satan. This key is said to be given
him: which does not imply a warrantable call; But, 1. the great change which
followed upon his fall, and the exercise of his power in respect of what it
was, he gets now another key in his hand. 2. An usurpation of the person
acting, and promoting the designs of Hell, in a way of Authority, as if that
key had been entrusted to him. 3. It implies a prime Ministerial office (to
say so) which he has from the devil, who does account of, and acknowledge him,
as primely subservient to his designs, and a subordination of this key-bearer
unto him, who has given him this trust, Chap. 13.2, 4. Lastly, It implies a
wise and just, though a secret, overruling providence of God, ordering this
subordinate Authority of Antichrist for His wise ends, as He does the dominion
of the devil, whom He permits soveraignly (as it were) in respect of the
other to bear a kind of rule.

Verse. 2. The exercise of this power is set down with three effects following
thereupon, verse. 2, 3. And he opened the bottomless pit, that is, as he was
employed by the devil, and permitted by God to assume an Authority for the
advantage of Hell, so did he instantly exercise his power for that end, and
left nothing unassayed for bringing superstition and Idolatry out of the
bottomless pit: where it was formerly restrained, now it is letten louse, as
appears by the effects, The first whereof, is, There arose a smoke out of the
pit, as the smoke of a great furnace. What is to be understood by this smoke,
the second effect following upon this, to wit, darkening of the Sun and the
Air, will make it appear: for, by Sun and Air are understood here, the light
and purity of the Doctrine of Christ, which shined clearly and comfortably in
the Primitive Church. The third part of this light was smitten by the fourth
trumpet, Chap. 8.12. Now, by this fifth trumpet this darkness spreads, and
the whole Sun and also the Air is darkened, which holds forth a greater
degree of corruption in Doctrine, than was under the former: it began then, but
now is at a height. This being then the meaning of darkening the Sun and Air,
this smoke, which brings forth this effect, must be these corrupt and
superstitious Doctrines, and increasing of humane traditions and ceremonies,
whereby the light of the Truth of God was obscured. This is compared to a great
smoke, 1. Because error and superstition, though it seems to be something sib
to devotion (as smoke is to fire) yet is really not only without light and
heat, but also is onerous and hurtful, as smoke is. 2. Because the darkness
which error and superstition infers upon the Truth of God, does not corrupt
it in it self, more than smoke can darken the Sun; but does by ceremonies and
traditions darken it to us, as great smoke does the Sun to onlookers. Again,
this smoke is said to be as of a great furnace from the bottomless pit, to
show, that the defection of Antichrist consists not in one particular error,
but (as it were) an inundation of errors ascending together. 2. To show, that
whatever the Authors pretended, Yet the rise of these superstitions were from
Hell, as in the forecited place, 1 Timothy 4.2, 3. superstitious traditions, and
errors concerning Meats and Marriages (Doctrines much esteemed of among
Papists) are particularly by the Apostle attributed unto devils.

Verse. 3, The third effect following upon these two, v. 3. And there came out
of the smoke locusts upon the earth, a vermin, (as it were,) engendered by the
former corruptions; these, as being of special concernment in the
Antichristian Kingdom, are largely and particularly described. That these
locusts were men; yea, that they were pretended Churchmen, promovers of error
and superstition, appears from this, that they stand in subordination to
Antichrist, and in a Monarchick way are governed by Abaddon, verse. 11. and must
therefore be servants suitable to such a master, and members conform to such a
head. They are said to come out of the smoke, because oftentimes corruption of
Doctrine begets corrupt Teachers to promove the same, as we see in Jeroboam,
2 Chronicles. 11.14, 15. and 2 Timothy 4.3. the rejecting of sound Doctrine and heaping
up Teachers after men's own lusts, are put together: for, a spirit of error
loves to innovate in respect of Officers, as well as Doctrine, and by it
people are some way disposed to strange Teachers; and also for promoving new
tenants, they are necessitated to make use of them. However the scope and sum
of the prophecy is thus, that the beginning of Antichrists kingdom shall be by
an eminent Church Officer, who, falling from the right exercise of Ministerial
Authority in subordination to Christ, to be a promover of the devils designs,
and subservient to him, be shall bring in such abundance of ceremonies,
superstitions and errors upon the Church which shall obscure the clear Doctrine
and simplicity of the Gospel, whereby numbers of false Teachers, and orders
shall be established, which our Lord Jesus has never warranted. They are
compared to locusts, 1. Because of their number, as Antichrist shall bring in
many errors, so shall he multiply Teachers, who shall live and converse
together in the world like swarms of locusts. 2. To set forth their nature, and
that both in respect of their worthlesnesse, and also of their hurtfulnesse
unto the Church, this being the nature of locusts to consume and destroy where
they come, so that a land pleasant like Eden before them, is brought by them to
a desolate wilderness, Joel 2.3, etc. compared with Chap. 1.4. These orders
and teachers shall even do so with the Church: yea, the increasing of them is
marked here, as a part of Antichrists superstition, as a fruit of former
corrupting of Doctrine, and as a mids to carry on that corruption to a height;
by which we may see, that the altering or inventing of new Officers in the
Church, is of no little concernment. By these locusts, we conceive clearly to
be holden forth the many invented orders and superstitious rabble of these
called the Clergy of the Church of Rome, who not being plants of our heavenly
Fathers planting, but purposedly brought in to promove and support the worldly
grandour of that Hierarchy, and did flow from superstitious principles brought
in upon the Church; and so are to be accounted as locusts, having their rise
from the bottomless pit, which their description will more fully clear.

The first part of their description (beside their rise already spoken of) is
the power that was given them, which is these four ways set forth, 1.
Generally, verse. 3. unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth
have power, etc. Scorpions are a dangerous and subtle sort of Serpents; these
look like locusts, but sting like scorpions, that is, dangerously and subtly,
their hurt being beyond their appearance, by their cunning instilling poisonous
Doctrine: their having of power given them, does not import lawful authorizing
of them, but, as was said of their head, verse. 1. they want not commission, but
that is given them by the Angel of the bottomless pit, who does formally
authorize and create these orders, and prescribes rules unto them, so that
even his Officers and Ministers have order among them, and assume not
commission and calling (although to superstitious orders) of themselves. This
is fully made out in the Popes way of founding, creating, commissionating, etc.
by his bulls, patents and other writs (as they give them names) of all orders,
whereof many hundreds are in that Kingdom; all which have their dependence on
him, owe their being to his Authority, and are regulated by the Laws and
Commissions given them from him.

Verse. 4. The second way how their power is described, it, v. 4. where their
Commission is bounded and ordered in these two respects, 1. In respect of these
they shall not hurt; it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass
of the earth, etc. whereby is understood (as is clear by the opposition
following) the Elect or sealed ones. This command comes not from their
immediate superior, to wit, the Angel of the bottomless pit, but proceeds
from the Lords Soveraignity, in order to the fulfilling of what was foretold,
Chap. 7. Again, the proper objects unto whom their power reaches, are set
down, to wit, but only these men which have not the seal of God in their
foreheads, that is, these who are not elected: here the end of Christ's sealing,
and the advantage of it does appear, and also who they are upon whom the
delusion of Antichrist has full victory.

Verse. 5. 3. Their power or Commission is discribed further in a twofold
limitation, v. 5. 1. And it was given to them that they should not kill them,
that is, that their plaguing of men should not be directly by taking away the
bodily life (as the horsemen under the sixth trumpet have, v. 18.) but must be
understood of another sort of plague as afterward. If any say that Antichrist
is said to kill, Chap. 11.13.17. and so, how can this be said of him? Answ. We
may consider Antichrist in a twofold respect, 1. In respect of the Elect: 2. In
respect of hypocritical Professors in the Church. In respect of the first,
Antichrist is here limited from killing them spiritually, but in these places
he is permitted to kill them bodily. On the contrary again, in respect of the
second, Antichrist does not take away the life bodily of these that submits
to him, but he proves a spiritual plague unto them. Now, if we consider him in
the first sense, as he corrupts the Elect, Antichrist is not the plague of
the world; but in the second sense, as souls are endangered by him. And
therefore this being a threatening of sending him as a plague to the hypocrites
of the Church, his proper commission in reference to them is only set down. 2.
This limitation may be put in, to show the proper work of these locusts, which
should not be professedly to take away bodily lives themselves (from which, as
to its act, the Romish Clergy does superstitiously pretend to abstain,
although they be deep in bloody contrivances) but that their native work should
be the destroying of souls. The second limitation in this Verse, is in respect
of the time; it is not for ever, but for five months. We understand it
indefinitly for a considerable long time, yet a time that is bounded by the
Lord and will have an end, as ( Ezekiel. 39.12.) seven months are to be taken
also. It is probable that particularly five months are mentioned, because
ordinarily locusts continued to destroy during five months, as it is written
of them; for, beginning in April, they died in September. If we should aim to
be more definit in applying this time, it would but prove more troublesome, and
uncertain, than satisfying or edifying.

The last thing wherein their power or commission is described, is, in the
nature of the plague it self, that is, it was not that they should kill men,
but that men should be tormented, etc. This torment in the greatness of it, is
aggreged by a similitude in the end of the fifth Verse, their torment was as
the torment of a scorpion, which is a grievous, dangerous, and vexing torment.

Verse. 6. The second aggravation, is, v. 6. from the effect of this, Men shall
seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and death shall
flee from them. In sum it is this, their anxiety shall be so great, as shall
make them weary of their life (as we see often good men wish for death under
great anxiety of spirit, not as death is considered in it self, but as usually
it is accounted an end to present vexations, as Job and Jonah) and yet death
shall not prove comfortable to them; but death (that is, a quieting death which
they desire) shall flee from them, and thoughts of death shall breed a new
terror to them. For understanding this, two things are to be observed, 1. That
it is not bodily torment which the Text speaks of, but Spiritual anxiety and
inward vexation of spirit, and that such as natively flows from the practices
and doctrine of these locusts: For, 1. this torment is on the friends and
native subjects of this Kingdom, whom these underofficers do not pretend
willingly to torment. 2. Their power is not to kill bodily, and therefore not
to torment bodily.

The second thing to be observed, is, that nothing does more natively breed
anxiety and spiritual torment than the principles contained in the Popish
Doctrine, and propagated by these who are signified by these locusts. And
therefore seeing the spreaders of such Doctrines as breed anxiety and vexation
of spirit, and can never satisfy nor quiet a conscience, must be understood
here, we can more warrantably apply it to none, than to underlings of the
Popish Clergy, and other propagaters of that Kingdom: Where these things are
clear, 1. That their Doctrine is apt of it self to breed this vexation of
spirit, such as the innumerablnesse of their ceremonies, holy days, Doctrine
of merit of works, and uncertainty of Grace and Salvation, perfection of
holiness, and fulfilling of the Law of God, with the great yoke of
will worship and superstition, which cannot but bring the zealots of these
traditions under much bondage. 2. This is clear, that by their principles there
is no quieting of a conscience once wakened: What can their pennances,
pilgrimages, satisfactions, indulgences, invocation of Saints and Images, and
such like, do to the sprinkling of an heart from an evil Conscience? There
needs no more proof of this, than to read the Writings of some of their
Casuists, and to consider the many dotations given for soul-masses, after
death, because the Conscience could never be quieted here. 3. We will find also
both these made good in experience; Histories are full of instances of the
heartlesse and comfortless life, and anxious death of many members of that
Body, which God has blessed to some, for constraining them to flee over these
things to the alone Grace of God in Christ Jesus. Yea, 4. does not their
Doctrine pursue men till death, and after death to torment? their peremptory
exacting of auricular confession of all sins, and that under the pain of
damnation; their founding of the man's confidence upon the Popes pardon, the
Priests absolution, his own penance and holiness, or the virtue of some
Sacrament (yea sometimes of some idolatrous invention, as the Mass, etc.)
according to their principles, conferring grace by the working of the work (as
they call it) and such like, cannot furnish the soul with solid confidence.
Beside, the fear of Purgatory does weaken that hope, or expectation of ease,
which otherwise men might have from death: in this sense, though they seek
death, yet it flees from them, and they obtain not their desire by it, and
their vexation dies not.

Verse. 7. Again, in the seventh Verse, he returns to the particular
description of these locusts. 1. In their appearance or shape; like horses,
that is, strong, and swift, and stout, as prepared unto battle. So Gregory
before spoke of Priests, calling them Sacerdotum exercitus to usher in
Antichrist. They are compared to horses prepared unto battle, because of their
courage and expeditnesse in undertaking and prosecuting their designs, and
because of the success which followed them, who, as a conquering Army do
prevail over the world, which is not armed against them. For which causes,
these locusts ( Joel 2.) are compared to horses and Armies. 2. They are said to
be crowned with Crowns like gold; to set forth their outward grandour and
seeming stateliness and authority, which is not so indeed, though it appeared
to be so; and therefore said not to be gold, but like gold. In a word, they are
like Kings in pomp, and Armies in strength: This agrees well to their
Cardinals, Bishops and others of the Clergy of the Church of Rome. 3. They
have faces as the faces of men, that is, a pretended affablenesse, and
sociablenesse in their conversations: thereby to insinuate themselves by
rational pretexts upon the affections of men, yet being indeed nothing less
than they pretended.

4. ( verse. 8.) They are said to have women's hair: which holds forth an
effeminatnesse, and vain delicatnesse in their disposition and carriage, and a
whorish way of decking themselves, and alluring others to their fornication;
for which, this Kingdom ( Chap. 17.) is called the great whore. 5. Their teeth
were as the teeth of Lions, that is, cruel and ravenous, notwithstanding of the
former appearances, devouring the souls of these that are subject to them, the
bodies of these that oppose them, and the goods and estates of both, like
these, Mat. 23.15. who devour widows houses, and that under pretext of long
prayers. The horses mentioned, verse. 17. have Lions heads; here they have only
lions teeth with the faces of men, and hair of women. The reason of the
difference is, although both agree in cruelty and destroying; yet the Popish
Clergy (signified here) do more subtly and covertly destroy souls. Therefore
are they described by Lions teeth only, which are not so obvious to sight. The
Turks again (of whom the sixth trumpet speaks) do more manifestly appear what
they are; therefore are described with Lions heads.

Verse. 9. He proceeds to describe these locusts in their defensive and
offensive arms; they are said to have breast-plates, as it were breast-plates
of iron, and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many
horses running to battle. The first part shows their security from all
danger, and the advantage they had in their war; there was no hurting of them
more than there is of hurting horsemen well armed with armor of iron. The
second part of the verse. shows the horrible noise and terror wherewith they
prosecute their designs when they find opposition; so that Armies with
horsemen and Chariots, are not more horrible nor violent in their encounters
than they are. In the application to the Clergy of the Church of Rome, both
these may be made good by the many privileges and immunities which they
possess, whereby they are exempted from dependence on all Monarchs but their
own; by the dread of Excommunications and thunderings of Church-censure, while
they keep the keys of Heaven and Purgatory, they were not only free of fear or
hurt from others, but also when they met with opposition from Emperors and
Kings, did with such clamor and violence so persecute them, that no Enemy or
Army has been for a long time so terrible as they, making the world astonished
with the stupendiousnesse of their pretended power. The effects of this have
been often found, as Histories do witness.

The 10. verse. does continue the description of these locusts in three
particulars more. The first, is, they had tails like unto scorpions. Tails,
(Isa. 5.19.) do hold forth the flattering and fauning humor of false Teachers,
who insinuate themselves by flatteries and lies, as dogs (to whom they are
compared) do with their tails. 2. It is said, there were stings in their tails,
that is, not only their mouth and head were hurtful, but their tails: that
which seems most pleasant to others, and is most delighted in, does often
prove most noisome and hurtful to them. Such fair words and pleasant speeches
of corrupt men have ever a sting in them, tending to the seduction of the
simple, Romans 16.18. 3. Their continuance is described, their power was to hurt
men five months: this was formerly spoken of, verse. 5. and is again repeated
here, either because it was mentioned formerly by way of limitation, that they
should torment no longer than the time appointed; here it is to show their
continuance, which shall be till the appointed time come; or, it is doubled, to
confirm the faith of Gods overruling providence in timing both the rise,
continuance, and close of this dreadful plague. This verse also being
particularly compared with verse 19. following, will also clear the plagues
threatened by these two trumpets, to be of distinct and different natures.

Lastly, ( Verse. 11.) Their government is described in three, 1. (contrary to
that of locusts, Prove. 30.27.) it is monarchick, they have a King over them,
that is, although they be many and various and different among themselves, yet
are they all subordinate to one supreme head, who exerceth absolute and
independent Authority over all the rest, and who lives in royal state and
majesty in the world, having uncontroverted and illimited power within that
Kingdom, and has all others in subordination to him: it is impossible to
indigitate any other by this than the Pope. 2. This Monarch is described by his
Office, which is to be the Angel of the bottomless pit: which holds forth
two things, 1. That he is a servant to that Kingdom of darkness, one
commissionated and sent in embassage from it, for its behove; and so is not to
be understood of the devil himself, who is not properly sent, but sends from
the pit. 2. It holds forth an eminent trusty and singular messenger of that
Kingdom, therefore called (by way of eminency) the Angel of the bottomless
pit, and therefore cannot be applied to ordinary false Teachers. In a word, he
is the same Star that fell from Heaven, verse. 1. and got the key of the
bottomless pit, and the same beast (mentioned, Chap. 13.) to whom the Dragon
does especially give his power and commission as his great Deputy and Vicar in
the backslidden Church; and therefore he is said (2 Thessalonians. 2.) to come after
the working of Satan, etc. 3. This King, is described from his name, which is
set down both in Hebrew and Greek, Abaddon, and Apollyon, a name suitable to
such a King and Kingdom. His name in both, signifies a destroyer, or to
destroy; partly, because actively he destroys; and partly, because he is to
be destroyed. It is set down both in Hebrew and Greek, Because, 1. he usurpeth
over all the Church, and proves a destroyer both to Jews and Greeks. 2.
Because in due time he is to be destroyed by both, as we will see on Chap. 16.
and 19. and also because the Lord would have him known to be so, both by Jews
and Greeks, as Pilate caused write the title above Christ in diverse languages.
Our blessed Lord Jesus had two names, one, Jesus, in Hebrew, and Christ in
Greek; both which hold Him forth to be a Savior. This King will be satisfied
with no less honor and extent of government, yet is described by these titles
to be of a quite contrary nature. It is not to be thought, that this King
should assume such an odious title, or that any such should be attributed to
him by his followers, but that indeed he shall be such, as this title
describes, that is, a most horrible waster and destroyer of the Church of
Christ.

This, all along, is applicable to the papal Kingdom, whereof the Pope is
head, unto which shortly we have hinted the application of it, which stands
sure upon the preceding grounds and suppositions. For further confirming
whereof, we shall, 1. in few words resume some general properties of, and
considerations concerning, this plague here described. 2. We shall lay down a
little view of the public rise, progress, nature, etc. of the papal Kingdom:
from which two, we shall leave the application, by way of conclusion, to be
gathered.

1. The object of this plague, is, the visible Church, and hypocritical
Professors in it, who are not appointed and marked for eternal life. It is the
same Christian world, and light of Ordinances, which is darkened and destroyed
by it, which was weakened by the former trumpets. 2. The nature of it, is
Spiritual, corrupting the Ordinances of Spiritual life, and bringing with it
destruction to immortal souls. 3. The extent of it, is universal, over the
face of the whole visible Church, the actors in it are Churchmen, once by
their places having Power and Authority in the Church of Christ. In time it
breaks out in a Spiritual Kingdom and Hierarchy; and upon a pretended
Ecclesiastic account, assuming great Power and Authority, it does breed, and
is supported by swarms of Church Officers: the time of its public appearing
to be a Kingdom in an established form, will be found to be about the year 600.
for, it follows immediately the fourth trumpet; which continued the story of
that time, and does immediately preceed the rise of the Mahometans, which from
the 700. year forward is at an height, and grows, as the exposition of the
following trumpet will clear. This plague carries along with it much corrupt
Doctrine; yea, brings again Idolatry into the Christian Church, as we will
see in the close of this Chapter, and especially such corrupt Doctrine as
overturneth the comfortable and quieting grounds of the Gospel; it brings
also to the world great store of new created orders for promoving these
Doctrines and supporting that Kingdom, who both by covered subtilty and
violence carry on their designs, and many such other particulars.

Now for the second thing propounded, if we will take a view of the papal
Kingdom, What will we miss? That it is a Kingdom under one absolute Monarch
with most illimited power, having dominion over the Church, being begun and
carried on by Churchmen, having corrupted the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
brought Idolatry again into the Church, are all evident. I shall instance but
these three particulars, 1. The nature of the Doctrine and errors brought-in by
them, which, though exceeding agreeable to nature, yet exceeding opposite to the
way of Grace, and therefore cannot but necessarily and natively be destructive
to the solid consolation of souls, and beget fearful horror in the hearts and
consciences of poor sinners, so that sometimes the greatest promotters of them,
have been forced to abandon these principles under challenges: and their
greatest disputants are constrained to acknowledge this, we have one instance
in Bellar. de justif. lib. 3. cap. 7. who, after his long dispute of
indulgences, merit of works, etc. seeks to sum up in all in three assertions.
The first whereof, attributes merit unto works; the second allows men to
confide in their own merits; yet as distrusting this foundation so largely
contended for, he adds a third proposition, propter incertitudinem propriae
iustitia and periculum inan^ gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei
misericordia and benig^itate reponere. So that in end for uncertainty of man's
proper righteousness and hazard of vain glory he accounts it most safe to
place our whole confidence in the mercy and goodness of God all^nerly, and
gives this reason, if man has no merit (says he) he should not confide; if
he has (which yet is uncertain) it is no hurt or loss to flee only to Gods
mercy. In which one assertion we may see, 1. The uncomfortablnesse of that
Doctrine of merit that can never comfort solidly, because, at the best, it is
uncertain. 2. We may see the hazard of it to foster pride and vain glory. 3. We
may see the disquietnesse of it, by which sinners can never be secure, till
they have fully renounced it. Suarez also does homologate Bellarmin in this.
And yet this Doctrine of merit is a prime fundamental tenent of that Church,
but has often disappointed the defenders of it, when they had most need of
comfort, and has made them prize the Doctrine of Faith in Christ Jesus in
their death, who often thought it absurd in their life: as particularly is
written of Charles the fifth, after his laying by of public things in the
world and his retiring of himself to a Monastery.

The second instance, is in the abundance and variety of their Religious
orders, as they are called, (which take up a main part of the description of
this Kingdom) there is at least thirty five orders reckoned, each whereof, for
the most part, will comprehend many thousands, beside their Bishops and other
members of their Hierarchy. The number of the Monasteries belonging to these
orders, are reckoned by some to be 2^5044. as is observed by Alstedius in his
Chronology: all which have their original by the Popes Authority, hold their
dependency on him alone, and are vigorous instruments, specially devoted to the
upholding and promoving of his designs.

Lastly, A more particular considering of its rise and public appearance;
which was about the same time, to wit, Anno 60^. and its growth and manner of
proceeding afterward will make out this, which was shortly thus,

After the three hundred year, when the Church possessed peace, pride soon
infected her Officers, whereby there was ambitious desires after pre-eminence
amongst these who should have been most free of that vice: Rome had many
advantages for this end, and her Bishops improved them well, as has been
hinted in the exposition of the former trumpets; yet did never one of them
usurp a settled superiority, or the title of Universal Bishop or headship over
the Church, till Boniface the third assumed it, about the year 606. Which was
upon this occasion: after the seat of the Empire was translated from Rome to
Constantinople by Constantine, that Bishop was privileged with all the
privileges which Rome enjoyed, by her being formerly the seat of the Emperors
court, even as that city was named New Rome, and made fellow in all privileges
unto Old Rome: from this, many contentions followed, as is before hinted. While
the Emperors court constantly continued there, the Bishops of Constantinople
would not be content with equality, but assumed a superiority, and a title
suitable to it, of Universal Bishop. This, John B. of Constantinople did a
little before the year 600. while Mauritius possessed the Empire, who did
countenance him, it is like out of respect to the place, where his court
resided. This usurpation was generally ill taken, and written against,
especially by Gregory Bishop of Rome, who did presage the revealing of
Antichrist not to be far off, when men durst be so impudent to take that style,
which no Apostle ever usurped. Upon some occasion, the Emperors Army
mutinying, did choose one Phocas (a base, vile wretch) Emperor, who having
killed all Mauritius children before him, did afterward kill himself. Unto this
Phocas did Gregory of Rome make addresses, by Commissioners and Epistles,
grossly flattering him, and abusing that place of Daniel 4. of Gods changing and
transferring of Empires, as he had done that for the good of His Church, in
removing a tyrant and setting up such a Religious Prince as Phocas was, as may
be seen in his Epistles, Lib. 11. Epist. 36, 44, and 43. By this means, Phocas
came to favor the Bishops of Rome, and what out of envy toward Mauritius
name, and what to ingratiate himself in the west by the Bishop of Romes means.
Some few years after (while Boniface, who was at first Gregorie's Commissioner
to Phocas, possessed the Sea) he passed an Edict, willing and declaring Rome to
be acknowledged for the supreme Sea, and the Bishop thereof for supreme and
Universal Bishop from that time forth. This decree Boniface the third, within
short time caused ratify and pronounce in a Lateran Council of 62. or 72.
Bishops; and although it wanted not much contradiction then, and was never
fully acknowledged by all the East Churches, yet from that time did this great
Roman Hierarchy receive its public rise, and that mystery which long had
been working, was obstetricated and brought forth by such a midwife, as this
infamous Phocas, Anno 606. as is said. At this time and after (as Platina in
vita Bonifacii tertii says) this Pope and others did put in their decrees, Sic
volumus and jubemus; and says, that the reason of preferring Rome, was,
because the Emperor was still styled Romanorum Imperator, wheresoever he
resided.

Immediately after this, the light of the Word wonderfully decayed, traditions
were obtruded, all public worship was to be performed in Latin, the
Scriptures were kept up from laick people (as they called them) Letanies,
Lyturgies, and Masses were brought instead of the Word and preaching. And in
effect, all reformations consisted in building Churches and Monasteries, and
enriching them with great dotations; plurality of Mediaators and worshipping of
Saints and Angels were brought in (especially this was in Vitellianus his time,
about the year 666.) Heathenish superstitions and ceremonies were brought again
into the Church, the Temple called Pantheon (formerly dedicated to all the
heathen gods) was now opened and dedicated to all Saints (this was in Phocas
and Innocentius their time; Images were set up in the Church, and appointed to
be worshipped: which occasioned great confusion in the Church, and although it
was long resisted by the Emperors of the East, and by several Councels both in
the East and West, yet was it afterward established by the second Council of
Nice. This second Council of Nice was held, Anno 781. or 788. Thi^ worshipping
of Images was mightily opposed by Leo Isaurus, Constant. Compron. and other
Emperors of the East, who for that were Excommunicated by the Popes. At last
Irene, a superstitious cruel woman, obtaining the Government after her Husbands
death, the foresaid Council of Nice did conclude this Image Worship. It sat
first down at Constantinople, but the people being enraged at this their
design, they were forced to remove it to Nice. It is marked, Cent. Magd. out
of old Writers, that these Emperors urged the removing of Images, that that
scandal might not lie before the Saracens, that Christians worshipped Idols;
this Council of Nice was also withstood by Charles the great and Ludovicus Pius.

At this time also the Pope grew exceedingly to an height, not only of
censuring Bishops and disposing of Bishoprics, but also deposing Kings and
disposing of their Kingdoms at his pleasure, supreamly and soveraignly to
decide all questions whatsoever, and that without all possibility of erring. In
a word, in every thing so absolute, as he might lead millions of souls to hell,
and none might say to him, what do thou? and all this with wonderful
violence and terror to any who should in the least contrary the same: which
things are not only practiced by the Head of this Antichristian Kingdom, but
also are owned and maintained by these his forementioned Armies to be due to
him (as from many particular instances, and their general principles might be
made out) all which being put together (especially by the intelligent who are
acquainted with their practices and Writings) it may be confidently concluded
(which was asserted in the introduction to this Chapter) that the Popish
Kingdom is the very Kingdom, the Pope the very King and the Angel of the
bottomless pit, the Popish Clergy the very Locusts and Armies, and their
Doctrine the very noisome smoke of the pit, which are here somewhat darkly, but
exceeding fully and appositly described.

We shall say no more for use of all, But, 1. That we would bless God, who
has so clearly discovered to us this abomination that makes desolate. And 2.
We would bless Him further, that He has freed us from this tyranny under
which a great part of the Christian world does lie, and by which our own
Predecessors were sometimes kept in bondage. 3. It would provoke us to
improve the light and liberty of Truth which He has conceded to us, and to
welcome the soul-comforting Doctrines of the free grace of the Gospel. O what
great odds is there betwixt the dispensations of the Gospel which we enjoy, and
that which our Fathers lived under! and therefore how much more is required of
us? and how much greater will the condemnation of these be, who shall
ungratfully perish under this light? Lastly, let it stir us up with holy
indignation against this contagion of Popery: ought we to think this a light
and indifferent matter, which the Lord has threatened as so great a woe to the
visible Church, and which he does so significantly delineat in the hellish
nature and hurtful effects of it? and let us commiserate the deplorable
condition of many thousands of poor souls, captivated under this tyranny, and
stung with the poison of these scorpions, who yet cry not when they are bound.
And let us cry mightily to God to break this Covenant with death, and to bring
this agreement with hell to an end, that the oppressed captives may be let go
free, and the Temple may be opened in heaven, and that He may take to Him His
great power, and reign, that the Kingdoms of the earth may become the Kingdoms
of the Lord, and of His Christ: even so. Amen.

Concerning the comfortless grounds that Popery lays down for the
comforting of poor afflicted Consciences.
IF we might take a view of such grounds as Popery lays down for the quieting
of an exercised Conscience, what a labyrinth would it be found? For, 1. They
deny all not imputation of sin or imputation of righteousness, and place
remission of sins only in the infusing of a gracious quality in the soul, which
they call gratia gratum faciens; so that if the sin be mortal, this is lost
(although the person were formerly just) and must again be recovered. If it be
venial, he must satisfy for it. 2. To this kind of remission, they require
attrition and contrition. The first is a legal sorrow for fear of wrath, the
second is an intense sorrow for the sin committed; the first proceeds from
servile fear, this from filial: both these they lay down as necessary for
attaining of the former remission, or infusion of Grace. 3. To this contrition
they give a fourfold influence in the attaining thereof, 1. Dispositively, or a
disposing influence, as the material cause (as they call it) of this grace,
that is, by this contrition as it is a virtue, the soul is disposed for
receiving of that grace; or, that that grace may be wrought in the soul, out of
that contrition, as the pre-existent matter thereof. 2. If concurreth
instrumentally, as it is a part of the Sacrament of Penance, by which, the
Priests absolution does ex opere operato beget such grace in the heart of one
that is contrite. These two are laid down by Thom. supplement. Quest. 5. Art.
1. corp. 3. It concurreth by way of satisfaction for the sin committed, and so
this inward contrition, in the sensitive part, is man's recompensing for his
fault inwardly, as he does outwardly inflict punishment on the body; ad
recompensandam offensam quae in Deum committitur, as Aquinas speaks, Quaest.
1. Art. 2. 4. It concurreth meritoriously as an act of virtue, even as other
works do for procuring meritoriously something from God, supp. Quaest. 1. Art.
2. even the first entrance into glory.

All which ways will be unsatisfying to a conscience; for neither of them
looks on Repentance as that which the Lord of His grace has promised and
knit pardon freely unto: therefore, that it may be meritorious, there arises a
new dispute; wherein this contrition consists. 1. Some old Schoolmen say it
must be in summa gradu, otherwise pardon is not to be expected. 2. Others, of
whom Scotus is the head, say that it is such a sorrow as is only known to God,
and so by it the conscience can have no quiet. 3. The later Jesuits, as Bellar.
do p^^niten. lib. 2. cap. 11. and Gregor. de Valent. tom. 4. disp. 7. Quaest.
8. de contritione, do reject both these as false and dangerous: and because
that contrition in such a degree is most rare, therefore they have a twofold
cure, le^t there be no ground to quiet one at all. 1. Bellarmine distinguishes
contrition in that which is intensive summa and appretiative summa, and says,
that though the first be not, the second will be sufficient, providing the
sinner be still pursuing after the first to the uttermost, so that if any thing
be left undone which might be done for attaining thereof, this ground will
fail; and the conscience can have no peace in this, because in it there is a
new sin, and what shall satisfy for that? This is also rare, and considering
that a wakened conscience will no^ easily acquiesce in its own appretiative
contrition, as being equivalent for satisfaction, that being only such as
desires to be intensively in the heighest degree, as they expound it.
Therefore, 2. the weight is laid on the power of the keys, and the Priests
absolution in the Sacrament of Penance (which Greg. de Vall^ntia ^aith is
communis Scholasticorum sententia) that is, that though contrition of it self
be not sufficient, yet by virtue of the foresaid absolution, one that is
attritus, does become contritus, and so have the forementioned remission of
sins bestowed on him. Therefore they make Baptism simply necessary to the
pardon of Original sin, and penance to actual, except when it is impossible;
and in this case the vow thereof does supply. To this sacramental absolution
they require particular confession of mortal sins, d^ necessitate ^almis, to
be made necessarily to the Priest, before he absolve them, which can be no
little torture; and so still this leaves the soul to dispute the Priests
Commission, and the nature of that Sacrament, which will not easily quiet it,
and also leaves it under Aquinas his unanswerable Argument, suppl. Quaest. 1.
Art. 3. Where (says he) the principles are diverse, the one can never pass
unto, or become the other; But the principles of attrition, to wit, servile
fear, and of contrition, to wit, filial fear, are diverse. Ergo, etc. When
this is done, there is still a stick (even by their principles) in the
uncertainty of this, whether their contrition be true or not, or whether that
remission has followed freely or not; for, this, they say, cannot be known but
by particular revelation) Therefore do they conclude, that to supply all, it is
necessary to enjoin satisfaction in work, by pennances, peregrinations,
dotations or such like, whereby they make up equipollently the defects of their
contrition, and make all sure: and if the person cannot satisfy himself,
because his sins are great, here they have their indulgences, and the
application of the satisfactions of others for quieting the mind, whereby the
Pope, out of his Treasury and plenitude of Authority, does apply the
satisfaction of some others, who did satisfy and pay more than their own guilt
did amount unto, as Bellar. speaks de indul. lib. 1. cap. 4. The conscience
is recommended to this for quietness; whence it is, that so much money is
given for these indulgences. These ways indeed oppress the persons and empty
the purses of their patients, but can produce no solid cure. This great
difficulty follows ever that way, when external bodily pennances do not the
turn, then so many years have they to endure in Purgatory notwithstanding of
ordinary indulgences, and this, (as Bellar. says, lib. 1. de Indulg. cap. 9.
page 1174) may amount to 20000. years: which is the great courtesy allowed by
this way unto a tortured conscience.

The question is, what may become of that person at the day of Judgment when
his years will not be expired? By the intensenesse (says he) of the degree
that is to be made up in three or four hundred year. This is the path way of
their casual divinity: and after all, they leave the patient at an
uncertaintie, when they have bestowed all on them, and endured that twenty
thousand years in Purgatory, if for all that they may be afterward relieved and
brought through; So it is still at a venture, and what peace can be here in
this way, where necessarily these four are controvertible? 1. Whether these
means, being applied, can work the effect, when no such way is holden forth in
Scripture, and is but grounded in many steps on traditions and canons, and
disputable principles at the best. 2. Whether a proportionablness can be
between its satisfactions or sorrow, and the sin committed, so as they may
quiet the conscience, as having appeased God by them, seeing His Justice is
infinite, and the deserving of sin is great. 3. Whether its sorrow can be
without sin in its self, and so being defective cannot be satisfactory, but
must need a satisfaction. 4. Whether its own act of sorrow be sincere or
gracious, that is still uncertain, and so cannot but mar peace still as they
acknowledge. And to close, it must be a poor peace which is sought-for in
Purgatory, by so many years continuance there, and yet not to be sure of it
when these shall end. There is nothing liker the anxiety mentioned here than
this, which is but an hint of that which is followed in many inextricable
disputes concerning these three parts of Repentance, to wit, contritio cordis,
confessio oris, and satisfactio operis, which would sooner distract a wearied
sinner than give quietness unto him.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 12. One woe is past; and behold there come two woes more hereafter.

13. And the sixth Angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of
the golden altar, which is before God,

14. Saying to the sixth Angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four Angels
which are bound in the great river Euphrates.

15. And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a
day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.

16. And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand
thousand: and I heard the number of them.

17. And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them, having
breastplates of fire, and of ja^inct, and brimstone, and the heads of the
horses were as the heads of lions, and out of their mouths issued fire, and
smoke, and brimstone.

18. By these three was the third part of men killed by the fire, and by the
smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.

19. For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails
were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt.

20. And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet
repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils,
and idols of gold and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither
can see, nor hear, nor walk:

21. Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of
their fornication, nor of their thefts.


IN the last trumpet were described the nature and success of the kingdom of
Antichrist, who was there called, the Angel of the bottomless pit, in
opposition to Jesus Christ, who is called the Angel of the Covenant. The
visible Church was pestered with corruptions, superstitions and idolatry by
him, for which the Lord threatens to plague them with a more sensible plague
by this sixth trumpet.

The 12. Verse, One woe is past, etc. is set down to rid marches betwixt the two
trumpets, and to make the transition clear from the one to the other. It is not
to be understood, as if the event of the fifth trumpet were fully to preceed
the sixth, and no ways to contemporate with it (the contrary of this is clear
from the close of this Chapter, where the idolatry, brought into the world by
the fifth trumpet, continues unrepented-of during the sixth; but this is to be
understood, either as holding forth the priority of their beginning, the fifth
preceedeth the sixth, as being the procuring cause of it; or, it relates only
to the former description, and signifies this much, the description of the
first woe is past, and now comes the typical description of the second.
Therefore what we prefaced in general, concerning the order both of seals and
trumpets, is to be applied here.

The judgment prophesied of here, at the first reading is exceeding terrible,
and so described as must be necessarily understood of some more than an
ordinary woe. In this description we have, 1. the rise of this plague, in the
supreme and subordinate overrulers thereof, verse. 13, 14 -- 2. The actors and
executioners thereof are generally hinted at, v. -- 14. 3. Their commission is
expressed, verse. 15. 4. The executioners and their execution following
thereupon are described, verse. 16, 17, 18, 19. 5. The procuring cause of this
plague is implied, verse. 20. As also, 6. the end which the judgment aimed at
in it self, with the success, (or rather unsuccessefulnesse) which it had, are
set down, v. 20, 21.

For the more clear opening of the words, we would premit these generals, 1.
The object of this plague, is generally the same with the former, to wit, the
visible Church, now drawn to superstition and idolatry by Antichrist, are
plagued by this: for, judgments are spoken of in this Book, not as they are
indifferently upon the world, but as particularly they concern the Church. And
one of these trumpets after another does contain a further step of judgment
upon the self same object; and the Church being the object of the former
trumpets, so must she be of this, otherwise the pronouncing of this woe would
have with it no further addition to her plagued condition, which is contrary to
the scope.

2. The Church here, is to be considered as declined, and as being guilty of
Idolatry, and many other gross sins, as is clear by verse. 20.21.

3. It is clear also, that this judgment is of a different nature from the
former (as was hinted in the exposition of it) and does particularly denounce
temporal judgment upon the Church, already drunken with Spiritual plagues:
this the particular description will demonstrate; yet it is such a judgment in
temporal things, as carries gross abominations, and Spiritual venom, for
poisoning souls, along with it; so their having of tails like unto Serpents,
etc. does import.

Lastly, It must also be such a plague as is executed by some great power in
the world, who have mighty Armies in executing this in a warlike, violent and
successful; though in a barbarous and cruel, manner.

And therefore, in short, we conceive no other to be intended here, but the
dominion of the Turks, who, by their mighty strength, great cruelty and
poisonous Doctrine of Mahomet, have proven exceeding destructive both to the
bodies and souls of innumerable poor Christians: which we may clear a little
more in the application, and as we go through the words.

Verse. 13. The first thing John mentions, is, a voice, I heard a voice from
the four horns of the Golden altar, etc. which sets forth the voice of God.
or of Jesus Christ, as supreme overruler of this plague, with allusion to Gods
giving answers in His Temple under the Old Testament. This voice gives orders
to the sixth Angel, the subordinate overseer of this plague, to loose, etc. by
which is holden forth Gods sovereignty over, and His making use of Angels in
the ordering of, the most fearful plagues that come upon the Church.

Secondly, The actors are touched at in this order which the Angel gets,
verse. 14. Loose the four Angels, which are bound in the great river Euphrates.
Where we have these particulars, 1. Their nature, they are Angels, not properly
to be understood; for, the thing which follows is Armies of horsemen: but
they are here called Angels, to signify their being subservient to God in His
design, and their being fitted with agility, promptitude, etc. for this work,
which He was to employ them in (it being ordinary in all this prophecy to
compare instruments good or bad to Angels and Spirits, as, Chap. 9. verse. 11.
Chap. 12. verse. 7. and 16. verse. 13, etc. 2. They are called four, not precisly
to determine a number; But either, 1. to signify the spreading of this plague
to all the corners of the earth, That as ( Chap. 7.1.) there were four Angels
holding the four winds, that they should not blow; so there are here as many
instruments to hurt the Church, as were there to prevent it. Or, 2. it may be
to point out a fourfold difference either in respect of government, place,
nature or ceremonies, which should be amongst these who should be actors in
this plague, which we will find agreeable to the Turks in this sense also. 3.
These four Angels are said to be at the great river Euphrates. This river in
Syria, is famous in many respects, 1. Upon it the great city Babylon stood. 2.
It was the march of David and Solomon's Kingdom that was from the sea to the
river. 3. It was the great fatal bound of the Roman Empire, beyond which they
could never extend their dominion. 4. Because of the footing that the Turkish
dominion took first beside it; for, the first Turkish government being by four
Souldans, all of them for a considerable time had their residence near and
about this river, to wit, in Asia, Aleppo, Damascus, and Antioch, which were
the places whereby these governors were designed. We conceive this river to be
here mentioned, to show, that such should be isntrumental in this plague, as
were neither within the Church, nor the Roman Empire, but should have their
residence beside this river Euphrates, as the Turks are observed to have had
before their dominion spread. 4. They are said to be bound in that river, that
is, restrained from breaking in upon the Empire, or the Church in it, for a
long time, by Gods providence, so as if they had been indeed bound for many
years, what from intestine divisions among themselves, what by Tamerland's
invasion of them, and what by our Lords providing some instrument to defend His
Church for a time: these Turks were restrained from invading and overruning the
Empire, although they vehemently gaped after it. They are said to be loosed
from that place, when the impediments and restraints, formerly keeping them in,
are removed, and they (as it were) hounded like dogs, formerly tied up, to
destroy the west part of the Christian world, which accordingly came to pass
very speedily, when the Turks (having prevailed over the Saracens) did with
them combine in one dominion under the Ottomanean family; which was about the
1000 year and some more, from which time their power grew till a great part of
Europe was overrun by them.

Thirdly, We have their commission, verse. 15. which shows the end wherefore
they were loosed. 1. Their work, is, to slay. 2. The number, is, a third part
of men. 3. The time or continuance of their execution, is, for an hour and a
day, etc. To slay, is to be here understood properly to take away men's bodily
lives: and therefore the expressions in this trumpet differ from what is in the
former. The event also here marked, ( the third part was killed, verse. 18.)
does confirm it. Again, by the third part of men is not to be understood any
number definitely, nor any indefinite number of the world absolutely
considered; but a third part, or, a considerable number of the men living on
this side the river Euphrates, from which formerly these executioners were
restrained; now, being loosed, they are commissionated especially in respect of
them, to wit, the ancient Roman Empire, now become Antichristian. 3. The time,
or continuance, is set down in four several words, an hour, a day, a month,
and a year. We conceive it not safe to apply it to a day, or an hour of any
definite time; (which we would rather reverence than follow in the practice of
others) But we understand here a definite time bounded and limited of God for
the prevailing of this plague, as there was set down a time to the locusts
under the former trumpet. We conceive the words are multiplied, hour, day, and
month, and year, to set out, 1. Gods particular determining and bounding of
that plague in its continuance, to an year, month, day and hour, according to
the phrase, Numb. 9.22. whether it was two days, or a month, or a year, etc.
which is there used to show the absolute dependence the Israelites had upon God
in their marchings and sojournings, whether for time long or short: so shall it
be here, the time for which they are prepared, is particularly appointed. 2.
They are said to be prepared for such a time, differently expressed, to show,
that in diverse respects their continuance should be both for a short time, as
of an hour or day; and also of a long time, as of a month and year. 3. To show
their alacrity to use the opportunity and liberty given them carefully; so that
after the removing of restraints, they should not miss one hour or day in
executing their commission, and should prosecute it vigorously, till the year
or longest period of their continuance should be finished. Thus may they be
said to be prepared, etc.

Fourthly, We come to the executioners themselves, and the execution which
followed. They are described more particularly, 1. From their number and
nature, verse. 16. The army, is, of horsemen; and the number, is, two hundred
thousand thousand. That which is added, and I heard the number of them, is to
show, that John invented not this number, but that he had it plainly revealed
to him. They are called horsemen, partly, to show the swiftness and celerity
of their success; partly, to show they were such a people as abounded with
such warriors. The number we conceive (more than the time) is not definitely
to be stuck to; but signifies an exceeding great number. Both these agree well
to the Turks, who have led the greatest Armies in Europe especially of
horsemen, and made the swiftest progress after their invasion, which has been
of a long time heard of, much more numerous than ever the Christians were able
to oppose unto them.

The riders with their defensive armor, and the nature of the horses (and, it
is like, their offensive arms) are described, verse. 17. They had breast-plates
of fire and of jacinct and brimstone. Breastplates use not to be made of such
matter. We conceive the meaning is, they shall be terrible, dreadful and
destructive, as fire, brimstone, etc. which, working terror on these whom they
invade, shall occasion such security to themselves from the hurt of any, as if
they were fully armed, and also richly, which we conceive to be understood by
jacinct. Their offensive arms, or, their offending power, are set out by two
expressions. 1. The heads of the horses were as the heads of lions, that is,
bold, fierce and destroying, and that professedly without any color or
pretext, such as the locusts had. 2. Out of their mouths is said to issue fire
and brimstone: whereby it would seem, their wasting and cruel way of
proceeding is set forth. Some also think it does relate to the use of Cannon,
Musket and Pistol: For, these two are certain. 1 That the use of these weapons
was found out, much about this time. 2. There was never such abundance of them,
and of such hudge greatness, as was used by them in their European expeditions.

In the 18. Verse, The event of the execution is marked to be answerable to
their Commission; By these three was the third part of men killed: this is to
be understood properly, as verse. 15. It is marked, to show, that there is no
threatening or prediction of Gods, but it is exactly fulfilled, and no
Commission of His, but it is fully executed. In the application of this, the
speedy, terrible and great overthrow of Asia the less, the coast of Africa,
and a great part of Europe, being destroyed and overrun by the Turks, are
sufficient evidences of the truth of this. Beside the cruel murder committed
by the Saracens in Italy, France, Spain, where yet it pleased the Lord to keep
them from settling.

Verse. 19. Their manner of hurting is more particularly explained, 1. by a
double mean whereby they hurt; Their power is in their mouth and in their
tails. By mouth is understood their open violence against the body. The tail
signifies the abominablenesse of the Doctrine spread by them, which is
destructive to souls. 2. These tails are further described, (because their
Doctrine was not spoken of before, though their violence had been described)
they are said to be like serpents for poisonablnesse and subtilty; and they
have heads, an unnatural-like thing that tails should have heads on them. This
sets out the gross abominablnesse and absurdity of that Doctrine. The
locusts had tails, but they had not heads on them; these have heads, to show,
that it shall be more discernable in its grossness than the former. It is
added, and with them they do hurt, that is, with their tails and heads. The
first part of the Verse shows, that this Army hurts both by cruelty to the
body, and pestiferous Doctrine to the soul: therefore it is said, their power
is in their mouth and their tails. This last part shows the success that
followed upon their Doctrine; there were many souls hurt and destroyed with
this, as there were bodies with the former. This fully agrees to the Turks
also, who are not more terrible in their Armies to the bodies of men, than that
pestiferous delusion of Mahomet is of it self hurtful and destructive to
souls, and actually has destroyed many, a great part of the world in Gods
righteous judgment being carried away with it.

We come now to the 20. and 21. verse. And the rest of the men which were not
killed by these plagues, yet repented not, etc. The scope whereof, is, 1. To
show what sins procured so great a plague, and so fierce an enemy to be letten
loose upon the Christian world; and indeed the consideration of these sins will
vindicate the justice of God in inflicting all these evils. There is one sin
mentioned in this verse, to wit, idolatry, several ways aggreged; and there
are four more in the last verse added: and though God will suffer cruel
abominations in Pagans, that never had the knowledge of His will; yet these who
are guilty here, being by profession of His Church, there is the greater
access in justice to take course with them. 2. It is set down to show the end
which the Lord drove by such strong Physic; it was at the health, and not the
subversion of that part of the world; and so by the application of this mean,
either to bring them to repentance, as the right fruit of all, or to discover
their desperate impenitency. 3. It shows the fruitlesnesse of this mean, that
notwithstanding it was sharp, yet did it not prevail with them; which is not
to be understood, as if God failed of His intended purpose, but to show how mad
the Antichristian world was upon their Idols, when such a judgment, having
destroyed so many, did not yet effectuate the recovery of the rest.

By the rest of the men which were not killed, etc. is to be understood, not
these who remained all the world over, but within the Christian World or Empire
now declined to be Antichristian. The rest that remained, after the third part
were killed of the same total, to wit, these on this side Euphrates; for, the
Lord observes not what the rest of the world did, but what His Church by
profession did, whom He corrects when He forbeareth all the world beside.

What we said in preface to the trumpets, in general, and to this, does also
confirm it. They are said not to repent, that is, that these idolatrous
Christians, notwithstanding of these plagues, neither were inwardly brought to
loath these sins, or to be humbled for them before God; nor outwardly to
abstain from them in their practice, but rather grew worse and dotted more upon
these superstitions, even after this plague, which fully came to pass also,
Papists being never more drunk with their superstitions, and profane in their
carriages, than since the Turks destroyed a great part of that Antichristian
Kingdom.

The first sin mentioned, is, Idolatry, four ways aggreged, 1. The works of
their hands: so called, because the Images and statutes used in that worship,
are made with men's hands, and so cannot be a fit object of worship. It is like
hereby to relate to the second Command, where the making of all such, upon such
an account, is forbidden. 2. It is called a worshipping of devils, not that it
is so directly in the intention of the worshippers, but that it is so indeed,
and accounted so by the Lord. Therefore it is usual in the Scripture to give
it that name, Levit. 17.7. 1 Cor. 10.20. Yea, not only that sort of Idolatry,
which is against the first Command, is so called; but even that which
acknowledging the true God, does yet corrupt the rule of Worship prescribed by
Him, by putting an Idolatrous manner in the room thereof. So, that Idolatry of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat is styled, 2 Chronicles. 11.15. he ordained him Priests
for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made:
and yet the particular considering of that sin, will make it appear, that he
did not directly intend the worshipping of these calves (and much less of
devils) in the room of God. 3. This Idolatry is aggreged from the variety and
multiplicity of it, in respect of the matter whereof these Idols were
compounded, gold, silver, brass, stone and wood, (of which metals of all
sorts, Images, Crucifixes, Relicts, etc. are abundant in the Popish Church)
and yet whatever be the shape of the metals, it is still, at the best, gold,
silver, brass, etc. and so no fit object of worship. Lastly, It is aggreged
from the lifelesnesse of these Idols, which being unable to hear, or move
themselves, must be exceeding unfit to be invocated by others, as helpers of
them; and so must imply exceeding great stupidity in these who fell into that
sin. Upon which ground, the Scripture usually aggregeth that sin, Psalm. 115.
verse. 4.5, etc. and 135.15, 16. both which places do pronounce the worshippers
of them to be for stupidity like unto them.

There are four more particular sins charged upon them, verse. 21. and
impenitency under the same also. All which may be figuratively understood
according to the strain of this Book, or properly, as the words sound. The
first sin, is, their murders; figuratively understood, it holds forth the
great bloud-guiltinesse of souls, which we formerly hinted at in the exposition
of the fifth trumpet. Properly, it holds forth the many massacres,
persecutions and butcheries of Antichrist, whereby that Kingdom is guilty of
the blood of many thousands of the Saints, as from Chap. 11.7. and 13.7. and
18.24. will appear. The second thing, is, their sorceries, which figuratively
holds forth bewitching and intoxicating Doctrine, and delusion therein, at a
height: literally taken, it holds forth a guiltiness of devilish and
magical arts. According to the first sense, the whore is said to have a cup,
Chap. 17.4. according to the last, Antichrist is said to come (2 Thessalonians. 29.)
after the working of Satan, with signs and lying wonders. The thing signified
by both, will be found in Popery, their Doctrine having bewitched and blinded
so many, and Magic vented in lying signs and wonders, and other abominable
pranks, has been abounding and frequent not only amongst the inferior
Clergy, but even in the Popes themselves. And this, under the pretext of
working miracles and exorcisms, has been in some cases ^vouched. The third
sin, is, fornication: by which we may understand their whorish Doctrine, which
draws souls away from God, in which respect that Kingdom is called the great
whore; or, bodily filthiness (which we will often find in Scripture to go
along with idolatry, as from the counsel of Balaam, ( Numb. 3^.16 and
elsewhere) may appear. This sin is not wanting in the Popish Church, especially
in the Clergy, their pretended vows are snares to bring it on, as experience
has proven; yea, Bellarm. de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 24. says, that it is more
tolerable to commit fornication, than for one under a vow to M^rrie, although
he have not the gift of continence, because, says he, Marriage reddit eu^^
inh^bilem ad votum servandum, which the other does not. By their principles
they maintain Bordels. It is said in Rome alone, the permission of them have
yielded yearly 40000 Crowns to the Pope. This sin is especially eminent among
their Clergy, and often in their Head the Pope himself: yea, one Pope Iean, or
Joan according to others, is recorded to have brought forth a child in her
Popedom. These things are not forged, but partly from experience have been
found, and by their own Historiographers have been set down; partly, by some
Godly men in these times, and others more civil have been often complained on
and regrated; partly, are manifest from the Popes donations, and offices
fr^quently bestowed upon their children, which continue to this day as avowed
testimonies of their public accession to this sin. The last, is, their thefts,
that is, the breach of the eighth Command, taking and wronging the estates of
men, and by indirect means drawing them to themselves, without any warrantable
right. This is especially applicable to the Romish Clergy, who by the pretext
of dotations, mortifications, indulgences, annates, Peter's patrimony and
Peters-pence, and such like means, have engrossed to themselves the whole
substance almost of Christendom. This sort of theft in the Pharisees, was long
since condemned by our Lord as a breach of the Commandment of God, Matthew. 15.5.
and 23.14. with 25. Of all which sins, it is not only employed that the
Antichristian world is guilty; but also that they, that is, the two parts not
destroyed by the Turks, continue so to practice without repenting of the same.

The charging of the Popes with these foul faults, will not seem strange, if we
consider what Platina, Martinus Onuphrius their own writers, and Bellarmin,
himself writes concerning them from the 670. forward: where abounded, 1.
Irregularity in elections by bribes, magic arts, ambition, faction and
violence, by poisoning and incarcerating their predecessors: so that Platina,
in vita Stephani 6. says, ^o deventum erat Ecclesiasticis, ut largitionibus
sedem obtinerent; The Churchmen came to this condition that they got the
Papacy by bribes. And Damas. 2. vi sedem occupavit, inoleverat enim hic mos,
ut cui seditioso liceret Petri sedem invadore; he took the Papacy by force,
for this was the custom, that any seditious person might by violence take up
Peter's seat. And, in the life of Sylvester the third, Eo enim Pontificatus
devenerat, ut qui plus largitione and ambitione, non dico sanctitate vitae and
doctrinae, valeret, is tantummodo bonis oppressis and rejectis obtineret: quem
morem utinam aliquando non retinuissent nostra tempora; sed hos parum est, etc.
The Papacy was come into this condition, that not he who was holiest and most
learned, but he who gave maniest bribes and was most ambitious, obtained it,
and that only by bearing down and casting at good men: which custom I wish our
times had not retained; but this is little of it, etc. 2. There is grossness
in their persons for adultery, cruelty, devilrie. John the 13. omnibus probris
ac turpitudinibus a pueritia contaminatus, venationibus, siquid temporis a
libidinibus supererat, magis quam orationibus deditus. Hic sceleratissimus in
adulterio comprehensus confossus fuit; An infamous and vile man even from his
infancy, what spare time he had from his lusts, was spent rather in Hunting
than Prayer, at length he was stobbed in the very act of Adultery. Sylvester 2.
malis artibus sedem adeptus, Diabolum socutus, cui se totum tradidorat, ea lege
Diaboli opem obtinuit, ut post mortem ejus totus esset; Sylvester 2. having got
the Papacy by unlawful ways, gave over himself to the devil, and got his
help upon that condition that he should be his wholly after death. 3. Great
cruelty in their poisoning, exhumating and beheading after death their
predecessors, rescinding all their acts, So that in Steph. 5. Haec consuetudo
invaluit, etc. See more in Chrystoph. 1. Boniface 7. Hildebrand and many
others. 4. Innumerable schisms, some of them reckon 26. decided ordinarily by
violence, and some of them with two or three Popes continuing many years, to
say nothing of John the 8. whom Martin. and Plat. call a woman, who of child
birth died in procession.

From what is said also we may gather, 1. That the Kingdom of Antichrist is not
fully to be overturned by the Turks, but that there remains the greatest part
undestroyed by that plague, upon which afterward the vials are poured forth,
Chap. 16. God restraining and bounding that destruction for the Churches and
Elects sake, which He had reserved, lurking amongst them.

2. We may see the tenaciousnesse of these men in not quiting their Idolatry,
and repenting of their sins, which makes way for the coming vials, under which
also it is marked ( Chap. 16.9.) that they repented not, but went on in their
blasphemies against God.

3. It appears, that the Idolatry and sins mentioned here, and the man who
continue impenitently in them, are not to be understood of the idolatry and
sins which the Pagan world is guilty of (whom God by this judgment aims not
to reclaim!) but such sins as the backslidden Church of Antichrist is guilty
of, that being the world, a third part whereof is destroyed, and two parts
whereof, for a time, are spared, as is said, it being not the rest of men
simply, but the rest of the men, which relate to the visible Church (the object
of these plagues) as contradistinguished from the rest of the world. Beside,
the idolatries, murders, etc. mentioned here, and the men who continue
impenitent in them, are the same who are plagued by the last woe and last
plagues or vials of the wrath of God; for, it is one continued controversy
upon the same account, but the men plagued for Idolatry, murder, fornication,
etc. by the vials, are the men who have the mark of the beast, Chap. 16.2.
charged with the blood of Saints, ibid. verse. 6. Yea, the seat of the beast
(untouched by this plague) ibid. verse. 10. found guilty also of Idolatry,
sorcery and fornication, Chap. 13.1, 2, 4, 5. and Chap. 17.4, 5, 6, etc.
Therefore they must be of one and the same Antichristian Church. For, seeing
such men under such guilt, are found tenacious of the same impiety under the
vials, although plagued by them, Whom can we esteem them to be but the men
spoken of here under the same guilt, who being spared, and yet continuing
therein, are of new brought unto a reckoning by the Lord? neither were it so
wonderful to see Heathens continue in their idolatries after crosses, but it
is wonderful to see Christians do so; more might have been expected from them.

4. Hence we may gather, that supposing the former trumpet, and Chap. 13.17. to
relate to the Romish Church (for which the exposition of these places may be
considered) and finding it true in the event, that the Romish Church, for a
great part thereof, is overrun by the Turks; yet the seat, and as it were a two
part of that Kingdom to be spared, according to this prophecy, I say, we may
gather, that the idolatry, sorcery, murder, etc. mentioned here, is to be
enquired for among them, and that it is their worship, service and practices
which are here so denominated by the Lord.

From what is said, we suppose it not needful to add many reasons why we have
applied this plague to the Turks or Mahometans, the consideration of what has
been laid down touching the object, nature, properties and effects of this sad
woe, being compared in the event with the rise, progress, success and nature
of the Turkish Empire; it will be found so evidently to be fulfilled in them,
as will leave no ground to question it. Only let it be observed, that we
conjoyn the Saracens and Turks together as one; for, they possess the same
parts of the world, did actually continue in one Dominion, do follow the same
Religion, Laws and Customs, and do observe the same manner of proceeding in
their Wars, with the same hatred of, and quarrel against Christians, etc. and
seeing in the event what is prophesied here, is found exactly to be fulfilled in
them, the considering of this prophecy, and the reading of their story, does
of it self make the application. And considering the great change and
destruction that by Mahom^ts means has been made especially in the Christian
world, it is not like it would be omitted in this prophecy; and, there will be
found no type so suitable, nor time so agreeable to it, as that of this trumpet.

This Mahomet lived a little before and about the 650. year (a little after
Boniface the third had assumed the title of Universal Bishop) he was an
Arabian, a subtle fellow, and no Christian, about the 630. With the help of
one Sergius a Nestorian Monk, and Ioannes Antiochenus an Arian, and some Jews
he began to coin his blasphemous Alcoran, wherein he endeavors a mixture of
Paganism, Judaism, and Christianity, but of the grostest kind, to wit, Arianism
and Nestorianism. It were long to rehearse all his tenets. He called himself
the great prophet, and blasphemously applied some Scriptures to that purpose;
he alleges that his writings (to wit, what he calls his Alfurca and
Alcoran) were given him from heaven, and are without error, and therefore
joyneth the Old Testament, the Gospel and the Alcoran together; he denies the
necessity of signs and wonders, but that the refusers of the Alcoran are to be
persecuted with the sword, and yet that no man is to be persecuted for his
Religion. To the receivers of the Alcoran be promises many great things, and
asserteth it to be confirmed by many victories from the Lord; he asserteth One
only true God, and denies the Trinity of Persons, and absurdly asserteth a
twofold personality of the Godhead; he is against all Idols and Images, and
alleges himself to be specially commissionated against Idol-worship: and it
may be that God having purposed him indeed to scourge that sin, has also
wisely ordered that, partly to make him the more isntrumental in pursuing that
sin, partly the more to convince and shame Christians that should be addicted
to it. These things and such like may be more fully gathered from the Alcoran
it self, and these who write of it. This is certain, that his monstrous
absurdities became taking to many, and he himself to have great temporal
power, especially on this occasion. Heraclius the Emperor in his wars against
the Persians, had a considerable Army of Arabians in his service, who being
dimitted after the war with reproachful speeches from their Officers, in stead
of pay, did fall to mutiny. Upon these this Mahomet so insinuated himself, that
he was received to be their head (from this came the name of Saracens; for,
these Arabians being indeed Ishmaelits, and Hagarens, but accounting it a
reproach to be descended of the bondwoman Hagar, to hide that, they claimed
title to Sarah, and so assumed her name) after this Mahomet and they having
prevailed in Arabia and settled in Mecha for a time, he left it, and invading
Syria, settled the head of their dominion in Damascus. From this forward they
speedily prevailed and did overrun many Kingdoms under the name of Saracens,
yet were restrained from having footting in Europe, till after the Turks
victory over them, they became of one Religion, under one head, for the further
strengthening of their union. Since that time their dominion has mightily
increased under the name of Turks, so that now they are not restrained in the
east as formerly, but do possess almost all the Grecian Empire, and parts of
the western Empire also, yet have been kept from overrunning Italy, it being
like that these are not to be made use of by the Lord for that piece of service
of darkening the Throne of the beast, which is reserved for another time.

If it should be objected here against this application, that these eastern
parts of the Empire, over which the Turk has prevailed, are such as have been
least submissive to the Pope, and therefore this plague of the Turks may rather
be looked on as a judgment on them for breaking unity with him, than as a
plague upon him. Ans. This is indeed harped upon by some of the Papists,
particularly by Bellarmin is his preface ad libros de Pontifice; But will be
clear by considering, 1. That once these Churches were professedly for the
generality of them under him, the whole Christian world being admirers and
worshippers of the beast, Chap. 13.8. and subject to the Pope, as they
themselves used to boast. Now, there being so many Christians destroyed by the
Turks, it must either infer a great destruction to be upon the Popish Kingdom,
or it must be said, that a third part of the Christian world did not belong to
him, which they will not willingly grant. 2. Suppose there was a withdrawing
from his usurpation in part, yet these same Churches, being once infected with
idolatry, error and superstition, by the Bishops of Rome, did still retain that
leaven, till this jugement came upon them, and so in plaguing them for these
evils, God gave warning to others lying in that same guilt. And that it pleased
the Lord to begin with these eastern Churches rather than others, these reasons
may be given, 1. Because he was not by these hands to overturn the beasts
throne, but was to reserve a two part of that Kingdom, for other wise ends
afterward. Therefore this west part of the world, is not first begun at. 2. In
these eastern Churches Antichrists Kingdom and his corruptions had been most
freely testified against and opposed, which made their guiltiness of after
yielding to be the more inexcusable and ripe for judgment. 3. By scourging them
first who seemed least accessorie to the guilt, the Lord would evidence how
displeasing any part of it is to Him, and the more to convince others who were
deeper therein; and it is agreeable to this, that these plagued here, are only
charged with such corruptions and sins of the Church of Rome, as these Churches
were guilty of; and the two part now reserved, and after plagued by the vials,
are beside these, charged with worshipping the beast and having his mark, Chap.
16.2. as if these did go a further length in the acknowledging of the
absoluteness of the Pope than this third part, who are at the first reckoned
with, did in that particular, though in the same guilt in respect of other
corruptions. But lastly, it is clear that by this Turkish dominion a great part
of the Romish power is ecclipsed, and many of all orders, who had their
dependence upon the Pope alone, were destroyed, whereof the war, called the
holy war, is an evidence, besides the overthrow of many Kingdoms, Armies and
Towns, who did directly own the Pope, and did not want his Holiness
encouragement and benediction, with many consecrated Crosses, Swords, Banners,
and the like, as pledges thereof: yea, not long before the ruin of that
eastern Empire, diverse of the Emperors thereof, came purposly to be crowned
at Rome, as acknowledging their dignity of the Pope; and ( Anno 1274.) Michael
Emperor of Constantinople, promised to Pope Gregory the tenth the obedience
of all the Grecian Churches: upon which grounds it is evident, that we may
warrantably say that the tyranny of the Turks has been a great plague to the
Romish Ecclesiastic Kingdom, and that these who were destroyed by them, were
generally accessory to the guilt of their corruptions.

Concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome.
IT may be of great concernment (and possibly of more difficulty) to clear
this, that the Church of Rome by their worshipping of Images, relicts, and such
like, even though they intend the worshipping of the true God, are yet
notwithstanding really guilty of idolatry: and though it be not pertinent for
this place to insist in it by a long digression; yet, (considering of what
concernment it is for the clearing of this prophecy, and for warranting the
application thereof to the Church of Rome, both in this Chapter and in many
Chapters following) we think it necessary to lay down some things which may
bear this application.

For the making out of this charge of Idolatry and worshipping of devils upon
the Church of Rome, we shall first lay down what is such in the Scripture
account. 2. What the Church of Rome does practice concerning their Images and
worship given to them. 3. Make out, that these practices are condemned in the
Scripture, as worshipping of Idols the work of men's hands, etc. It is not our
purpose to enlarge the first two, in speaking either of all the Idolatry which
the Scripture condemns, or yet of all the practices of the Church of Rome,
which come in under this guilt, but so much as relates to Images especially.

For the first, The Scriptures reckon and condemn a twofold Idolatry in
reference to Images. 1. When the Image it self is accounted God and worshipped
as such. This Idolatry is properly against the first Command, and is generally
condemned in the practice of the Heathen.

The second sort of Idolatry, is, when the Images themselves are not
worshipped, as having any Godhead properly in themselves; but as they relate
to, represent, and are made use of in the worship of Him who is accounted God,
so that the motive moving to worship, is pretended respect to the God
represented by them, which we will find both amongst Heathens and amongst the
people of God, the one worshipping the Images of their Idols, not as gods
themselves, but as intending to worship their gods in these, and by these; yet
are they commonly condemned in the Scripture, not only for worshipping their
supposed gods, but for worshipping the Images whereby they did represent them;
the other, to wit, the people of God, professing to worship the true God, and
yet for doing it by Images, and to Images, are condemned for worshipping of
Images themselves, as the after instances will clear.

This sort of idolatrous worship may be two ways tried,

1. When we worship him with such worship as Idolaters used to their Idols.
Thus the representing of the true God by Images, making high places and groves
to Him, are condemned, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, 25. and Deuteronomy. 12. verse. 31, 32. and 2 Chronicles. 33. verse. 17. where, sacrificing in the high places, though to the Lord
their God, is marked as a relict of their Idolatry.

2. It may be tried by this, when religious worship alone due to God, is given
to any thing which is not the true God, though it were to instruments and means
appointed by Himself: such Idolatry is condemned in Cornelius, Act. 10. and in
John, Revel. 19. and the peoples going a whoring after the brazen Serpent (much
more when that worship is given to any thing which is not made use of in the
worship of God by His appointment, as Images of Angels, Saints, or of the Lord
Himself) Thus it had been Idolatry under the Old Testament, to have worshipped
the Tables of stone, Pot of Manna, Moses Rod, Paschal Lamb, or such things
ordinarily or extraordinarily made use of by God. These properly come under the
second Command, whereby we are discharged, not only to worship false gods, or
Images as gods; but also are inhibited to worship the true God any way not
prescribed by Him, but especially by Images.

If it be questioned what this Religious worship is, we take it up thus,

1. That worship which the Scripture only appropriateth to the true God, as
praying and vowing to Him, swearing by His Name, building Temples, Altars, etc.
seeking the restoring of health and such like.

2. We call that Religious worship, which Idolaters use to give to their
supposed gods, such as to kiss an Image, Hos. 13.2. to sacrifice and burn
incense to them, set lights before them, and appoint Priests for them, Judge.
17. and of this sort was that Idolatry ( Act. 14.) of offering sacrifices to
Paul and Barnabas; for, these things have ever been counted Religious by men,
and given to Idols upon that account, neither ever has it been or can it be
given to Images upon another account.

3. When the worship is not civil, it must be accounted Religious, as may be
gathered from the circumstances thereof, as if the act, end and other
circumstances be Religious, the action or worship it self must be so also; as
it is one thing to bow the knee in a salutation to a man, it is another thing
to bow in prayer, and that before an Image, to do it occasionally, and in such
place, and purposly, as a piece of Religion and worship; to bow the knee at a
table or before an Image, is one thing, but to do it before an Image, set up
for a Religious end at a table, upon which Christ is esteemed to be really
present, is another.

That we may be distinct in the second, we shall, 1. consider what is the
practice of Papists. 2. What is their Doctrine concerning this sort of worship,
and that in so far as is uncontroverted by them.

1. We will find infinite numbers of Images framed for the worship of God, and
of the persons of the Godhead, distinctly, of the Virgin Marie, the Cross,
Angels, Saints, etc. 2. We will find them in their practice giving great
worship to all these, kneeling to them, discovering themselves before them,
offering oblations, and putting up prayers to them, building Temples, and
sanctifying of them by these, carrying them in processions, etc. 3. We will
find a worship given to Angels and Saints in a high degree; as praying,
dedicating of Temples, swearing by them, seeking their intercession: of such
kind are to the virgin Marie, as follows, Ora pro nobis, sancta Dei genitrix,
ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi. Dulcis amica Dei, rosa vernans,
stella decora, iu memor est^ mei dum mortis venerit hora. Ave, santissima matter
Dei, regina Coeli, porta Paradisi, Domina mundi, libera me ab omni malo, ora
pro peccato meo, that is, O holy Mother of God, pray for us, that we may be
made worthy of the promises of Christ. Sweet friend of God, the pleasant Rose,
and glorious Star, be mindful of me when the hour of death shall come. Hail,
most holy Mother of God, the Queen of Heaven, the port of Paradise, the lady of
the world, deliver me from all evil, pray for my sin. And infinite numbers of
this kind to be gathered from the Roman Breviarie, that is called Psalterium
Marianum; a compend whereof, is set down by Chemnitius in his Examen of the
Council of Trent, part. 3. de veneratione sanctorum and little invocatione. So
are also their prayers to other Saints, as to Elizabeth; Eia, matter, nos
agnosce, etc. O Mother, acknowledge us, etc. To Nicolas; Credo, sancte Nicolas,
tuis me procibus esse salvandum, id^o te clamo, etc. Serva me supplicem famulum
tuum, amice Dei Nicolae, de praesentibus angustiis and tribulationibus, quia in
te confidit anima mea, ut per t^ me salvet qui te sibi elegit. I believe, holy
Nicolas, to be saved by thy prayers, therefore I cry upon thee, etc. O Nicolas,
the friend of God, save me thy humble servant from my present straits and
tribulations, because my soul trusts in thee, that He who has chosen thee to
Himself may save me through thee. Sancta Dorothea, cor mundum in me crea; Holy
Dorothie, creat in me a clean heart: and hundreds of that kind. Yea, it is that
length, that the Jesuits do monthly (as Lorinus in 1. Act. asserteth) cast lots
what Saint to choose for their Patron, for the month ensuing. Luther pronounced
this sort of Idolatry to be the cause of the Turks War against Christendom, as
in vita ajus apud Melch. Adam.

4. Beside what worship is given to Saint^ and their Images, there is also a
worshipping of the material Cross, Nails and other things made use of in our
Lords suffering, and of the Images of that Cross, of the Saints Relics, and
Clothes of the Sacrament of the Altar or Mass, or the Host, as they call it;
these they adore, to these (especially the Cross) they direct their prayers,
as, O crux, ave, spes unica, hoc passionis tempore, Auga piis justitiam reisque
dona veniam. Hail O Cross, my only hope, in this time of Christ's suffering,
increase in the Godly righteousness, and grant pardon to sinners. This is
brought in by Aquinas, 3. part. 4. art. quast. 25. as the ground whereby he
pleads the highest degree of divine Worship to the Cross; because that song
is used in the Church, insisted on also by Bonaventura, lib. 3. insententias,
ad distinct. 9:

These practices (and innumerable more) are the practices not of a few
particular persons, but are contained in the public Liturgies of their
Churches, we shall now enquire in their Doctrine concerning these practices,
wherein we will not find them so unanimous: our enquiry is especially
concerning the worshipping of Images.

1. They do generally agree, that Images of all these sorts may be made, and
being made, ought to be worshipped with more than civil Worship, and with
respect to these represented by them. And though this be determined by the
second Council of Nice, formerly mentioned, and again ratified in their late
Council of Trent, as may be seen in the acts thereof; yet are they not one
among themselves in defining the nature of this Worship. Their prime Schoolmen,
Aquinas, part. 3. quast. 25. Bonaven. lib. 3. ^ist. 9. and others their
followers, give to the Image that same worship which they give to that which is
represented by it, to wit, to the Images of God and to the Cross, they give
that which they call (...); to the Image of the Virgin Mary (...), a worship
above what is given to other Saints; to the Images of Saints (...) it self.
Upon this ground (cited out of Aristotle) that honor done to the type,
honors him that is typified. And they labor to vindicate themselves from
Idolatry by this distinction, that these Images may be considered, either, 1.
respectu materiae, as they are of Gold, Silver, etc. Or, 2. respectus formae
and significationis, as they signify and represent; the first way they honor
them not, but the second, say they. Ergo, etc. In which distinction we conceive
the Heathen themselves would acquies^e; for, no Gold or Silver was worshipped
by them, but as in such a form, and as under such a signification.

Again, Durand. (who has not many followers in this, and is marked to be a
special opposer of Thomas his Doctrine) though he asserteth that worship is to
be given to the Images; yet says, that it is not properly given to them, but
to what is represented by them, so as our adoring of the Image, is the adoring
of Him brought to our memory by the Image, as if He were present. Thus he, Lib.
3. distinct. 9. Quast. 2.

3. The later Writers, who would seem more subtle, as Bellar. Gregor. de
Valent. etc. look upon these former two opinions as extremes, the one giving
too much, and the other too little to Images. Therefore Gregor. de Valent. in
3. disp. 6. quaest. 11. punct. 6. does condemn Durand for this alswell, though
not in the same degree, as he does the Heretics. Their judgment is (although
even they differ, Gregor. de Valent. being nearer Thomas than the other, yet
both account it proper worship) that the Images should be truly and properly
worshipped with Religious worship (relatively, as they call it) that is, with
respect to the thing represented. Thus in one act of worship, they worship both
the Image and the thing signified, with a worship suitable, but not equal, and
the same with that which is given to what is signified; as for instance, in
worshipping the image of God, they worship God represented by the Image with
the highest degree of honor; they worship the Image also properly, but not
with the same honor, because they worship God for Himself, His Image for Him,
and not for it self. Again, the Image of the Virgin Mary, is worshipped with
true worship, but inferior to what is given to her self for the reason
foresaid, and also inferior to what is given to the Image of God, but beyond
what worship is given to the Image of any other Saint, because she her self is
inferior to God, though superior to other Saints. This manner of worship they
illustrate by an example; as suppose a great Courtier to be made Commissioner
and Ambassador for his Prince, he is received and honored with all Kingly
reverence due to him, whose Person he sustains; in this, say they, that honor
is principally given to the King, who is honored in his Ambassador, as if he
himself were present, yet truly and properly the Ambassador may be said to be
so reverenced, and to have all that honor done to him, as he fills that room
by representing his King, and, as such, he is really and truly honored also;
even so, say they, is it here. The honor of the thing represented is
principally aimed at, yet so as for that end the Image representing is really
and truly honored with that same worship which should be given to him that is
represented if he were present, only it is not for its self, and so in that
respect inferior. Neither do they esteem this to be Idolatry; because they
esteem Idolatry to consist in this, the giving of Divine worship to the
creature after that same manner, and upon the same account that is given to
God. And therefore, although they give the same Divine worship to the Image
which they give to God in it self, yet seeing they give it not upon that
account, as if the image were God, and for it self, but relatively, Therefore
can it not be Idolatry, because they never conjoyn these two together, (as
Gregor. de Valent. ibid. ut supra, expresses it, ut and cultum divinum
usurpent, and illum qua ratione Deo exhiberi debeat, tribuant creatura, hoc
est, ipsis imaginibus secundum se (and, as a little after, sicut Deo) and
therefore, illi ejusmodi adoratione nunquam committunt idolatriam.

It is generally granted further by the forcited Authors, that the making of
Images to God, was simply prohibited under the Old Testament, and that there is
nothing under the New Testament to establish this worship, but that it is
grounded upon tradition, and the Churches determination confirmed by a famous
tradition of the Lords sending His own portraictour to Abagarus; and of Luke's
painting the Lord and His Mother, which are amongst their unanswerable
arguments for establishing this worship. Therefore when that horned argument is
propounded, Either Images are warranted by the Word or not; If they be
warranted by the Word, that warrant is to be produced: if not, then are they
not to be valued. Eccius, answering to this in his Enchiridion, does no way
offer to instruct their warrant from the Word, but asserteth many things in
practice to be warranted by tradition, such as is for this. If then we make out
this, that such ^orshipping of Images, notwithstanding of such exceptions, be
condemned in Scripture, as Idolatry, we have what we proposed, and if this can
be gathered from the foresaid grounds laid down by their most coutelous
Doctors, what might be collected from the principles of their superstitious
Mor^ks and practices of ignorant people, especially if they were considered as
in the time of darkness, before the light of Reformation made them alter many
expressions? Cassander, speaking of their worshipping of Images, says,
Consult, deimag. that these Images were more or less reverently worshipped as
they were more or less gorgeously apparelled, and that these which should have
drawn others from these superstitions, proved to be the Authors thereof
themselves, that ( quaestus causa) they did nourish them among the people.

Argument 1. If the Heathens who believed an invisible Godhead, be yet found
guilty of this idolatry of worshipping stocks and stones, etc. because they
worshipped Images of such matter, even though they professed the worshipping of
the God represented by these, and did disclaim the acknowledging of these
Images to be their gods, or of worshipping them as such, but with relation to
the God represented by them: Then this worshipping of Images amongst the
Papists must be so also, notwithstanding of their exceptions: But the former is
true. Therefore the latter must be true also.

The connection of the major cannot but hold; for, if they be found guilty not
only of worshipping the Idols represented by their Images, but also the Images
themselves, because they worshipped their gods as represented in and by these
images, so must the Papists be accounted worshippers of Images upon that same
account; for, a quatenus ad omne, valet consequentia.

It cannot be said, that the worshipping of Images among the Heathen is only
condemned as Idolatry, because they made Images to represent false gods, or
because they represented the true God by unsuitable Images, as of an Ox that
eats grass, Psalm. 106. For, 1. Idolatry and making of Images at the
beginning, was not with respect to false gods, but was a degenerating from, and
corrupting of the worship of the true God, as may be gathered from Romans 1.23.
where it is said of the Gentiles, that knowing God they worshipped Him not as
God, but changed His glory, not the glory of an Idol, into the similitude, etc.
and it is like, this corrupting of the worship of the true God made way for the
altering of the very object of their worship, as an effect of the Reprobate
mind which followed. Something of this also may be gathered from Acts 17. in
Paul's dispute at Athens. This exception then would not serve to convince
these, whom yet the Scripture condemns. a. We answer, that the connection will
hold even in reference to these who represented false gods, suppose Jupiter,
Diana, Apollo, and such, because they were not only charged with worshipping
these Idols, Jupiter, Apollo, Baal, etc. which were not the work of men's hands,
but they are also charged with worshipping the works of their own hands, and
images of these Idols, whom they pretended to worship by these representations,
and adorations before them; and therefore the ratio a pari, will hold in this,
that if these exceptions did not liberate them from the charge of worshipping
their Images the work of their hands, So neither will it be effectual to
exempt the Papists, because the Argument runs not to prove them to represent
false gods by their Images, but that the worship done to the Image (though
pretended to be done to another) is also counted a worshipping of the Images
themselves before God.

The other exception is of that same nature: for, the Scripture condemeneth not
worshipping of God in Images, because they were Images of unreasonable
creatures only, but simply, because they were Images: Romans 1. they are charged,
that they changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, to the Image of
corruptible man; and Augustine, de civitare Dei, clears out of Varro, lib. 7.
cap. 5. that the Gentiles portraicted their gods in man's picture chiefly,
though they were invisible, because man's soul is likest to them, and man's body
being the vessel of the soul, is therefore the fittest Image to represent them,
yet can it not be said, but that comes still to be Idolatry.

The weight then of this Argument will ^y in the Assumption, to wit, that even
these Heathens who are charged with worshipping Images in Scripture the work of
their hands, did yet solemnly disclaim their accounting these Images to be
gods, but that they worshipped them for the honor of the God whom they
represented. This appears, 1. by considering these places of Scripture, Romans
1.21. Acts 17. where the Apostles dispute runs to condemn that opinion, That
the unknow God ignorantly worshipped by them, could be worshipped by men's
hands, verse. 28. that is to say, by making of Images, or could be represented
by silver or gold, or any other thing, verse. 29. And although their thoughts of
God might be more gross, yet this is ever true, that they accounted not their
images to be the God whom they worshipped, and so did not worship them for
themselves (or, secundum se) but relatively with respect to others also. Act.
19.35. express difference is put betwixt Diana and her Images, and the silver
shrines that were made to her, and Jupiter is asserted to be in heaven, and
therefore was distinctly considered by them from the Images they made unto him.

2. It will appear from reason, if we consider that they placed their gods in
Heaven. 2. That they had many Images of one God. 3. That they often changed
their Images, but not their gods. 4. That many whom they worshipped by Images,
were once such as had been living in the world, unto whose honor they erected
such Images, but could never nor did never suppose them to be the persons
themselves.

3. It will appear from the Heathens own disputings and assertions, whereby
they shifted that absurdity of worshipping the works of their hands; yet is it
by the Fathers, on this ground, born in upon them. See August. in Psalm. 113. (
nobis 115.) where, having asked the Question, why the Scripture insisteth so
much to clear that the Images of the Gentiles can neither speak nor hear, etc.
which could not but be known to a child? the reason is, says he, Because by
erecting such Images, people are ready to conceive some Godhead to be in them.
Hence when they were pressed with this absurdity of worshipping the work of their
hands, they did deny it, saying, that they worshipped not the Image, but the
numen or God which dwelt in it, and was represented by it, and that after its
dedication. If some of them were pressed further, that that numen or god was but
a devil, they would answer, nec simulachrum nec daemonium colo, sed per
effigiem corporalem ejus rei signum intueor quam colere debeo; I neither
worship an Idol nor a devil, but by a bodily Image I behold the sign of that
thing which I should worship. If Christians pressed yet further, that the things
represented were but creatures as Tellus, Neptune, Vulcan, Lucifer, etc. or
some Star, or this or that creature which was a body, yet, says he, they durst
answer, non se ipsa corpora colere, sed quae illis regendis praesident numina;
that they worshipped not the creatures, but the gods that ruled in them. In
consideration whereof, he cites that place, Romans 1. of changing the truth of
God into a lie, and serving the creature more than the Creator, as if by the
first part, the Apostle did condemn Images of God, and by the second their
interpretations of the worship given to them, because it is there counted a
serving of the creature whatever their pretext was; for (says he) who, praying
or worshipping, beholding an Image, is not so affected as if he thought to be
heard by it, and hoping to have what he desires performed by it? Therefore
(says he) men involved in such superstitions, turn themselves to pray to that
Image which they call the Sun, or Neptune, etc. as if they could affect them
with their sighings, and give that same respect to them as to the thing
signified by them, and pray to the Image before they pray to the thing it self.
This (says he) comes and someway is extorted by that visible Image, as
thinking that readiest to hear which it in shape likest to our selves, etc.
where many other things are further to this purpose. Also, in Psalm. 96. (
nobis, 97.) where he brings in the Heathen giving this answer, Non illud colo
seu adora quod video, sed servio ei quem non video, quis est iste? Numen
quoddam invisibile quod praesides illi simulachro: where they distinguish
betwixt adoro and servio, as Papists do between (...) and (...). If it were
objected further to these heathens, that they worshipped devils, they would
answer. They worshipped good Angels and virtutes Dei. It is replied in the same
place, If they worshipped good Angels, they would reject their worship, as that
Angel did to John, Rev. 19, etc. This way of shifting also may be found in
Lactantius, de origin erroris, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. apud. Chrylost. in Ephesians. 5. hom.
18. From all which we may gather, that the heathens wanted not the same shifts
for excusing their worshipping of Images, yet was it still charged upon them,
that they worshipped Idols which neither saw nor heard, etc. although still
they denied it.

2. Thus we argue: If the people of Israel were accounted guilty of Idolatry
and worshipping of devils, and the works of their hands, because of their
worshipping Images, which they professedly erected to the true God, and even
when they pretended the abhorring of false gods, and the adhering unto the true
God, Then must the same guilt be justly charged upon the Papists, who worship
Images, as is said; But the former is true. Ergo, etc. The connection of the
major depends on this, that the inhibition of Idolatry and manner of
worshipping God under the New Testament, is as strict and spiritual as it was
under the Old. And therefore these who say that such making of Images of the
Godhead and worshipping them, was unlawful before Christ's coming, but now is
made lawful, must show some repeal of that Law, before that can be granted.
Beside, these Images being pleaded-for as Books for the rude and ignorant, it
is unreasonable to say, that there is more use of such Books under the light of
the Gospel, than during the Law which stood in types.

The weight of this also will ly then upon the Assumption, to wit, that the
people of Israel were charged with Idolatry in their worshipping of Images,
even then when they pretended the worshipping of the true God by them. For
clearing this, we shall consider these four Instances, 1. Exodus 32. 2. That of
Micah, Judge. 17. 3. That Idolatry of Ieroboans which the Tribes of Israel
continued long in. 4. That worshipping in the high places, condemned in the
Tribe of Judah, 2. Chron. 33.17. In all which places, we suppose these two to
be clear, 1. That these worshippers intended not the worshipping of false gods,
or of the Images which they had made, but to worship the true God by these.
And, 2. that yet they are still condemned as Idolaters, and that sin of
Ioroboam's is expressly called worshipping of devils, 2 Chronicles. 11.15. For the
first instance, Exodus 32. it is clear, 1. that they were not utterly forgetful
of the true God, though practically that might be charged upon them, especially
considering Aaron's uncontroverted going along with them. 2. That that Image
is called JEHOVAH, which brought them out of Egypt; which being a deliverance
past, before these Image had a being, must certainly be understood to be the
representation of that God which brought them out of the Land of Egypt. 3. It
can hardly be thought they should have esteemed these to be gods themselves,
and so soon to have passed from them. 4. The service is service to the Lord,
verse. 5. To morrow is a feast (not to the Calf) but to JEHOVAH. The worship
performed, ( verse. 6.) is not that which they used to give to Idols, but to the
Lord Himself; the peoples end in requiring it, that they might have something
to supply the want of Moses presence by some visible sign, and to have these
to go up before them to Canaan whether the Lord called them and not back again
to Egypt, does make it appear, that their sin charged on them ( verse. 8.) of
turning out of the way, looks to point out their failing to have been in
their manner of worshipping the true God by an unwarrantable mean, especially
if we compare this with Acts 7.40, 41, 42. where this Idolatry is made the
cause of Gods giving them up to worship the host of Heaven. Now, by Stephen's
arguing, the worshipping the host of Heaven must be Idolatry of a grosser
nature, than that committed by the Israelites, Exodus 32. and yet if their
Idolatry was professed worshipping of the calves as gods, it will be found more
gross than to worship the host of Heaven, at least there can be no such
sensible gradation of heightening that Spiritual plague of worshipping the
host of Heaven beyond the other, which is Stephen's scope; therefore it is thus
to be understood, that because they corrupted the worship of the true God,
contrary to His command, therefore God gave them up to the worshipping of these
that are not gods, such as the host of Heaven; which way of justice, was
formerly observed in reference to the Gentiles from Romans 1, etc. So that the
construction put upon their deed, ( Acts. 7.41.) is the Lords estimation of it
and not their own profession, and that the Israelites intended the worship of
the true God in these calves, Bellarmin thinks it not improbable, de imag.
lib. 2. cap. 13.

The second instance is in Micah's practice, Judge. 17. where it is clear, that
they counted not that Idol to be God, but intended the worship of the true God
by it: for ( verse. 3.) the mother says she had dedicated that money to the
Lord, to make a graven and molten Image, intending expressly to honor the Lord,
in bestowing so much on that Image for him: For she first dedicateth the money
to Him, and then bestows it (as it were) for His use upon that Image. 2. It
appears by Micah's great zeal to have a Levit to be his Priest, and his joy
when he obtained it, and his promising himself a blessing from the Lord upon
that account; which certainly supponeth, that he intended good service to
JEHOVAH in the doing of that, verse. 13. And lastly, we find that Priest
enquiring counsel for the Danits; not from the Image, but from the Lord:
whereby it appears, that they intended not the setting up of new gods, but
the honoring of the Lord and confirming of themselves by visible signs of His
presence.

The third instance, is, that of Jeroboam, 1 King. 12. 2 Chronicles. 11. in his
infamous sin of setting up calves at Dan and Bethel, whereby he made Israel to
sin: that this is most gross Idolatry and worshipping of devils, the Scripture
frequently holds forth. Yet, 2. that it was not Ieroboam's design to withdraw
the people from the true God Himself, to the worshipping of these calves as
God, but allanerly by corrupting the manner of His worship to set up these
visible signs of His presence in place of these appointed by Himself at
Jerusalem, will also appear, if we consider, 1. Ieroboams motive, inducing him
to this sin: it was not for fear the people should worship the true God, or to
prevent that; but it was for fear of the peoples going to Jerusalem, and to
prevent that: hence his pretext is not to put these calves in the room of the
God worshipped at Jerusalem, but to equal Dan and Bethel with these visible
signs to Jerusalem according to his saying, It is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem, as if he would say, ye may worship God nearer home in these places
designed. Neither is it likely, that he could have so expected to have
effectuated his interprise by proposing a change in the object of their
worship. 2. It will appear from this, that that Idolatry of Jeroboam is not
only distinguished from the true worship of God continued for a time in Judah;
but also from the Iolatry of Heathens abroad, and Idolatrous Kings succeeding
to him, such as that of Ahab. 1 King. 16. 30, etc. (who yet it seems wanted
not all profession of worshipping the true God) Iereboam's Idolatry is counted
light in respect of Ahab, and no other reason can be given, but because Ahab,
and these Sidonians, whom he followed, erred in setting up strange gods; and
Jeroboam his error did consist in setting up strange worship to the true God:
and when Iehu is commended for destroying the Idolatry of Ahab (2 Kings Chap.
9. and 10.) it cannot be thought, that he changed only the worshipping of Baal
into the worshipping of Ieroboam's calf, without respect to the true God. For,
1. what less abomination were it to worship the image of a calf than the image
of Baal. 2. That could not consist with John's fair professions of zeal for the
Lord, if he had not thought the worshipping of these calves (upon the former
politic consideration of Jeroboam) consistent with worshipping of the true
God, 2 King. 10.31. John's challenge, is, that he took not heed to walk in the
Law of the Lord with all his heart; for, he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam: which words imply, that John had some profession of worshipping the
true God, but was not sincere in the manner of it; which phrase is also
sometimes spoken of sundry Kings of Judah. Beside (2 King. 10.23.) John
separateth between the worshippers of Baal and of the true God: and who were
these, but even such as continued in the sins of Jeroboam? 3. We will find,
even in Israel, whiles that Idolatry continued in it, a general
acknowledgement of the true God (by the Kings and People of these times) and of
his Prophets: all which were inconsistent with their worshipping of the calves
as the true God: beside, even after the captivity of these ten Tribes, we will
find the new inhabitants plagued for their Idolatrous worship, which made them
enquire for the manner of the God of the Land; which mixture in the service of
the true God with their Idols, continued even till Christ came. By all which,
it appears that the people of Israel never so esteemed of their calves as to
account them gods, or to place them in the room of the true God; but that they
esteemed themselves to be worshipping him when they worshipped them, which was
the thing intended to be proven.

The fourth instance is from 2 Chronicles. 33.17. Nevertheless, the people did
still sacrifice in the high places, yet unto the Lord their God only. That this
sacrificing in the high places (where the Groves and Images ordinarily were)
was to no Idol, but to the Lord only, is expressly asserted in the Text; and in
this it is differenced from the peoples sacrificing formerly before Manasses
repentance unto Idols. Now, their fault is, that they continue that manner of
worship formerly used to their Idols and apply it to God.

That this practice of theirs is a kind of Idolatry, will also thus appear, 1.
It is excepted as a thing that was discommendable, Nevertheless, they
sacrificed in the high places, etc. and consequently it must belong to one of
the commands, which can be to none so well as the second, and must therefore be
a breach of it. 2. Their sacrificing now is in general a sin of that same kind
with their sacrificing formerly; But their sacrificing formerly was Idolatry:
only this is the difference, it was formerly Idolatry against the first
command, but now it belongs to the second as failing in the manner of
worshipping the true God. If it be said there is no mention of Images here? We
answer, It does make the more to the scope to condemn worshipping of God by
Images, seeing He notes it as so great a sin, where no Images are, that there
was yet so much of Manasses Idolatry unremoved, while the people continued that
custom. And, 2. the peoples sacrificing there, does imply, 1. a worshipping of
God in a way not warranted by Him. 2. A worshipping of Him at Heathens (and
they themselves) used formerly to worship their Idols. 3. Their sacrificing in
the high places does suppose a greater sanctity and fitness in these places
than in other places, and a greater acceptablnesse to their sacrifices in these
places, Besides that, it is derogatory to the place appointed by the Lord for
that end. All which sins do come under the Idolatry forbidden in the second
command, and do stand on these same grounds, upon which worshipping of God by
Images is built, And therefore does infer a charge of Idolatry upon people,
even while professing to worship the true God in that unwarrantable way.

3. We argue, If this worship formerly described be against the second command
of the Moral Law, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. It
must then be Idolatry: But the former is true. The connection is undeniable; for
whether we take these words as a distinct command by themselves (as necessarily
they must be, condemning an Idolatrous manner of worship, as is said) or, if we
take them as a part of the first command (as Papists and Lutherans generally
do) yet still they are a part of the Moral Law, and must be binding according
to their native signification; and seeing by these ten commands, the Lord has
laid on ties of perpetual obligation upon Christans under the Gospel, as well
as on His people of old, if it be found that the forbidding of making or
worshipping of Images comes under this command, whether first or second, It
must also be still obligatory, and will not be gotten easily shifted out of the
roll of the commands. For the minor, to wit, that this command condemns as
Idolatry all representing of the true God, or worshipping of Him by Images,
even when the Images are not worshipped for themselves, but for Him, It may be
thus made out, 1. If by this command the Idolatry of Ieroboa^^, and that
sacrificing in the high places, (2 Chronicles. 33.17, etc.) be condemned, Then such
worship (as has been said) must be condemned by it also. That these practices
were of this nature and are condemned, has been formerly made out. That they
are condemned by this command, appears: for, they must either be condemned by
it, or by the first, they are not condemned by the first, which requires the
only true object of Worship to be worshipped (for, they did not disclaim that)
Therefore it must be by the second.

More particularly the scope of this command, is, to condemn all will worship,
and worshipping of God otherwise than He has prescribed, as Idolatry; and
worshipping of Him by Images is grounded upon no Scripturall warrant, but their
own tradition, as is said. 2. This Command forbids all serving of the true
God after the manner which the Heathens used in serving their Idols: So, Deuteronomy.
12. comparing verse. 2, 3. with the 4. I^ shall not do so unto the Lord your
God, etc. Again, verse 30. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by
enquiring how did these Nations serve their gods? verse. 31. Thou shall not do
so to the Lord thy God. It is not, thou shall not do so to these Idols, but not
so in that manner to the true God, as they did to their Idols: But verse. 32.
What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto,
nor diminish from it. Yet, more particularly the command does instance two
things, 1. That no Image should be made; not simply condemning all painting,
etc. but all Images of God, or, for worship. Deuteronomy. 4.12. it is observed, that
the people heard a voice, but saw no Image, lest thereby they had taken
occasion to represent Him: which fault the Lord upbraideth, Isa. 40. To whom
will ye liken me that I should be like him? And though Christ Jesus, the second
person, has now assumed our nature, yet it cannot be thought that the making
the image of a man can represent that person who is God and man in two distinct
natures: and this command being Moral, and binding now, as we said, it must be
still as impossible, and unwarrantable to represent God as ever. Even the
Tridentine Catechize, ( Sect. 19. i^ 1. Praecept.) affirms this to be a
breach of this command, and says, that Israel sinned so in representing God by
an Ox, Exodus 32. with Psalm. 106. The second thing condemned in this command,
is, the worshipping of Images made of whatever shape, or kind, and with such
expressions, Thou shall not bow down to them nor serve them, and backed with
such reasons, For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, etc. as purposly
intending the overthrowing of all distinctions in this matter. In a word, if
multiplying of Images in Gods service be not contrary to this command, we can
conceive no other meaning to it, nor imagine any other use of it; which were
absurd to attribute to the only wise God, as having needlessly put so many words
in such a short sum; and yet, by denying this meaning of it, this will follow,
And therefore the razing it out of the number, and oftentimes from the society
of the rest of the commands (as the Papists usually do by omitting this in
their Catechises which necessarily follows on their Exposition) must infer
one of two, either the uselessenesse of this command, as is said, or its direct
striking against such worship, which may be the reason why they so willingly
are content to bury it. If therefore this command be a peculiar and perpetual
command of God, binding us Christians to serve Him according to the rule of His
Word, and particularly inhibiting the making or worshipping of Images for His
service, Then it will follow, that the worship of the Romish-church, as
formerly described, must be Idolatrous and against this command. And so they
are justly to be charged with worshipping Gold and Silver, and the work of men's
hands, which was the thing proposed to be enquired into.

From all which it may appear, 1. What the Popish worship is esteemed of before
God; it is d^vilry, idolatry, murder, theft and adultery, etc. This is His
construction of their services: and what a sad thing is it, that the most part
of the Christian world with delight should own these abominations?

2. It appears, that when once men darken the light of the Word, and come
over that, there is no rod read^ly that does convince or profit them; now they
adhere to their former superstitions, notwithstanding of all these rods that
the Lord had brought upon them. There is need to use light well; for, it is
precious; and when once it is put out, men may forever continue in darkness.
This is fulfilled in the particular instanced; for, though the Popish service
is loathsome to a Spiritual discerner, yet is the world so drunk and bewitched
with it, that hardly by any mean the favorers thereof are brought to abandon
it, which is the fulfilling of this prophecy; and therefore although it were
never so clear, that their practice is Idolatry, yet can it not be expected
that they will acknowledge it, this being both a part of their sin and plague,
as is usual in the most gross Idolatry, Isa. 44.18. etc. Romans 1. Which ought
to make men admire and tremble at the depth of the unsearchablenesse of Gods
justice and fear them from communion in these sins that mar even the reason of
these that fall in them, which is no less discernable and terrible in respect
of these who are mad upon their idols in the way of Antichristian Idolatry,
than in Heathens, in respect of their blind doting upon their idols. And there
is reason for this, that these who have not received the light of the Gospel in
love, should be given up to strong delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2. as these, who did not
walk according to the light of nature, and did not like to retain God to their
knowledge, were given over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28.

LECTURE
CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. ANd I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a
cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun,
and his feet as pillars of fire.

2. And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon
the sea, and his left foot upon the earth,

3. And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had cried,
seven thunders uttered their voices.

4. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write:
and I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Seal up those things which the
seven thunders uttered, and write them not.

5. And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lifted up
his hand to heaven,

6. And swear by him that lives for ever and ever, who created heaven and the
things that therein are, and the earth and the things that therein are, and the
sea and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer.

7. But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to
sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the prophets.

8. And the voice which I heard from heaven spoke unto me again, and said, Go,
and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which stands
upon the sea, and upon the earth.

9. And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little book. And
he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter,
but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.

10. And I took the little book out of the angels hand, and ate it up, and it
was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was
bitter.

11. And he said unto me, Thou must prophecy again before many peoples, and
nations, and tongues, and kings.


THe sixth Angel having sounded, whereby the second great woe is brought into
the world, it might be expected that the sounding of the seventh should be
immediately set down, but, as after the opening of the sixth seal ( Chap. 6.)
there is something necessarily premitted for the consolation and confirmation
of the people of God, before the seventh seal be opened, Chap. 8. even so here,
there are two material consolations laid down ( Chap. 10. and 11.) before the
seventh trumpet sound, for the comforting of the Elect in reference to the sad
estate of the Church formerly prophesied of ^ for, the visible Church now being
darkened, and drawn into defection by Antichrist under the fifth trumpet, and a
third part thereof being destroyed by Mahomets followers under the sixth; and
withal considering, that the rest did not repent of, but did continue in,
their former abominations, it might be the occasion of many sad fears and
doubts concerning the Church of God, both before and during that time; and what
that defection and impenitency should turn unto. In reference to these fears,
there is one consolation laid down in this Chapter. In sum this, That that
darkness shall not continue, but, at the peremptory appointed time, Antichrist
should be destroyed, and the purity of the Gospel again brought to light, which
is diverse ways not only asserted, but confirmed in this Chapter, for
strengthening the faith of Gods people in the hope of an outgate. And, 2.
Because that outgate comes not till the seventh Angel sound (which yet seems
to be for a long time delayed, considering not only the interruption put in
here before its sounding, which yet ought to be observed, seeing it sounds nor
immediately upon the back of the sixth, as the other did upon the back of each
other) but the many sad effects also which are to be performed by the fifth and
sixth trumpets, which do necessarily imply the continuance of a long time for
the bringing of them about, and therefore the People of God might have a new
doubt and fear concerning the state of the Church, during all that time that
Antichrist and Mahomet were in their height, and the sounding of this trumpet
delayed. In the 11. Chapter the Lord obviateth this, by describing a Church and
Ministry to be reserved for Himself during that time, who (although few in
number, and poor in their outward condition) should continue unpolluted by the
corruptions, and undestroyed by the tyranny of these times, until their
testimony should be finished, and the days of their prophesying ended: upon
the back of which, the seventh Angel blows, verse. 15. by which the former
promised outgate begins to be accomplished. This we conceive to be the
native scope of these two Chapters 10.11. And hence, ( Chap. 11. verse. 14.) it
is observed, that the second woe is past; thereby implying, that what has been
formerly spoken since the sounding of the fifth and sixth trumpets, is to be
taken as contemporary with them, and belonging to one of them.

In setting down the first consolation ( Chap. 10.) we have, First, the
description of the publisher of these glad tidings, intermixed with some
circumstances, set down in the first four Verses, which do not a little
contribute to the consolation it self. Then, 2. The sum of the seventh Angels
Commission is set down, and the event foretold, is certified by the publishers
oath, verse. 5, 6, 7. 3. The effect of the seventh Angels sounding, to wit, the
reviving again of a Ministry, and public preaching of the Gospel, after that
darkness is both expressed and confirmed by John's eating of the little book,
and the word added, that he must prophecy again (as it were, be revived) after
such a sad interruption. This is verse. 9, 10, 11.

The publisher is four ways described, 1. He is called an Angel, and a mighty
Angel, to difference Him from these that sounded the trumpets: we conceive it
to be understood of no created Angel, but of Jesus Christ the Angel of the
Covenant, as the description following will hold Him forth. 2. His clothing and
appearing are set down in four particulars, 1. He is clothed with a cloud;
often applied to God, and only to Him, in the Psalms and Prophets, whereby the
unconceivable, and inexpressible Glory, and Soveraignity of God is pointed at.
2. He is said to have a rainbow upon His head; so is the Lords Throne
described, Chap. 4.3. and Ezekiel. ^.28. which is marked here, not only to show
the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, but that as the Rainbow ( Genesis 9.4.) was a
sign, and a Sacrament (as it were) of the Lords Covenant with Noah, of not
destroying the earth again by water; so our blessed Lord Jesus, being often
suspected to be forgetful of His Covenant, and being now to give warning of
the deluge of wrath which was to come upon the Antichristian world, He does
thus appear, to evidence His mindfulnesse of His Covenant both in the
overruling of the Churches affliction, and His enemies ruin. His face and His
feet are described as formerly they were, Chap. 1.15. whereby it appears to
be one and the same Person.

The second Verse has the third thing whereby He is described, He had in his
hand a little book open, some way like Him that sat upon the Throne, Chap. 5.
only with this difference, that there it was in the Fathers hand, here in
Christ's; there it is called simply a book, here a little book that was sealed,
this is open: what is meaned by His appearing with the book in his hand, will
appear from the end of the Chapter. It holds forth here our Lord Jesus Christ
to be the sender of the Gospel through the earth, and the having of it, as it
were, in His hand to send in a manifest and clear manner, even then when it is
most obscured and darkened in the world; for which cause, this book is open in
His hand, when the Temple and Ordinances were shut up amongst men as we may
gather from the last verse. of the 11. Chap.

It is much debated what this little book is; whether it be the same,
mentioned, Chap. 5. or, any distinct book, containing distinct prophesies from
what was in that book, as if what follows in this prophecy were revealed to
John by his eating of this last book, as being contained in it. It is not
necessary much to debate this, considering, that it is represented to John in
vision, and for another scope than the present furnishing of John for
completing of this prophecy. It will therefore be more suitable to say, that
this book is the same mentioned, Chap. 5. as now in the hand of the Mediator,
and opened by Him, and now called little, because so much only may be
accounted, as has not been by the former prophesies discovered; or, we may
take the type of the open book to signify the preserving of the Doctrine of
the Gospel, as if it were written on record, and kept in the hand of the
Mediator, and therefore can neither of it self be vitiate nor destroyed by
Antichrist or Mahomet. This, the scope, and the commanding of John to eat it,
seem to favor; but, that it should contain prophesies, different from what was
contained in the former book, Chap. 5. so that the former prophesies belong to
that book, and what follows this Chapter, to this book, mentioned here, we
cannot assent to, 1. Because all the trumpets belonged to the first book, as
being comprehended under the seventh seal of that book, Chap. 8. but the
seventh trumpet follows in the close of the eleventh, and is further
explicated to the end of the book: Therefore all these prophesies are contained
in the first book, mentioned Chap. 5. 2. This Chapter and the next, unto the
15. verse. do belong to the second woe; and therefore must be supposed to be
contained in the same book with the first part, Chap. 9. Again, 3. if that
series laid down in the preface to the 6. Chap. hold, that the seventh seal
comprehends the seven trumpets; and again, the seventh trumpet, the seven
vials, Then the seven vials are comprehended under the seventh trumpet, and so
both vials and trumpets under the seventh seal. Beside, if this following part
of the prophecy were compared with the former, we see no reason why it should
either be called little or open, more than the former; The reason why this book
is open in the hand of Christ, we conceive to be, (beside what was above
hinted) 1. To show Christ Jesus His acquaintance with the mysteries of God;
this book is open to Him, and therefore that we may trust Him in the revealing
of the secrets of God. 2. To typifie the future spreading of the Gospel, and to
confirm it upon this ground, that as Jesus Christ had prevailed to open the
book of the secrets of God, when it was sealed, and none was found able to open
it; so might it be expected from Him, that the Gospel should be again brought
to light, notwithstanding that during the reign of Antichrist it seemed to men
impossible.

4. The posture wherein this Angel was, is observed, He s^tteth his right foot
upon the se^, and his left foot on the earth: by which is set out His
Sovereignty over both, and so that He has Authority and Power to make out what
He now pronounces. Or, this setting his foot on the earth and upon the sea,
being compared with the first part of the 1. verse. I saw a mighty Angel come
down, it may look to be a type of Christ's coming to take possession of the
earth again, who, during Antichrists reign, seemed, as it were, to be kept in
Heaven; yet afterward He shall come down and establish His Government through
the earth, and by His Power bring under the greatest and most raging enemies.
This suiteth with that expression ( Chap. 11.17.) of His taking to Him His
great Power, and reigning as if there had been an interruption of His Kingdom
formerly; which place is the fulfilling of what is here prophesied of.

Before the Angels words be set down, several circumstances are marked for
making this Proclamation the more observable, v. 3. He cried with a loud voice,
as when a lion roareth: which holds forth seriousness and Authority in Him
who goes about this work, and that he purposes to have what He has to say,
taken notice of. The second circumstance, is an interveening effect before His
words be marked; seven thunders uttered their voices.

We may look upon what preceedeth this, as preparatory, and take up what
follows in the Chapter in three distinct principal parts, yet all tending to
one scope. The first is expressed by these seven thunders uttering their
voices: wherein we have, 1. the voices of these thunders. 2. John's practice,
he was about to write what they uttered, which supposes that he understood it.
3. There is the inhibition whereby he is restrained from that. We may look upon
this, 1. generally, as prognosticating sad judgments to come upon that
unrepenting world; for, by thunders, such are often signified in this
prophecy, as Chap. 11.19. (thundering in it self being an evidence of Gods
dreadfulnesse) and though this general may be gathered safely, yet it is like
the Lord intended not (at lest in this place) particularly to set them forth,
which we are to reverence, and not to seek any new mystery from these words,
but what elsewhere may be gathered, till the event speak. Or, 2. seeing they had
intelligible voices, and were of concernment to the Church, which made John aim
to write them, and so not like to have been for no purpose at first revealed
(with reverence) they may be conceived to hold forth the same seven judgments,
which are executed by the seven vials following. For, these seven thunders
signify future judgments, and most probably must hold out the third and last
woe which is yet to come by the sounding of the seventh Angel; especially
considering, that ( Chap. 11.19.) thunderings and earthquakes are marked to
follow upon that Angels sounding, and these seven vials are the same with the
last woe. Beside, the number of the vials being seven, and the seven last
plagues which followed these thunderings in the event, we conceive it not
unsuitable to take these seven vials, as the fulfilling of what was more
generally hinted at by the thunders: And seeing we seek no new mystery out of
the words, but rather do bound curiosity, and do content our selves with what
is afterward revealed, we conceive there is no danger to say, it is either
thus, or it is nothing, which we can or should search into.

John as he had formerly done he goes about to write, but is inhibited by a
voice from Heaven, saying, Seal up these things which the seven thunders
uttered, and write them not. He intended presently to communicate these things
to the Church; and, no question, sincerely, from which yet the Lord restrains
him. This ^aith, Ministers ought to live in great dependence upon the Lord, not
only for obtaining, but also for venting of light when it is obtained. It will
not be warrant for them enough to communicate any thing, because they know it
and understand it, there will need also a warrant for this; and it is no little
part of wisdom, not to preach simply what they know, but what they know to be
edifying, pertinent, and profitable to be brought forth, and so as approven by
Him. It is not simply necessary to expound this inhibition of sealing, as
perpetual, but as temporary, till some other visions were inferred, or till he
had that matter expressed in other types; in which sense we will find the like
inhibition, Dan. 12.4. as also, Dan. 8.26. But in this we conceive it not
material to insist, providing we keep off the groundless mysteries, which
some dig from these thunders.

Now he comes to show what the Angel published, and the manner of his doing
it, verse. 5, 6, 7. First, he prefaceth (as it were) with a solemn oath, which
tends to make the people of God give credit to his message, who, it is like, at
that time would be much oppressed with misbelief: the manner of proceeding to the
oath, is solemn, with hands lifted up to heaven; and by the true God, described
by His Eternity, him who lives for ever; and by His relation to all creatures,
as being Creator of them: not only in general, to show how solemn a thing an
oath is, and how reverently we ought to assume the Name of God, especially in
this piece of Worship; but also to difference the true God and the right way of
swearing, from the Idolatrous oaths used under Antichrist. Beside, this posture
and manner of swearing, do fully agree with that, recorded, Dan. 12.7. After he
has made faith in the thing, his deposition (to call it so) is set down more
generally, verse. 6. and more particularly explained, verse. 7. It is first
expressed in few words that he does swear, that there should be time no longer.
What this short negative does signify, is positively expressed in opposition
to this, verse. 7. But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he
shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he has
declared to his servants the prophets. Where we have these three, 1. That time
should be no longer, is expounded by this, the mystery of God shall be
finished. 2. This mystery is described to be that same which was declared to
the former Prophets. 3. The time of finishing this mystery is set down to be
the sounding of the seventh Angel: and so we must gather the interpretation of
this mystery, and what this is, that time should be no longer, from the events
following the seventh trumpet. The mystery of God, (the opening whereof will
clear all) is three ways taken in Scripture, 1. It is taken for the end of the
world, 1 Cor. 15.51. This was also spoken of by the Prophets, Isaiah, Daniel,
etc. This place so being understood, the meaning is, the end of the world shall
be hastened, and time (properly taken) shall be continued no longer: But the
resurrection of the dead, formerly declared to the Prophets, shall be
accomplished, and the effects following upon the sounding of the seventh Angel
shall bring it about. This is truth: for, though at the sounding of the seventh
Angel immediately time ends not; yet the seven vials being the last plagues,
have no temporal judgment succeeding to them, and immediately upon the
sounding of the seventh trumpet they begin, and go on to put an end to time.
And it is not unusual among the Prophets to say, such an event is fulfilled,
when the mean, having influence upon the fulfilling of it, is certainly and
speedily driving it on. 2. By the mystery of God, is understood the spreading
of the Gospel, and in-bringing of Jews and Gentiles after the days of
Antichrist, as it is expressed by the Apostle, Romans 11.25, etc. which also was
not unknown to the Prophets, as the Apostle proves in that same Chapter. Thus
the finishing of the mystery of God, will signify the removing of
Antichristian darkness, and the spreading of the light of the Gospel, that
Christ Jesus may have a flourishing Kingdom again in the earth, as has been
prophesied of: and that time shall be no longer, that is, though this be for a
time suspended, yet after the sounding of the seventh Angel, it shall no longer
be delayed. The words being thus understood, are the same with Christ's taking
to Him His power and reigning, Chap. 11.17. and the opening of the Temple in
Heaven, verse. 19. 3. By finishing the mystery of God, may be understood Gods
bringing down the Roman Antichrist, (as the building up of that Kingdom, is
called the working of Satan and mystery of iniquity) thus the meaning is,
although the mystery of iniquity now be at a height; yet, says he, Gods design
of bringing him down shall be accomplished, and this ruin shall be begun when
the seventh Angel shall begin to sound. This exposition is necessarily employed
in the former, the exalting of Christ's Kingdom, having the overthrow of
Antichrists carried along with it. This agrees also well with the scope, which
is to strengthen Gods People particularly against his tyranny. And, 3. If we
look to the event of the seventh trumpet, ( Chap. 11.17.18.) it is the same for
which the Saints give praise that God has destroyed them, who formerly
destroyed the earth. We conceive all these, three expositions may well stand
together; for, the hastening of the day of Judgment, supponeth the preceding
of the other two; and the finishing of these two, to wit, the setting up of
Christ's Kingdom, and bringing down of Antichrist, does infer the hastening of
the day of Judgment: which is also marked in the event, Chap. 11.18. The
understanding of them also jointly, does serve to the same scope, to wit, the
comforting of Gods People in the faith of an outgate from Antichrists tyranny.
And, 4. We will find them all particularly observed in the song which is sung
upon the sounding of the seventh trumpet, which is the fulfilling of the event
prophesied here; and therefore we conceive all these three may be taken in, but
most properly and directly the last two, especially the middle acception, as
coming nearest to the immediate scope of the place: and therefore time shall be
no longer, is not to be understood simply, but comparatively, in some respect,
i. e. of such time of darkness, ignorance and persecution as then it was, that
time should be no longer when Antichrist should continue to prevail, and the
Saints to suffer; Thus it may relate to the forty two months afterward set for
his reign, which comes to an end at the seventh Angel his sounding.

The third part of the consolation, or confirmation, follows, from verse. 8.
to the end. Wherein, 1. there is a type, and 2. the exposition of it, verse
ult. The type consists in a twofold direction given to John, and his
obedience to both, verse 8, 9, 10. though at first, it is like he knew not what
was intended. The type serves both to illustrate, and confirm what was
formerly said, and alludeth to that, Ezekiel. 2. ult. and 3.1, 2. where eating of
the book, signifies Gods instructing the Prophet for the work of prophesying
when He sent him out, and His confirming of him by that sign: The effect of
his eating, is, sweet in his mouth, and bitter in his belly: to show, that
communication of light from God, is in it self pleasant to Ministers; but, in
respect of the difficulties that they meet with in their exercising of it, or
in respect of the sad messages they carry, it is in its digestion sad and
bitter to them, however they must carry it; and John neither scareth at it
before, nor complains of it after he had eaten it.

4. ( Verse 10.) There is John's obedience: though it was told him it would be
bitter, yet he took it, and ate it up, and found as it was told him in the
event or effect of his eating, whereby he might be the more confirmed in the
truth of what was typified by it. What is meant by John's eating of the book, is
expressed to him in plain words, verse. ult. he went on st^l, not disputing, nor
asking what it meaned till He show him who gave the command; Thou must (says
He) prophecy again: intimating by this speech, 1. That there had been
prophecy. 2. That some intermission had interveened. 3. That it should be
again revived. 4. That it should be spread again before Kings, Nations,
Tongues, etc.

If it be questioned, whether John be to be looked on here as getting a new
commission for himself only, or as being a type of Gods raising the former
decayed pure Preaching of the Gospel, and furnishing, or commissionating of
Ministers for that end after that darkness should be past; for, we will see (
Chap. 11.) Ministers may live, and prophecy in their successors, when they are
gone? Ans. I conceive both to be meaned, but the last principally; and John's
eating, and commission that he gets to proceed himself in this prophecy, to
be but a type to represent the other, and a sign to strengthen him and others
in the faith of it; that as truly as God sets him on work again to
prophecy, and makes him eat an open book which before was sealed, So will He
do in reference to that He has promised in the former part of the Chapter, in
bringing the Gospel again to light after Antichristian darkness. Reasons of
this, are, 1. It is most agreeable to the scope of the Angels appearing, and
this little book open in his hand, which is, to comfort particularly in
reference to the strait the Church was then in. John had no other use of eating
the book; for, his commission was clear before to write what he saw and heard,
and all his visions afterward are what he saw without respect to this book, as
if he had not eaten it. Neither was there any such intermission of John's
prophesying, to say he must again prophecy, nor did he ever actually, first or
last, prophecy before Kings, etc. But this being a main part of the prophecy,
must certainly be of larger use as it is prophetical, than to stir John up to
a particular duty. It must then be understood especially of the revealing of
the Apostles Doctrine, which was to be for a long time almost buried, yet was
it, even that same Doctrine, again by the Lord to be revealed, in which John
was again to prophecy in his Doctrine, or when this Revelation, especially by
events, should be made more plain, then it comes again (as it were) to the
world and spreads amongst Nations, Tongues and Kingdoms: and this agrees
also well with the event which follows on the seventh trumpet, Chap. 11. and
is in its scope a confirmation of what was said by the Angel in the Verse
before; first, expressing it in a word, and confirming it by oath in the first
seven Verses of the Chapter. 2. expressing it in a type, and confirming it by
sign in the rest; which is well consistent with the former, seeing the Angels
appearing with this book in his hand, and what follows, do aim at the same
scope.

This which was represented to John in type, we see through Gods blessing in
some measure fulfilled in our eyes, the Gospel is again revived, and the
fulfilling and finishing of this mystery (which begins in the enlargement
of the Gospel, and shall go on in calling in of the Jews, and end in perfecting
the Bride, when she shall be made ready for the Bridegroom) is already begun;
which proves us to be under the seventh trumpet.

In this tenth Chapter we may observe from its scope in general, 1. Our Lord
is tender of the consolation of His people, and allows them to have confident
expectation of comfortable outgates from Him in their lowest difficulties;
therefore is consolation laid down before hand in reference to this. 2. The
Lords people are often suspicious of Him in their affliction, and although it
be most groundless, yet is He thought to have forgotten His promise, Psalm. 77.
and scarce will His word at sometimes get credit by them; therefore does He
swear here to put that suspicion out of their hearts, which needlessly He would
not do; for this cause has He also sworn His Covenant, Heb. 6. here Grace
someway contendeth with our suspicions; therefore the Lord so condescendeth to
our weakness, as to give us for our security that which one mutable creature
uses to rest in from another, as the yondmost of what can be attained. 3. Our
Lord Jesus is a most stately and glorious Person, and it is not the least part
of this consolation that He is so; therefore this glorious description is begun
with, to show that there is such a connection between Him and His people, that
if He be glorious, they will be so, and He is glorious even then when the world
seems most to slight Him. 4. The ignorance of the excellency of Christ, does
much increase His peoples discouragements; therefore is this description laid
down as the remedy thereof, showing also that the right uptaking of Christ in
His excellency, and in respect of His Covenant-administration whereby His
faithfulness appears to His people, is a main foundation by which the daily
comfort of His people is sustained: if this were thoroughly believed and
improven, there would not be such room to confusion and profanity in evil
times. Obs. 5. Men ought reverently to speak and make mention of the Holy God:
when this mighty Angel speaks so of Him, verse. 6. what ought we to do? If we
heard the holy Angels speak of Him, and to Him, we might be both instructed in
our duty, and ashamed of our practice in reference to this, which is no little
evidence of our Atheism. Obs. 6. Time certainly shall have an end; every
purpose that the Lord has concerning His Church shall be accomplished. This is
here confirmed by this mighty Angels oath, and this end will be shortly; what
therefore is bounded within time, is not much to be valued. Obs. 7. It is none
of the least of the consolations that Gods people have, that time speedily
passes away, and so, what ever is promised hastes to be performed. This is
the end why this is set down here: the men of time, who have but their portion
in this life, and all their projects within time, will have a poor bargain when
time shall be no more, and then the great consolation of the people of God is
but beginning.

Concerning Prophesying.
THere is much spoken of prophesying in this Book, and of Prophets, Chap. 11.
and Iezebel ( Chap. 2.) is reproved for taking to her the name of a
Prophetess; and here the reviving of prophecy is spoken of in this Chapter:
It may be enquired then, how these places are to be understood? and if
prophesying may be now expected in the Church? or, if that gift has now fully
ceased? or, in what respect?

We may consider Prophecy or Prophets in a threefold consideration, 1. In
respect of the matter that is brought forth: which is either, 1. some general
truth not formerly revealed in the Word. Or, 2. some particular contrary to
what is formerly revealed there either in Doctrine or practice. Of this kind
might be the Israelites their borrowing of Jewels, Abraham his taking his son
to sacrifice him, and many such practices which cannot be condemned, yet do not
agree with the precepts that are in the Word for directing of the people of God
in their ordinary carriage. Or, 3. it is some particular neither formerly
revealed, nor yet in it self contrary to the Word, but that which concerns
some particular event or personal duty allanerly.

2. We may consider it again as it holds forth an ordinary or extraordinary
way how these things, or any thing else, come to be known although the matter
be a truth formerly revealed in the Word, such as the matter revealed to these
Prophets, 1 Corinthians. 14. which was to be tried by the Word.

3. It may be considered in respect of the proposing of what is revealed to
others, to be a direction, or, to rule them in their practice, and that either
by recording it as Scripture, as some of the Prophets of old did, or by taking
on an office or authority, and by virtue of that to do it. Or otherwise, we may
answer in these Assertions.

Assert. 1. There is now no gift of prophecy, either for the bringing forth of
any truth not formerly delivered, nor any gift to warrant one in a particular
simply condemned in the Word, as to take another goods, life, station, etc. so
as to be warranted merely by such a Revelation in things otherwise unlawful,
as it is like prophetical men of old in some of their practices were, which to
us are no precedent for our warrant; which appears, 1. Because now the Word
is complete, furnished with truths, to make the man of God perfect for every
good work, and that in respect of the last administration of the Covenant;
there is therefore no access to the adding of any new matter. 2. Because if
any other Gospel, or duty contrary to this Word which we have received, be
preached, we are not to receive it, but to account him accursed that carries
it, under whatsoever pretext he do it, if he were an Angel; and this leaves no
place for admitting, either of truths, or duties contrary to the Word, Gal. 1.
3. The commination added in the close of this Book ( Chap. 22.) confirms
this, there being the same reason against adding unto, or detracting from the
Scriptures in general, or any part of them, as there is in reference to this
Book, all of them being of the same Authority, yet is it not without weight
added to this as the close of all. 4. The gifts of prophesies, being now
generally ceased (as afterward will be clear) and the Lord having thought good
more mediately and solidly (as it is called a more sure word of prophecy, 2
Pet. 1.19.) to feed His Church, to wit, by His Word; and He having given now
much more Scripture under the Gospel than under the Law, to supply the want of
immediately inspired Prophets; and considering how rare the examples of Gods
calling for duties seemingly contrary to Moral commands, are, and what
absurdities would follow, if now any such gift should be pretended unto in
reference to such matter, We conceive it therefore safe and necessary to
conclude, that there is now after Reformation no such gift of prophecy, or
Prophets to be expected or admitted, who may add any new truth to the Word, or
command any new duty contrary to it, by arrogating to themselves, or imposing
something as duty on others which the Moral grounds of the Word do not allow
of; and it is confirmed by this, that we are commanded to try the Spirits; and
even the Revelations of the extraordinary Prophets (1 Corinthians. 14.) were to be
tried and judged: which can be by no rule, but by the Word. It follows
therefore that no Revelation, containing any thing contrary to the Word, is to
be admitted or received as from the Spirit of the Lord.

Assert. 2. Yet is it not altogether to be denied, but that the Lord may in
particulars of the last kind sometimes reveal himself to some by foretelling
events before they come, such as the famine that Agabus foretold of, or Paul's
imprisonment, were: of such the story of the Martyrs and Saints do sometime
make mention; and particularly, Athanasius is often advertised of hazards, as
is recorded, and in their verity cannot be denied: and of this sort there were
many at the reviving of the light of the Gospel, who by foretelling of
particular events were famous, as John Husse his foretelling within an hundredth
years after him to follow the outbreaking of Reformation; such, it is like, was
Hieronymus Savonarola, who was burnt by the Pope, not, as was pretended, for
foretelling of events, as they imputed to him, by unlawful means, but for
faithful reproving of his faults, as he is described by Philip de Cumius and
other Authors: of such many were in this Land, as Master Wishart, Master Knox,
Master Welsh, Master Davidson, etc. And this cannot be said altogether to be
made void: for, although God has now closed the Canon of the Scripture, yet
that He should be restrained in His freedom, from manifesting of Himself thus,
there is no convincing ground to bear it out, especially when experience has
often proven the contrary in the most holy men. Yet, 1. this is not habitual
or ordinary to any, but is singular at some few times and in some few cases. 2.
Every persuasion of mind before the event come, and answerablenesse in it when
it comes, will not be sufficient to make it pass for a prophetical
foreknowledge, more than when in dreams it may often so fall out. 3. This will
not denominate one to be a Prophet, although in some singular events, God
makes this use of him. Nor, 4. can such predictions warrant any to do a thing
as a duty, which otherwise would not be warrantable unto them. 5. There is
difference to be put betwixt the simple foretelling of an event, which may be
of God, and a conclusion which may be drawn therefrom; this may be of our
selves, as we may see in the predictions of these ( Act. 21.) who foretold
Paul's Imprisonment at Jerusalem, yet was not that to divert him from his going
there, as many collected; that therefore was not from God, as Paul's pressure in
the spirit to go notwithstanding, does clear; every such prediction therefore
cannot be made a rule of duty, seeing the Lord may have other good ends of
trial, advertisement and confirmation in it. And we will not find that any
have made use of such particular revelations, as from them to press a duty
upon others, that would not otherwise be warrantable, although when it
concurreth with other grounds, it may have its weight for swaying in lawful
things.

Assert. 3. Prophecy taken for an immediate revealing of Gospel Truths and
mysteries, such as that, 1 Cor. 14. and what was frequent in the Apostolic
times, is now ceased; and there is neither such a gift, nor such an office. 1.
There is not such a gift; for, it is not common to all that are renewed, it was
not so in the Apostles days, there were diversities of gifts, and this gift is
distinguished from saving grace, 1 Cor. 12, and 14, etc. neither is that
particular gift of Prophecy continued; for, there is no other gift continued,
as these of healing, tongues, and interpretations, whereby men may come in an
immediate way to the exercise of these: And, 2. experience shows, that that
has ceased, and God calls men to the use of ordinary means for the attaining
of the knowledge of His will; and there being now no such gift that will abide
trial, there is therefore no such office to be pleaded for, that followed upon
that; yet even these Prophets in the matter prophesied by them, were to be
tried by the Word and judged; and in the gift, if it were a revelation indeed,
1 Cor. 14. Now there being none such who can abide that proof, we are not (at
least) without that to acknowledge such a gift, or such an office.

Assert. 4. Yet if we take prophecy for the understanding of Gods mind, and
for attaining to be well acquainted with the mysteries of God, by a mediate
way; yea, and that beyond the applied means, or to have a gift and capacity for
discerning of these things with little pains, and that beyond what some others
can attain unto by any labor, we conceive that in this sense Prophecy and
Prophets may be said to be continued in the Church; and such God raised up in
the time of Reformation, men singularily gifted with a Prophetical spirit in
this sense, which may be the fulfilling of this prophesied of in this Chapter.

Assert. 5. No gift of Prophecy now can warrant one authoritatively to set
down his light, although it be truth as Canonick Scripture, or as of equal
authority from it self with the Writings of Moses, etc. and other Scriptures,
That in the first Assertion was casten, though one by his gift may reason from,
or genuinly open these Scriptures by writ, as by word.

Assert. 6. No gift can warrant one to take on him the office of an
authoritative Preacher, even though in some particulars Gods mind
extraordinarily should be revealed to him; for, it is not the gift that gives
the authority of an office, but Gods authoritative mission; otherwise a woman
(as Philip's daughters) might be an Officer in the Church, and have public
access to preach and teach, which yet the New Testament admits not, even
when it speaks of this gift of Prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. and orders the
practice of extraordinary Prophets; there, this inhibition is inserted, and
elsewhere; yea even in these primitive times there was a trial of the spirits
and gifts by the Prophets, before any was to be accounted such: beside, one may
have a particular event revealed to him, who yet may be more unacquainted with
the mystery of the Gospel than others, who by Gods blessing have attained to
knowledge in an ordinary way; and if it cannot warrant an office to such,
neither will it do in this case: there is now therefore no Prophet by an
immediate Call.

Assert. 7. Yet we say, that as God by gifts may furnish some in a more than
ordinary way; so may He, and uses He to thrust them out in a mixed way to the
exercise of these for the edification of His Church, and make the seal of His
Call extraordinarily ratify His sending of them, that is, as He may furnish
men partly by means, and especially by His blessing extraordinarily
accompanying them, so may He send them out partly in a mediate way by men's
opening of the door, partly by His more than ordinary thrusting of them out,
making up so what was defective in the mediate Call by some extraordinary
concurrences of impulse and gifts within, of circumstances of providence
without, and of efficacy upon, and acception of it amongst others, whereby it
comes to be ratified. This the Lord fulfilled at the entry of the Reformation,
raising up men comparatively extraordinarily furnished and commissionated for
His work, yet still Ministers of the same Gospel, and walking according to the
common rule with others in their ministerial charge. This is not ordinarily to
be imitated, but where the like cases, call, and circumstances concur; and thus
the Lord in old stirred up men at times of Reformation to take on them the
furtherance of His work, who yet were not properly extraordinary Prophets or
Officers, or Levits, nor ordinarily called Magistrates, as Nehemiah, Ezra, and
others, who did both differ from Haggai, Zechariah, and such who were properly
Prophets, on the one hand; and from Ioshuah, Zerubbabel, and such who were
ordinary and properly Priests and Magistrates on the other; which yet in
ordinary and settled conditions was not done.

Concerning a Minister his particular Message to a particular Auditory, and if
it may be again and again insisted-on and repeated?
BEsides what is already said, there are two things in this Chapter which we
may consider a little further. And, 1. from verse. 4. we may see there is no
less Spiritual wisdom and dependence on Christ called-for in the venting of
light and in bringing forth of what we know, than there is diligence required
in searching of Gods mind that we may know; and it is not warrant enough for
Ministers to communicate that to the Church at all times which they know,
because it is the Truth of God. For, John knew that these seven thunders were
such, but there is a more special warrant to be looked unto. We mean not that
there should be some extraordinary thing here: but as from John's call, in
general, we may gather the necessity of a call to the Ministry; so from his
being commanded to write this and not that which was also revealed to him, we
gather proportionably, that Ministers ought to try what in such and such a
particular case is called-for to be communicated unto people as Gods message at
such a time to them, seeing every thing which he knows cannot be delivered at
once; something therefore is to be chosen, and that upon such consideration as
may be sufficient for his peace who conscientiously aims to follow Gods mind:
in reference to which, we may adventure to propose these generals, 1. That men
would not look for any extraordinary impulse in swaying of them to the choice
of Texts or Doctrines, it will be safest to walk by reasons that will abide the
trial, especially where that which the impulse drives at, does not appear upon
rational grounds to be so edifying indeed, where any extraordinary offer of a
Text and solid reason from the conveniencie of that matter concur, in that case
it is not to be neglected; yet now seeing God has not left men to an immediate
way of attaining to the knowledge of the Gospel preached, but does require of
them the use of mediate and ordinary means, so also are men both in reference
to their calling in general and to particular messages, to collect His mind
more from solid sanctified reason than from a mere internal impulse, left
thereby God be tempted, and Satan get occasion to insinuate himself too much in
our choice, or at least to confuse us by proposing one thing after another,
that so he may indispose for all; reason therefore would fix the determination,
and and even sometimes against the apprehended inclination, and once being
fixed, would not easily or rashly be altered, lest thereby one be brought to
question one place after another, and so fall into confusion, and anxiously
consume the time in choosing of a Text which might otherwise be more
profitably employed.

2. Although God be not tied to any immediate or extraordinary pointing out of
such a particular subject or condition of souls, yet is He not to be slighted,
but humbly to be depended upon, and seriously to be prayed unto for guidance
and signifying of His mind in that, either by some inward leading of the mind
to that which may be profitable, or by inabling of us singly to discern and
conclude from rational grounds what may he called-for by Him, that so His
pointing at some one thing beside an other, either by inward stirring, or
outward circumstances, be not despised, but at least brought to trial if it be
found fit; and we are sure if it be of God, the more it be tried, it will be
found to be the more suitable.

3. In this trial, not only the matter is to be considered as it is truth, but
also if it be edifying and profitable as lying near the great end of the
Gospel, to wit, the engaging of souls to Christ, and conforming of them to Him,
Christ being the end of the Law, and the foundation which the wise
Master Builder lays and builds upon among a people, 1 Cor. 3. and all
builders are to take heed not simply only how they build, but how they build
thereupon, ibid. verse. 10. left they build hay and stubble thereon in stead of
gold; and all truths, that, considered in themselves, are more remote, are to
be squared by, and lavelled so as may further this. 2. If it be pertinent to
the present Hearers and their present case, either for convincing, comforting,
or instructing, etc. as we would conceive Christ would do, if He were writing
from Heaven to such a people as he did once, Chap. 2. and 3. and to the seven
Churches. 3. In this choice, even the temper and disposition of the people is
to be considered, and so what may most edify these who are so qualified, in
which a Minister is neither to seek to be pleasing unto them, nor yet needlessly
to irritate, but so to lavell at edification as he may most probably gain the
end on such; for, as in bodily diseases, Medicines are not to be given alike to
all persons for the same diseases, but respect is to be had to several
constitutions, and accordingly applications more strong or more gentle are to
be prepared; so here, some are more sharply to be dealt with, and contrarily:
order also is to be observed where several things are necessary what to begin
at, and how to proceed and prepare them so as they may be received and
admitted; for, as the most healthful Potion cannot profit the Patient except
he receive it, and it be so prepared as he may not utterly nauseat and loath
it; so is there often no less dexterity called-for in the mannaging and
ordering of a fit matter, etc. and in the choosing of an apposit mids and
gaining manner, that what is useful for reproof, conviction, etc. may without
prejudice from the way of propounding it, be accepted and digested, than there
is faithfulness necessary in aiming at that scope.

4. In all this, there is much need of singlnesse, that the conscience may have
a testimony of its aiming allanerly at edification, when it is searching to
discern what is mainly calledfor; neither will it be unusefull to observe what
Doctrines occur, to which of them a door is opened, making the enlargement
thereof the more easy, which of them have the most pertinent uses natively
flowing from them; This is a main rule to be observed in the making choice of
Doctrines, and in choosing upon these and the like grounds the conscience may
have quietness; for although they be not sufficient to sway one simply to the
choosing of any matter, yet where the question is betwixt things equally
pertinent and profitable, at least where the difference is not so easily
discernable, they may have weight comparatively to sway to one more than to
another: and although, especially where there is occasion, Ministers ought
deliberately to choose their purpose, and know it is truth even from the place
they are to speak of before they go to public, that they may in Faith assert
that to be the meaning of the Spirit, and with the greater boldness go to
speak when they are clear of their warrant; yet we conceive, that Ministers
would not peremptorily limit their message to what matter or expressions the
Lord shall furnish them with in their private study, so as to repel every
motion that may be suggested to them in the time of delivery: in this indeed
men had need to be sober, and to fear, lest in hunting after other Doctrines,
or by their negligence or presumption needlessly they tempt God by slighting the
ordinary means when they may use them, much less would they accept of every
motion of every matter, as coming from God to them to be brought forth at such
a time; for, if these motions be dangerous, and not always safe in private, as
was formerly hinted, ^uch more have they need to be adverted to in public
before one forbear the following of some digested purpose to insist on some
other thing but presently occurring, yet where some outward providence changes
the case from what it was in the speakers apprehension before his coming to
public, or where the matter suggested is pertinent both to the place of
Scripture and pressing of the same purpose which the Preacher aims at, so as
if it had offered in private, he would have embraced it before some things he
had thought of, and the matter being such that he is not altogether
unacquainted with, but has clearness in the thing which is now presented
before him; if also it has with it some convincing proof and weighty
expression of the thing which is in it self profitable; we conceive that that
is not altogether to be slighted and neglected, but may warrantably and in
faith be yielded unto, and embraced, as if it had been formerly thought upon,
especially when the Lord has been sought in private, and diligence has been
used; yet it has there been a restraint as to the Lords furnishing of some
apposit message till then there can no reason be given why the Lord may not
suspend the answering of these prayers till the speaker come to public and
then do it; and except this were, Ministers should never go to public how ever
necessary their Call were, till first they had satisfaction about their
particular message in private, which were too great a limiting of God, and
unbecoming that dependence which His Ministers ought to have on Him, which
daily experience does prove not to be in vain; and seeing the message must come
from the Lord, is it not alike as to the thing it self, whether He give it in
private or in public? neither can this he called a leaning to immediate and
extraordinary inspirations, because by this, there is neither any new Doctrine
approven, nor any new way of attaining the knowledge of the Lords mind
commended, but only this, that Truths mediately revealed in the Word, and upon
the matter known to the Preacher with the grounds and the reasons thereof, may
be sometimes brought into the mind of the Preacher in public, which he did not
think of in private, yet when presented to him they are in themselves as clear
to him to be the truth, and able to bide the trial of the Word, and also fit
and apposit for his present purpose as much, and it may be, more than what he
had thought of in private; and can he be denied freedom now to choose to insist
on these which he would have accounted a favor to have had presented to him in
his secret Chamber? Sometimes also the Lord will think mere, that the Minister
prosecute some point in its application beyond what he purposed in his private
thoughts, and will put in edge upon him and give him liberty in the delivery
thereof beyond ordinary, and furnish him with expressions suitable for the
following thereof, and shall he straiten his own liberty which all Ministers
are to pray for, and shun the pressing of that which is profitable upon his
Hearers, even when he is fitted for it, because that was not presented to him
in private? It cannot give him peace to despise that motion, when the judgment
is convinced of the soundness and edifyingnesse thereof: for, in such things
as are most profitable to people, and which therefore the spirit does suggest,
there is to the intelligent Minister an unquestionablenesse; and the question
is not here, whether such a thing be truth or not; for we suppose that it is
obvious, and if it be not so, there is then good ground to lay it by till in a
due way it may be tried (for it is not like that at such a time the holy Ghost
will propound matter, which is debatable, to be the subject of a Ministers
present message for the edifying of people;) but the question is, whether the
bringing forth of this truth now presented, the reproving of this sin, the
pressing of this duty, etc. be pertinent and may not more usefully be brought
forth at this time than suppressed? we conceive there can be no such difficulty
here in this, but the decision thereof may be easy. Sometimes also a matter
studied, may in the Lords wisdom be forgotten, and some other profitable matter
offered in the room thereof, by which He sometimes necessitateth the insisting
on this which may be by His blessing more useful than the other; It is
recorded of Augustine by Poss. in his life, that being extraordinarily cutted
short in his memory from his intended purpose, he was led abruptly and with
vehemence to insist against the Manichean Error contrary to his purpose, and
that palpably both to his own observation and to the observation of others,
which made him thereafter at dinner express his confidence, that the Lord would
evidence some design of His in that particular, which accordingly came to
pass; for, a Manichean, beside Augustines knowledge, being a Hearer, within
some few days openly disclaimed that Error, and acknowledged that disgression
by the Lords blessing to have been^he mean of his conversion. And many such
cases there are wherein the Lord may signify His mind of a message to a
Minister at the instant of speaking, which ought not to be despised by him.

5. There is much help in this debate, when a Minister who has ordinarily the
same hearers and no extraordinary occasion interveening, does settle on an
ordinary, either in respect of purposes to be gathered from diverse Scriptures,
or of one portion of Scripture continuedly together; in which case the general
at first is to be chosen according to the former grounds, which also will
warrant in the following thereof, although no such explicit debate be about
every part; and this is neither unusefull to the Minister or People, because in
Scripture, and Epistles, the Doctrines that suit Persons and Churches, are
wisely and compendiously often compacted together; and the following of the
method of the holy Ghost, and the dependence that one thing has upon another,
does both contribute much for the bringing forth of His mind in the Word, when
it is followed in the order proposed by Him without diversion and interruption,
and also makes it more weighty to the hearers, and more native, and to be
digested with the less prejudice, when they see such doctrines and purposes so
linked together by the holy Ghost, and obvious without any immediate choice of
the Minister himself, whereas often people are ready with more prejudice to
look on particular Texts made choice of by the Minister, as having more of men
in it than in the former way; and certainly the holy Ghosts putting of purposes
together, sometimes in one method, sometimes in another, is not to be despised,
although Christian prudence would choose what matter and method does more suit
the case of such a people than another, and accordingly to fix on the Scripture
that is most agreeable to that. It seems also that among the Jews, order in
reading and expounding of the Law was observed, and we see it for the most part
ordinarily followed by the Ancients in their Sermons; yet, in this way every
Verse or every Doctrine is not to be equally insisted on or prosecuted in the
Application, but these are to be chosen which make most for the edifying of the
present hearers, seeing now it is to these we preach and not to the Romans or
Galatians, etc. and therefore are especially to insist on these truths, duties,
sins, etc. which concern most the present case; thus one may insist on some
things that are less touched in these Epistles, they being more necessary now,
and pass more shortly these questions that are most insisted on in these
Epistles, because now not so edifying; and in so doing, the intent of the holy
Ghost may be nearest attained, because it was upon that account of edification
that Paul insisted much on some things because then their case required it,
when he did more shortly pass over other things: in this also a Minister may
have some respect to his own gift, as its most fitted for explaining of
difficulties, instructing in positive truths and cases, convincing, wakening,
or comforting, etc. and so one may more ordinarily follow one strain which
would not be so pertinent to another, as it seems there has been a
difference in this respect between the sons of thunder and the son of
consolation.

Further by occasion of this Angel's saying to John, thou must prophecy again,
etc. It may be enquired if preaching over and over the same matter be allowable
and useful? For answer we say, 1. That the end of preaching being edification,
we conceive it is not unsuitable often to insist in the same things, even
though they be known and understood by the hearers; because the end of
preaching is not only to inform the judgment, and always to bring some new
increase to that, but to further conversion by the espousing of hearts to
Christ, and holiness, by pressing the practicing of known duties, and
eschewing of known sins; and this being certain, that many who know the
Doctrine of Faith and Holiness also, are yet defective in their practice,
There is need therefore both in invitations, exhortations, expostulations,
reproofs, etc. often to come over the same thing, especially where the Truths
are material and concerning in their use, and the duties are slighted, or the
sins followed in the place. In that case it ought neither to be grievous to the
Minister to insist on the same things, as the Apostle speaks, Philip. 3. nor
yet be stumbled at by the people, although it will require deniednesse in both;
yea, sometimes it may be more difficult for a Minister to get over his own
inclination that aims to carry some new thing, and not again to carry the
same message, which may both relish now less to himself and to the hearers
than formerly it did, yet ought he not to think it grievous if it be safe for
them. This we see the Prophets of old did with their hearers, using the Word as
an hammer (as it is called by Jeremiah, 23.29.) by doubling strokes to bear
that in, which at first took no impression: This way also the Lord follows in
the Gospel; How often presses He the necessity of Repentance, the difficulty
of enterring to Heaven, what concerns the abounding and hazard of hypocrisy,
the necessity of His own suffering, of self-denial and bearing the Cross and
other Truths, in themselves needful, and to the present hearers useful? This
is also used by the Apostles, who in their Preaching and Writing, insist again
and again in the same things: and although often hearers itch after some new
thing, yet are Ministers not to feed that humor. Chrysostom has a notable
expostulation with his hearers to this purpose on the 2 Thessalonians. Chap. 2. hom. 3.
says he, some hearers say, why should we come to Church, to hear the same
things over and over? to these he says, Are ye not ready to go to Theaters to
hear the same things, to the running of horses to see the same things? etc.
does not (says he) the same Sun rise again, and its light is not the worse? do
we not use the same food for our bodies, and they are not the less wholesome?
Or, if ye have often heard them, ought ye not then to profit by them, and the
better to know them? Others again (says he) when enquired in any thing, were
ready to reply, we heard it but once: whereby he would bear out the necessity
of repeating the same things, and the inexcusablnesse of a people that yet
could neither endore it, nor profit without it. 2. We say, Ministers would do
this, so as it may neither foster their own laziness nor become trivial and
less savoury to the hearers, but in respect of his own liveliness and the
weightinesse of the manner of his proposing it, and in respect of these
expressions and manner of following it, it would be so convoyed as being indeed
a new Sermon, though an old matter: hence we set, that in the same matter our
Lord Jesus multiplieth parables, and sometimes one way and sometimes another
way presses the same thing, as we see by the parable of the sower, Matthew. 13.
of the laborers, who were in their opinion first, yet made last, Chap. 20. of
the marriage supper, and wedding garment, Matthew. 22. of the foolish Virgins,
Matthew. 25. and many other ways. Paul also, Philip. 3. prefaceth to this, and
gives the reason of it, thereby to remove tastinesse and itching from the
hearers, or any prejudice against his practice which might mar the weight or
fruit of the thing which he is to insist on; which practices, no question, may
be laudably followed by Ministers both in the matter and manner; and Truths so
preached ought to be received by the hearers as healthful to them to feed upon
the second or third time, as if they had never formerly heard them; yea,
thereby they ought to gather the necessity of their use-making of these
Doctrines, Reproofs, etc. more now than if once only they had heard them, lest
they constrain the proposing of them again unto them, and draw on more guilt by
not making use of them now again and again repeated and pressed, than if they
had heard them but once.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood,
saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that
worship therein.

2. But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not:
for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy city shall they tread under
foot forty and two months.


THe Lord has discovered the first part of the consolation against the two
first woes, to wit, a comfortable outgate which the Church should have from
under them, and a reviving again of the Gospel after that: a type and
confirmation whereof, was John's eating of the little book; but seeing this is
suspended until the sounding of the seventh trumpet, and it might be a doubt,
what became of the Church till then, or if there were any during the time of
Antichrists prevailing, In this Chapter to Verse 15. the estate of the Church
in reference to that time, is particularly described: wherein is shown, that
even then there should be a Church provided for by God, and that there should
be Prophets and Preachers of the Gospel, although both Pastors and People
should be few and in a low estate outwardly.

That this does relate unto the condition of the Church under Antichrist, and
belongs to that time as contemporary with the fifth and sixth trumpets, will
appear. 1. This belongs to the state of the Church immediately preceding the
last woe, or seventh trumpet, by which Antichrists fall begins; and it does
describe the estate of the Church for the forty two months immediately before
his fall: and therefore must necessarily contemporate with his dominion and
height, which does immediately also for the same space of time preceed the
seventh trumpet. 2. This part of the Prophecy holds forth that trial of the
Church, when her Prophets prophecy in sackcloth, and have war with the beast:
which trial ends with the beasts prevailing over them, and their rising
again and being taken up to heaven; but that trial, in the continuace of it, a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, is the same with the beasts
dominion, Chap. 13. and closes with his begun fall: and therefore must belong
to the same time. 3. These times of forty two months, one thousand two hundred
threescore days, time, times, and half a time, etc. five times mentioned,
Chap. 11, 12. and 13. being all of equal extent, must be understood to be
contemporary one with another; for, that successively they should follow one
another, cannot be thought, beside the agreeableness of the same matter and
state of the Church under all of them, and the common beginning and rise which
all of them have: but it is certain, that forty two months ( Chap. 11.) relate
to the Antichristian tyranny: therefore we must understand this giving of the
outer Court to the Gentiles, and this prophesying for the like time, verse. 2.
and 3. of the same also. 4. The measuring of the Temple and treading of the
outer Court, do contemporate and belong to the same time; for, when the Temple
is to be measured, the outer Court is cast out, and contra, the outer Court is
left out, when the Temple is measured: and therefore seeing the leaving out of
the outer Court belongs to the time of Antichrist, That part of the measuring
of the Temple must contemporate with it also: for, the describing of the
Church, by comparing it to the Temple and to the outer Court, is not to
distinguish the visible Church in respect of time successively; but to
distinguish some in it at the same time from others, that should be really
differenced before God, as the Temple and outer Court used to be in respect of
the ceremonial differences that were between these two; Beside, the scope
formerly laid down, and other circumstances of the exposition being well
considered, it will be found that the intention of the spirit is not to
delineat the Christian Church from its beginning, but from this time of
Antichrists rise, that contemporateth with the Prophets their prophesying in
sackcloth.

The state of the Church then is two ways set down, First, More generally in
respect of the condition of the Church her self, verse. 1, 2. Secondly, More
particularly in respect of her Prophets, unto verse. 14. That by putting these
two together, it may be seen what posture she was to be in. Both these
descriptions are set down with allusion to phrases in the Old Testament. The
state of the Church in respect of her self, during that time, is again two
ways set out, 1. With reference to the true worshippers, verse. 1. 2. With
reference to false and hypocritical corrupted worshippers, verse. 2. That we
may understand it, there is a threefold allusion in the words. The first, is to
the description of the material Temple, where there were (as we may gather
from 2 Chronicles. 4.9. and what goes before) three several courts, the one called
the most holy, into which the high Priest, only once a year entered. The second
without that, was called the court of Priests. The third is called the great
court, or court of the people, which was without all, and next to the city:
unto this court the multitude of professing worshippers had access at their
solemn times: and this allusion holds forth, that as the inner court, being
compared with the outer, was small: and as many had access to this, which were
not admitted to the former; so, during this time, the number of true
worshippers shall be few, though the multitude of nominall Professors shall be
great, because the Lord will set apart some few to himself, and disown the
rest, even as if under the Old Testament he had appointed the outer court to be
divided from the inner, the greater part had been rejected, but the better part
reserved; so shall it be in the Gospel Church at that time, some few like the
Temple shall be ordered and set aside for himself, and the visible body of
Professors left out without any such special care: which leaving, or casting
out, we conceive to be the same, as not to be sealed, and so taken notice of by
God, Chap. 7. And this measuring will be sound to belong to the same persons
who are sealed.

The second allusion of measuring respects that vision, Ezekiel. 40.41, etc. And
it may signify, 1. the Lords putting a difference amongst Professors of that
time; and that profession will not be sufficient to make men pass, but they
must be tried and put to the touchstone; and that the Lord will do so. 2. It
holds out the Lords setting apart of some for himself in opposition to others
who are neglected; thus the land was to be measured, Ezekiel. 47.18. and for this
cause Israel is often called the rod of Gods inheritance, Psalm. 74. 2. Ier.
10.16, etc. as measured by to him, in opposition to all other Nations. 3. It
signifies a care and special oversight of the Lords in reference to these in
the Temple beside others, as if he were building and preparing a house for
them, even like a little Sanctuary to rest in during that time. Thus, measuring
of the Temple here is opposed to the casting out of the outer court to the
Gentiles, which is not to be measured, or so taken notice of by the Lord; and
this agrees with that, Chap. 12.14. of providing a place for the woman ( i.e.
the Church) during the same time. And lastly, this measuring of the Temple, is
opposed to the opening of it, Chap. 15. And opening of it there being to be
understood of an enlarged estate of the Church, and bringing of the Gospel to
open light, This here must signify a secret retired state of the Church
wanting that splendour and visibility of Ordinances which it had before this
time, and which after the seven trumpets sounding it was to have.

A third allusion is unto Daniels prophesying of Antiochus his making desolate
of the material Temple, Dan. 7.13. and so the meaning will be, That as the
Church of the Jews and their Sanctuary was tread upon, during such a time under
Antiochus; so shall the visible face of the Church be abused and overrun by
Antichrists followers during his tyranny over the same. Yet still will the Lord
preserve a remnant as in that former case.

Verse. 1. Now it will be easier more particularly to clear the words: Wherein
there is, 1. Something done. 2. Something said. And there was given unto me a
reed like unto a rod. A reed is used in measuring, either to find out the
quantity of a thing, or the regularity of a thing, or for the dividing and
setting apart of it. It is given to John, not only to signify the smallness
of that number which should be set apart for God, (for as numbering imports
fewness, so measuring does smallness) and the regularnesse of their worship
beside all the rest of the world; but to show, that the Church during this time
was not to be reckoned by the multitude, but that the rule behoved to be
applied for discerning of it, and these who were furnished by a measuring reed
should find it out and none other. That which is said, may be taken up in these
three, 1. What he should measure. 2. What he should not measure. 3. Why? His
direction what to do, is, Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the altar,
and them that worship therein. The Temple here, is that which we called the
Court of Priests, where the altar stood; it is opposed to the outer Court in
the following Verse. These that worship therein, point out true worshippers,
who rest not in the outer Court with the multitude (to whom they are opposed,
verse. 2.) but like Priests to God they worship him in the Temple where the
altar is, signifying the continuance of the prescribed worship in opposition to
the will worship of others, particularly their continuing to make use of
Christ's sacrifice, which is signified by the altar which the multitude did not
enquire for. These are to be set apart (after they are tried and found) for God
Himself. The second part of the direction, is, what should not be measured, and
that is the Court without the Temple, leave or cast it out, and measure it not,
says He: by which is understood the visible face of the Christian Church,
which in respect of external Professors is like unto the outer Court, during
the Jewish service. This not measuring of it, implies a slighting and
misregarding of it, and not setting it apart as the former, as the following
words do clear. 3. The reason of this, is, for it is given to the Gentiles, and
the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months. Where, 1. the
state of the outer Court is set down to be given to the Gentiles. 2. The height
and continuance of their tyranny is expressed, the holy city shall they tread
under foot forty and two months. By the Law, Gentiles were inhibited the
congregation and assembly of the people in this outer Court; so this giving to
the Gentiles, must suppose a profaning of the visible Church, and corrupting
and mixing of public Ordinances and Worship, even as admission of Gentiles to
the outer court would have been under the Law; for which Paul was complained
of, Acts 21. By Gentiles is to be understood not properly Pagans, for they are
not capable to possess the visible Church, and to partake its name: for, it
continues to be the outer Court, even while it is given to them, and is tread
on by them. Beside (as was hinted) the time of their treading of it, will fall
under the time of Antichrists sitting in the Temple of God, and therefore it
must be understood of his vassals and followers. They are called Gentiles in
this respect, that although they seem to bear the name of Christians, and so
did not destroy, but possess the outer Court, and retain the name of the
Christian Church; yet in respect of their defection from the purity of the
Gospel, and of the superstitious and idolatrous worship propagated by them,
they are rather to be accounted Gentiles than Christians; in which respect,
their head Antichrist ( Chap. 13.) is said to have a name of blasphemy, even as
the Pagan heads had which went before him. This is further explained in the
following expression, the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two
months. What he called the outer Court formerly, here he calls the holy
City, to wit, the visible Christian Church, whereof Jerusalem (called the holy
City for the Ordinances of God in it) was a type. They shall tread upon it,
that is, shall possess it, brook the name of it, pollute it, marring the
beauty of it, and that with an high hand, as the Temple was polluted during
Antiochus his tyranny.

3. What is meaned by the time, forty and two months, is not so easy to
determine: we think in all this there is an allusion to Dan. 7.24, 25, etc.
where Antiochus his trampling Jerusalem, was limited to a time, to wit, one
year; times, to wit, two years; and the dividing of a time, to wit, half of a
year, or some odd time more than three years: which holds forth in general,
that as Antiochus got great power over the Jews and their Temple, so Antichrist
shall get great power over the Church. 2. That as the people of God, His
Ordinances and Service were brought very low by him (who may well be
Antichrists type) so shall the Church be by Antichrist. 3. That as that cruelty
was limited and bounded for years; yea, for days, so shall Antichrists be, who
in many things is described from Antiochus for that end, as changing times,
having a mouth speaking blasphemous things, etc. And that there is an allusion
to this time of Daniel in all these times, Chap. 11.2, 3. 12.6. and 13.5. it
appears by Chap. 12.14. where, what was spoken ( verse. 6.) of the woman's
flying, by days, he expresses thereafter in Daniel's words, time, times, and
half a time, etc. all coming to one sum. So that as Antiochus for so long, till
the time set of God expired, trod on Jerusalem, Temple and Ordinances, so shall
Antichrist during his appointed time: with this difference, the inner Court is
reserved from Antichrist; though he comes very near it, yet he wastes not
all: even as in Iezebels persecution (which probably was three years and an
half) there were seven thousand reserved. The reasons moving us to expound
times throughout this prophecy by a general indefinit time, rather than
particularly to determine, are, not because they are not determined by God, for
that is meaned certainly; But, 1. because He has reserved the discovery of
times and opportunities especially in His own power, Acts 1.6. neither think we
it edifying so much to insist in these. 2. Because there are so many
difficulties in applying them particularly; for, it is not certain how many
days ought to be assigned to every month, if to all thirty, after the Grecian
account, or to some thirty one, after the Julian account, which goes to make
up the year to us: yet that doubt is helped here by the alteration of months
into days, etc. 3. Because Historians differ in their setting down of events
and matters of fact, some ascribing them to one year, some to another, whereby
application particularly must be exceeding various, as men choose what history
to follow or whose reckoning to lay weight on. 4. In taking times definitly, it
will be very hard to agree men with themselves, as, whether to take them all
literally and properly, or all prophetically and improperly: For, the thousand
years in the 20. Chap. is by the most part taken literally. Again, 1260. days
is expounded for so many years; and why it should be understood properly in one
place and prophetically in another, is hard to give the reason, especially
considering that these places, Numb. 14. and Dan. 9. and Ezekiel. 4. whereon this
opinion of days for years is built, seem not sufficient to bear it; for, these
places are particularly expounded by the Lord to signify so many years, and so
to be understood, and so cannot be a precedent except in such cases, where by
circumstances we may evince the same to be intended in that particular
application: yea, by this opinion, it will be hard for a man to reconcile his
thoughts, as, compare this time of Antichrists reign with that of the devils
restraint, Chap. 20. it is hard to say the devil is restrained when Antichrist
his special Minister and Mahomet prevails, and he in them reigns, yet
there cannot be so many years as to allow strictly to each of these so long a
time by particular application, except they fall in one time together; for, it
would take 2260. years successively. If it be alleged from the common rule,
that whole, complete, and even numbers in reckonings of this and other
prophesies, as ten days or times, two hundred thousand thousand horsemen,
Chap. 9. and the like, are to be taken indefinitly, but not so of broken
numbers as 1260. days, three days and an half, etc. Ans. 1. What reason can
be given from the Scripture to prove the one is definit and not the other,
1260. more than ten days. 2. All odd times may be resolved in some whole, odd
years in whole months, or in days or so many hours. 3. Why rather are forty
two months here to be understood prophetically than five before, Chap. 9? and
why not five there, as seven, Ezekiel. 39? 4. Even many odd numbers are indefinit
in other things, as seven thousand men were killed, verse. 13. a thousand six
hundred furlongs, Chap. 14. yea, of broken times, Chap. 8. half an hour, and
144000. that were sealed, are odd; even these who make the rule take sometimes
unbroken times definitly, as that of the thousand years, Chap. 20. And can
there be a solid application of three days and an half, in which the witnesses
are dead, to any definit time, more than to show a short time in comparison of
their prophesying? yet, that all is determinatly known to God, is not to be
disputed: yea, why the number of days more than the number of horsemen,
armies, spirits, etc. so frequently mentioned in particular numbers in this
Book, should be definitly taken, will not easily appear? Beside, if all these
numbers were definitly to be taken for so many years, then supposing the
beginning of them to be known (which seems possible, otherwise the
particular determination of the time would be for no end) it would follow that
men might know to a year, month or day, the continuing of Antichrists reign and
the performing of other great effects mentioned in this prophecy, which yet
seems not usual to the Lord in such prophesies, who even in this respect
has reserved times in His own Power, as was said. If any thing were objected
from the Lords determining seventy years for the captivity by Jeremiah, and
such like. Ans. That is in a particular, and was rather to dash the
presumptuous expectation of a sudden delivery, and therefore was particularly
and plainly revealed for that end. All which makes us account it most safe to
hold in the indefinit which is certain, and to gather the definit time rather
from other grounds laid down in this prophecy, especially compared with the
event and numbers here mentioned, than to settle upon them alone. And therefore
because this number (which is so often repeated here in so various terms) is
not altogether to be slighted, we shall show what seems most probable to us
on the matter afterward.

Only, if any ask, why forty and two months or three years and an half is
pitched on rather than any other time, for all these troubles of the Church,
the Prophets prophesying, Antichrists reign? etc. Answ. That time is pitched on
with respect to former trials of the Church, and includes this consolation,
That as God limited such and such enemies, and closed such troubles, so will
he do this. Antichrist is compared with Antiochus, the Churches hiding to Elias
fleeing while seven thousand were hid, See Iam. 5.17. The Prophets prophesying
alludeth to Christ's performing His Ministry for three years and an half, His
suffering and rising the third day; so it is with them, their suffering shall
have an happy outgate also.

From which allusions we may gather, 1. That the Church during Antichrist shall
be in a very mean outward condition. 2. That yet there shall be some pure
Professors reserved by God. 3. That there should be a great multitude
professing the name of Christians and claiming the title of the visible Church,
yet exceeding gross and superstitious in their worship. Lastly, That for all
their confident asserting themselves to be the only true Church, yet even then
should they indeed be disclaimed by God, and as the outer court, being
possessed by Gentiles could not ground an interest in Him, so neither should an
external profession and pretension to the visible Church be a ground of any
real interest in Christ to these pretended Christians.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy
a thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.

4. These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the
God of the earth.

5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner
be killed.

6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the
earth with all plagues, as often as they will.


THe second part of the description of the Church follows. John describes
the state of the Church at this time from her Ministers; and this is set down
in three steps with the several circumstances. First, Their prophesying, till
verse 7. Secondly, Their death and killing, till verse. 11. Thirdly, Their
restoring, from verse. 11. And as it is not to be supposed, that these same were
the witnesses that were raised, but others in their spirit and power (as is
said of John Baptist, Mal. 4. with Luke 1.17.) preaching the same truth, and
pursuing that same Antichrist; so it was not to be thought, that the same
witnesses should live and prophecy all that time: but that there was, and
should be a succession of them some after others, so that they should never be
wanting altogether till their testimony were finished. The Churches state is
especially set out by the state of her Ministers, because they are linked
together, so that it ever appears in them how it is with her. If persecution
be, they are first in it, if it be hard with them it is not well with her and
contrarily.

The Prophets are particularly described, verse. 3. 1. By their special work,
to witness and give testimony for Christ against the corruptions and
usurpations of these times; so Ministers, are called Christ's witnesses, Acts
1.7, 8. their work should be to be witnesses for mistaken Truth, and against
Antichrist. 2. Their number is set down, to wit two, a definit for an indefinit
number.

They are said to be two, 1. because two witnesses are the least that confirm a
Truth, but they are sufficient; so it imports they shall not be many, yet
sufficient to testify against these evils fully. 2. Because of allusion in the
words following, where something of three couple of famous witnesses is
attributed to these two mentioned here; in allusion (I say) to Gods way of
making use of two in all dangerous periods of the Church, to wit, Ioshuah and
Zerubbabel, Moses and Aaron, Elias and Elisha, in respect to which three
couple, the following description of the witnesses here is holden forth in the
effects of their prophesying both to friends and enemies; to wit, 1. they are
as Zerubbabel and Ioshuah, two olive trees, Zach. 4. 3. from whom droppeth the
oil to keep light and life in the two Candlesticks, that is, the Churches which
are now few in number; and it is not by might nor by power, but by the Spirit
that they prevail. 2. If any will oppose them, fire proceeds from them, as
Elias destroyed the two fifties, 2 King. 1.10. so their enemies shall be
destroyed as surely, and their word and threatenings shall take effect on them.
3. Their power is described by other effects, that as Elias by prayer prevailed
to shut Heaven, that it ruined not, and Moses and Aaron did turn waters into
blood, and wrought other wonders in plaguing of Egypt, So shall they have. But
all this in a spiritual sense (to denounce judgments which shall truly take
effect) as appears by this, That the city spiritually is called Sodom, so all
is spiritually to be understood. They have the power of the keys. Discipline
and Doctrine, ready to be applied when they find ground to revenge
disobedience. And this is no less terrible than outward judgments are, that
they Preach freely and authoritatively, and that for many days, 1260.
extending, according to thirty days in the month, to forty two months. In a
word, all the time of the Antichrists reign, God shall have a Church though she
be little, and Ministers though they be few: so long as he usurpeth, so long
shall they testify; and though he may fight with them, yet till they have done
what the Lord had commissionated them for, he shall not prevail. 4. They are
described in their mourning-weed or habit. They prophecy in sackcloth: when
many idle bellies were well fed, and clothed richly, they were thus clothed;
partly, to show their outward, poor, contemptible and despicable condition in
the world. There are not great rich men made use of for this service; partly,
to show how deniedly now under the cross they went about that employment, in
heaviness, mourning for that declining generation that they lived in. In a
word, it shows their condition to be the cross, and their carriage and
courage to be suitable to it.

If it be asked, why the same time is changed from days to months, and from
months to years? Ans. 1. To show it is numbered to a month, to a year, to a
day; yea, to an hour, as it is Chap. 9. v. 15. 2. To show, that their
prophesying was a daily work and task. 3. To show, that it was a work of the
day, as treading under foot is a work of darkness, therefore counted by months
which the Moon orders. 4. It is years, to show it will be of a considerable
continuance; It is days and months for encouragement, that they may know these
evil times shall have an end. 5. The alteration of months into days, will help
to discern how many days are to be assigned to every month, for making up the
total.

Lastly, It is marked, that it was given to them thus to do, verse. 3. which
holds forth the special commission they had, and that not only to enter that
station, but also to continue therein, implying withal assistance and success
beyond what could be expected in the discharging of their testimony.

This power looks especially to the Authority that God has given them to
denounce His judgments against Antichrists followers with the certainty of the
event thereof, and that both temporal in due time to be fulfilled, but eternal
always according to that denounciation, Chap. 14.9.10. As often as they will, is
not to be understood as if they had it committed to them at their abitrement to
use the keys (even extraordinary Prophets did not work miracles and prophecy
in foretelling of events at their pleasure, or by any habitual power, but when
and where it pleased the Lord so to bring forth such effects) but it holds
forth the supremacy and independencie of their power as to men; they were in
the exercise thereof no way subordinate to that beast, which the world admired:
and it holds forth the respect and Court (to speak so) which they have with
God, He will refuse them nothing, and make good all His word spoken by them, as
He had done in the persons of Moses, Elias, and these alluded unto; for which
cause, these expressions are especially used. Iustus Jonas uses such an
expression of Luthers effectualness in Prayer, that quicquid voluit pot uit,
which is upon the matter, agreeable with what is said here.

This prophecy of the witnesses, is foolishly applied by Papists to Enoch and
Elias, as if they were to come in person and prophecy against Antichrist, with
a number of vain circumstances: It is enough to say of this, 1. There is no
shadow from the word of any such application to Enoch and Elias; and therefore
more easily may be rejected than affirmed. 2. It no way contributeth to the
scope, nor is consistent with what here is intended, which is to show the low
condition of the Churches visible estate in her ordinary Ministers. Nor, 3. can
it stand with what is said of these two their glorified estate, and that both
in body and soul, and of Enoch that he was translated never to taste of death,
Heb. 11. it were strange to bring glorified persons from Heaven to suffer, and
to make them die most shamefully, whom yet the Scriptures exeem absolutely from
death: and although some persons have been brought to life whose souls were
glorified, while their bodies were in the grave, yet where body and soul are
both completely glorified, that can in no ways be asserted, more than to be
immortal as to the body, as well as the soul, and to be mortal, can stand
together. There is another application no less strange, whereof Grotius is the
author, of applying this to two Bishops of Jerusalem their testifying against
Simon Magus. This is also destitute of reason, there being no evidence of the
thing: beside, John is here prophesying of an event to come, and that of great
and universal concernment to all Tongues, Nations, etc. and that of Simon
Magus, was past, and of no such consequence: beside, the particular exposition
of these witnesses killing and their being raised again visibly, will be enough
to confute that opinion of it self. And the title of witnesses can no way be
astricted to these two Bishops, supponing such to have been; for, there were
still many more testifying even against Simon Magus; and rather Paul and Peter
should be by eminency accounted witnesses against him, they living in his
time, and encountering with him; yea, he being destroyed by the Ministry of
Peter, if history be to be credited in this, and yet all the Lords witnesses,
the Ministers, are represented by these two, and their estate described by
theirs in opposition to the beasts followers, and all the rest of the world
which rejoiced in their sufferings: it is a wonder how such an invention could
be entertained by learned men, which to the most gross Papists is ridiculous.

If it be moved who these are, that the Lord acknowledges here for His
Prophets, or how any could be so accounted of then who had one common call with
Antichrists followers? Ans. 1. They are certainly ordinary Ministers,
continuing faithful witnesses against Antichrist, as the scope of the place,
and the opposition clears; for which the Lord calls them my witnesses: and
although the difference of the call be not always discernable to us, yet it is
not impossible, but as there was distinct Professors, and for a time (at least)
particular Churches, so might there also be a distinct succession of Ministers;
for, this is certain, that the Waldenses in Bohemia at Merindole, Pedmont and
other places, had their own distinct Ministers without dependence on the Church
of Rome; and Sleidan and Thuan make mention of two of them who were sent to
Luther at his first appearing. But, 2. although that were not clear, yet one,
called by that ordination that was continued in P^perie, having the Lords seal
put to it, by an inward fi^ting and disposing of him for that work, and
blessing him in it, may be accounted the Lords Minister, as Baptism continued
amongst them, was enough for initiating of one to be a visible Christian, and
if abstracted from their corrupt practices, was enough with sound faith and a
holy life to make a man to be accounted a true Christian, so was their
ordination enough for the external part of a call; and a man having it, and
being furnished with gifts and inward zeal to exercise them for Christ and not
in a dependence on the Roman antichristian Hierarchy, as such at least, not for
promoving of their errors, but the edification of souls it was eneugh to make a
man to be accounted a Minister of Christ, and not of Antichrist, even as the
Scribes and the Pharisees, as such, and as following their corrupt traditions
and opposing Christ, were no Church Officers, nor plants of the heavenly
Fathers planting: yet, if sitting in Moses chair, and preaching his Doctrine,
they were to be accounted builders; so, much more here are these, seeing by
their way there is a stated contest between them and Antichrist. The reason is,
because Antichrist, and the most of his worship are accidents that intrude on
the Church and the worship of Christ; he fetteth himself in the Temple, and
therefore his corruptions and additions, being removed, the worship is not his
but Christ's, even as if wholly he were removed the Church and Temple would
still be the Lords; for, Baptism is not antichristian, nor does of it self
initiate any in his Church, but as men by their after carriage devote
themselves to him, and take on his name or mark: and therefore when one
disclaimeth what is antichristian, his Baptism is to be accounted the Lords
Ordinance; so ordination and appointment of some for the Ministry is the Lords
Ordinance: the restriction of ordination to such persons exclusively, and the
adding of many ceremonies with rules for them to teach but so and so, that is
Antichrists addition, and may be removed from the former, so that one may have
been ordained by them and yet become a Preacher of pure Doctrine, even as they
might be baptized by them and yet become Professors of it; And therefore no
doubt many, in all that time, were called to the Ministry by the Lord through
these ways of theirs, who did prove faithful witnesses for Christ against
Antichrist even unto death; they cannot therefore be accounted antichristian
Ministers who do not own that hierarchy, but, are to be accounted Ministers of
Christ: for ordination simply does not flow from Antichrist, but as it stands
in a subo^dination to him, and is a step of that Hierarchy, and not in a
subordination to Christ; now these not being in subordination but to Christ,
are to be accounted his. Indeed it may be in respect of the ordination it self
not discernable for the time, whether such a person be a Minister of Christ's,
or Antichrists; and it may be for some space one may mistake his master and
continue in Antichrists camp, not knowing what his commission leads him unto,
yet when in effect it is discovered, and he made to take up his task and to
walk according to it, and the Lord evidently sealing his call to him, he is
then to be accounted a Minister of Christ, when all accessory dependence on
Antichrist is cast off. We do therefore say, that it is not the ordination of
that time simply that was sufficient to make one a Minister of Christ, but
ordination going along with Christ's call, and dispensed according to His
allowance (though it may be the dispensers intended no such thing) and having
an after carriage suitable to a Minister of Christ: and therefore it will not
follow from this, that all that were so ordained, as to the outward ceremonies
and manner, are to be accounted Ministers of Christ, except they have Christ's
call concurring and evidenced in their fitness for it, and conscientious
discharge of it; now, this being certain that for the most part in Popery such
were ordained whom the Lord never called to it, and who in their carriage never
walked by His commission or owned Him as Master, Therefore are not these to be
acknowledged as Ministers of His, but of Antichrist, whose design they drive,
and whose orders they obey; and therefore as on the one side, that ordination
alone cannot constitute and evidence one to be a Minister of Christ's if he walk
not accordingly, so cannot their additions that are mixed in therewith prejudge
the Ordinance it self, when in so far as it is from Christ it is owned, and
when what in it is from Antichrist is disclaimed, even as it will not prove one
of their members to be a true Christian that he is baptized, if his way be
antichristian, yet where a Christian conversation, as to faith and manners,
does concur, it will be sufficient; and the additionals that are amongst them
in the administration of Baptism, cannot in that case prejudge that Ordinance,
So is it here.

If it be asked why they are not only called the two olive trees ( verse. 4.)
but the two Candlesticks also, which ( Chap. 1.20.) are expounded to be the
Churches and not Ministers? Ans. We conceive they are so to be understood here
also; and it is done, not to confound Ministers and Churches, which in Chap. 1.
are distinguished; but to show the sibnesse that is between these two, and the
likeness that is in their case; so that we may gather the implied case of the
Church, from what is expressed of the Ministers, which is the scope here, to
wit, that the Church should be few in number and low in her outward estate, as
these two Prophets are: and they are two Candlesticks, to show that
proportionablnesse which is between the increasing and decreasing of the number
of Professors with the number of Ministers. By some this is taken to be an
hebraism, as if it were to be rendered, these are the two olive trees, wish or
beside the two Candlesticks, the copulative in the Hebrew being sometimes to be
so rendered. But the scope is clear, to wit, that under that type of two
Prophets prophesying in sackcloth, is holden forth both the low condition of
Minsters and Churches; and this shows the absurdity of both the former
misapplications. And the Churches estate is rather described by her Ministers,
than by her Professors, because in that time the continuance of Truth is more
discernable in the Preachers than in the Professors thereof, who may be very
obscure in respect of any combined profession; and because also the violence of
Antichrist will be especially bent against Ministers, yet the Lords continuing
of these two olive trees does infer the being also of two Candlesticks whom
they are to furnish with their oil, and to give light unto. Hence Observe,

1. As our Lord Jesus has a Church, so has He witnesses in it: these two are
ever inseparable, the Church and Witnesses; He may have Saints where He has no
Ministers, but He has never a politic body of a Church without Ministers.
There is in this Book a strange connection between a Church and Ministers; the
Churches are the Candlesticks, and the Ministers the Candles; they are the
olive trees that entertain oil in the lamp; They have a special influence in
keeping life in the Church, as the one is up, so is the other, and when the one
is down, so is the other. It is a strange Religion that speaks of doing for
Saints and to promove their interest, and yet has little respect to Ministers.
2. As Ministers meet with opposition, so does the Church; and as the Church
meets with opposition, so do her Ministers. 3. Ministers ought by their place
especially to witness for Christ against corruptions. 4. When Ministers have
most to do and meet with most opposition, God often furnishes them accordingly
with more boldness, gifts and assistance than ordinary. 5. Christ's witnesses
are a terrible party: for as few as these witnesses are, none of their opposits
do gain at their hand; who ever hurts them, shall in this manner be killed.
Though they be despicable in sackcloth, yet better oppose a King in his
strength, and giving orders from his Throne covered in cloth of state, than
them: though they may burn some, and imprison others, yet their opposers will
pay sickerly for it. This is not because of any worth that is in them, or for
their own sake; But, 1. for His sake and for His Authority that sends them.
2. For the event of their word, which will certainly come to pass, and that
more terribly, and as certainly as ever any temporal judgment was brought on
by Moses or Elias. Fear to come in tops with this word, it is a sword with two
edges, and will kill these who oppose and do not submit unto it.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them, and kill them.

8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which
spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

9. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see
their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in graves.

10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth.


FRom the seventh Verse he proceeds to describe the Churches estate in the
condition of her Ministers. The first step whereof, i.e. their prophesying in
sackloth, contemporary with the Gentiles treading the holy City under foot, is
past: now follow other two steps further, 1. What was the low condition they
were brought unto, and the beasts prevailing over these witnesses, killing and
murdering them, to verse. 12. The last step is their Resurrection, and the
making of them and their testimony and the state of the Church more glorious
and visible than before.

Their low condition is set out, 1. in their death. 2. What went before it,
verse. 7.8. And, 3. in what followed after in the enemies insulting, verse. 9,
10. set forth in several circumstances.

The first circumstance, whereby this is set out, is the time of their killing,
verse. 7. When they have finished their testimony, or were about to finish
their testimony; for, it is within the term of Antichrists height that this is
done: what was called prophesying before, is called their testimony here:
because for that end they were to testify and preach. It is called their
testimony, to set out that peculiar task which God had given them as their
work and earand that behoved to be done and ended, even as it is said of John,
that he finished his course, Acts 13.^^ and so Paul speaks of himself. 2 Timothy
4:7. Thus was it with Christ, He preached about three years and an half (who
was the true witness) and could not be impeded till his hour came, and his
testimony and work given him was finished, Ioh. 17. More particularly, it will
be found to be about the expiring of the forty two months, which is one with
the beasts coming to an height; for, as we show before, these Prophets
prophesying is contemporary with the beasts reign; their putting on sackcloth
and mourning is occasioned by his rise; and so beginning together they go on in
an equal length, and therefore must end together, that is, at the beasts begun
fall, when they begin to put off their sackcloth. But the question thence
rises, 1. How can it be said, that their testimony is finished, and they are
killed and reproached, when Ministers testifying is a continuing work? And, 2.
how can it be said that the beast prevails more against the witnesses now at
the beginning of his fall, than in the time of his reign? For answer.

1. Consider, That though now more witnesses have appeared against Antichrist,
whereby it comes to pass that these two witnesses are about to finish their
testimony, and as it were, to go off the stage, because God had now provided
many for that task; yet the period of Antichrists absolute tyranny is not at a
close, as we will find afterward. And the Lord wisely made His Church somewhat
more visible before, that so this great act of his cruelty might be the more
discernable, and that thereby marches might be the more clearly rid betwixt the
period containing his height and that which immediately follows, wherein is
contained his decay and ruin.

2. Consider, these two witnesses testimony may be said to be finished when the
manner of their testifying is finished or changed. That is either, 1. when
their number is increased and God gives more witnesses, by bringing some others
in their tour. Or, 2. When they then testify more publicly and boldly who
were before hid and scarcely discerned, (as the Church while she was in the
wilderness, now they appear and openly avow their Doctrine, and give a public
visible testimony. Or, 3. When their sackcloth is something altered, and that
contempt and reproach that was upon honest Ministers is somewhat diminished,
and they begin to get countenance, (it may be by some great persons or Princes)
their testimony may be said to be finished, though not simply, yet in some
respect; for, this testimony of theirs seems to be especially intended as a
check against Antichrists reign, when all the world should be going after him:
Now, after such a long time, the Ministers step out more publicly to cry down
Antichrist; he is irritated and fights and warreth against them, and by his
discerning them better now than before, he comes at them with outward cruelty
more. And God having guarded His own testimony, and made the world more
sensible of these evils by their public appearing and suffering, in His
righteous judgment and deep wisdom He permits Antichrist to prevail, that
this testimony may be sealed by suffering and blood, in which the sufferers are
overcomers, as it is, Chap. 12.11. and Christ gets no less testimony and
victory in that.

The second circumstance, is, the party by whom they are killed, it is the
beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, to wit, Antichrist or the
Pope: compare this with Chap. 13. and 17, 18. It is a beast making war with the
Saints there, and here, who will be found guilty of their blood. First, He is
called the beast, (as these in Dan. 7. and 8. are called) 1. For his power and
greatness. 2. For his cruelty and inhumanity. Secondly, He is said to come
from the bottomless pit, to wit, out of hell; So his Doctrine came from
thence: Chap. 9.1. he is called the angel of the bottomless pit, and comes
after the working of Satan, whatever he pretend. Thirdly, He is said to be
ascending, in the present time, 1. to show his propinquity, that in its first
steps he was beginning to work, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. That he rose insensibly and as
it were by degrees till he was on his seat: and there is but one beast
mentioned here, because these two, ( Chap. 13.) are indeed but one and the same.

The third circumstance is in the degree of this, in three expressions, to wit,
make war, overcome and kill them. Quest. What? was he not making war against
them before? Yes, his rage, hatred and persecution was always during these
forty and two months. But, 1. It was not properly war; for, he had no
considerable party to deal with, but some lurking hidden ones, he had all at
will, treading under foot the holy City at his pleasure, verse. 2. Now, they are
a public party, and bide him some more contest. 2. His making havoc of
Orthodox Christians, was now more palpable, and his rage and violence at a
greater height, having more fear, and more matter to work on. 3. This rage
pursues till death; yea, continues after it; yet, it is not only to be
restrained to bodily killing, but it may take in excommunications, banishments,
forfeitoures, proscriptions, and all these ways used to undo his opposits. In
sum, it is here shown, that when Religion should get up its head, and Ministers
begin boldly and openly to preach the Gospel, then he shall rage, and leave no
mean of destruction unessayed, and shall in a great measure prevail to the
outward narring of its liberty for a time; and more especially, vent this his
malice on the Ministers of it, and take away the lives of many, which clearly
in Charles the fifth his time, in the wars of Germany, wars and massacres of
France, Martyrdoms and persecutions in England and Scotland after Religion
sprang up first, may be said to be fulfilled. By all which, it evidently
appears, 1. that after the forty two months immediately neither comes the
Church to peace, nor Antichrist to ruin, he fights and in part prevailed
then. 2. That this prophecy belongs and relates especially and particularly
to that time, when Reformation began, and the Popes Kingdom took a turn.

Verse. 8. Two circumstances of their low condition are further added, 1. That
after death they shall not be buried: which comes from two grounds, 1. from
that beasts malice that was not content with the bodily death of Christ's
witnesses, but followed them with contempt, and exposed them to opprobrie even
after death, it being common and ordinary in the persecutions of France,
England, Germany, Helvetia, etc. to keep the bodies, especially of Ministers,
unburied after their death, long. So Zuinglius, being killed by the Popish
Cantons, was thus insulted over, and the Admiral of France and many others at
the Massacre of Paris. Sometimes their bones were raised and burned after their
burial, as Bucers was in Queen Mary's days. However, it holds forth
cruelty, even after death, seeking to shame and rub reproach upon their very
names and works, when they thought they had their will. 2. It proceeds from
Gods overruling providence, that will not have all memory of these witnesses
testimonies buried; but though they be low, and as it were killed, and
unburied, yet He makes their enemies insulting over them in their low
condition, the forefeiting, imprisoning, banishing and keeping of them under
restraints, a mean to keep their testimony alive. So that though the witnesses
be despicable to them, and they think now that they are down, and shall never
rise again; yet there is a testimony visible, and they are witnesses above the
ground still; and things are not desperate, but even these witnesses in their
death, imprisonments, etc. witness and overcome.

The second circumstance in this Verse, is, the place where it shall be. It is
in the street of the great City, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt: by this
City is certainly understood Rome, yet so as it is not only meaned that Town,
as it is within walls, but that Empire ( urbs and orbis being at that time when
this was written almost equal) called the great City, Chap. 17. ult. that
reigns over the Kings of the earth; and the privileges of this City spread
as far as their government did: in which respect Paul calls himself a Roman
born, as being born of a City or Parents privileged with that liberty. And it
is observable when in this prophecy he speaks of Rome, he does it ever
eminently, the great City, the great whore, BABYLON THE GREAT, Chap. 17.5. and
18.2. and of no other he speaks so, save of the new Jerusalem in opposition
to it.

This great City is set out in three properties, which are spiritually, that
is, mystically to be understood; So, 1 Corinthians. 11. they all eat that
spiritual food, etc. that is, something represented by these names, which is
to be understood in a spiritual sense and not literally, but as she is called
MYSTERY, BABYLON, etc. Chap. 17.5. because there is a mysterious resemblance,
so here she is called spiritually Sodom, that is, for luxury, pride, fullness
of bread and spiritual uncleanness, abominable, Ezekiel. 16. 2. Egypt, that is,
having and exercising a spiritual tyranny over Gods people, and abounding in
spiritual Idols, as Egypt did in a more gross way, for which Israel could not
sacrifice among them. 3. It is said, that our Lord was crucified there; not
literally, but spiritually, as the word before clears, and as that word also
does clear, that is, either not only was He crucified at Jerusalem, but also
there, or it is spiritually Egypt, also spiritually our Lord was crucified
there, which cannot agree to Jerusalem, neither to Egypt nor Sodom at that time
literally taken; neither were it any mystery, or spiritually to be understood
of Jerusalem (which never gets the name of the great City) literally. And it
is rather designed by that paraphrase, where our Lord was crucified, than by
Jerusalem, because mystically the true Church is still in this Book set out by
that. This part of the description agrees to Rome, 1. In that under its
dominion, Christ was crucified, and by its Authority, to wit, by a President of
theirs Pontius Pilate; for, He was delivered to the Gentiles. 2. In respect of
His Members, Ordinances, etc. there He had been long persecuted and crucified
in them and put to open shame, Heb. 6.6. In the street of this city, that is,
publicly by their Authority, as malefactors used to be in the streets: this is
not private murder, but open avowed persecution. See for this, Petrarcha, lib.
Epist. sine titulo, Epist. 16. who wrote three hundred years since.

This is amplified in the 9, and 10. verse. In the 9. verse. 1. In the delight
that all men shall take in the low condition of these witnesses, they shall see
them, that is, they shall with delight behold it and hear it, and will not be
content to have them buried; and this is done by all kinds, their hatred is
universal. 2. The time is not long; and this sad condition of the Prophets, and
mirth of this world, will change. It is but three days and an half, with an
allusion to Christ's being under the power of death, and to keep a
proportionablnesse to the three years and an half before, an indefinit time
certainly, and cannot be three days; for, then all kindreds shall not have
time to see them and so make merry. 2. It is not literally to be taken; for,
they are said to rise again, and their death must be such a death, as is
consistent with that, and with the manner of their rising. 3. It is not three
years for days: for, 1. no considerable application can be given that agrees
with it. That which interveeneth between Charles the fifth his taking, and
imprisoning the Elector of Saxon and Landgrave of Hessen; and Mauritius Duke of
Saxon his making him again to flee, and the peace which was concluded at
Paussow with Ferdinand, will in strict account be about five years and odds, to
wit, from April 1547. to August 1552.

The third circumstance is verse. 10. their exceeding great mirth and jollity,
which is aggreged from the reason of it, in the end of the verse. all that dwell
on the earth, that is, all carnal Professors of that antichristian Kingdom
(for the earth here, is opposed to the true Church which is called Heaven)
shall make such feasts and cheerfulness, and use all signs of joy, which men
do in their greatest mirth and upon obtaining greatest victories. See Esther
9.18. after their delivery, and Nehem. 8.10, etc. These are the greatest tokens
of mirth. Let us consider the victory which is the cause, These two Prophets
that before tormented them, now they are rid of them and at ease. We shall
enquire in the reasons of these, 1. Why faithful Preachers are often a torment
and torture to the men of the world, who neither can abide their consciences to
be stirred, their faults touched, their designs marred, or lusts restrained?
etc. such Moses and Aaron were to Pharaoh, the prophet to Jeroboam, Elias and
Micajah to Ahab and Iezebel, John Baptist to Herod? etc. 2. Why a profane
people will be so glad to be rid of honest Ministers, and yet well pleased with
hir^lings? Ahab could abide four hundred Prophets of Iezebel, but could not
endure one Micajab that spoke the truth. The world is now swarming with the
supporters of Antichrist, who live delicately on the fat of the earth
uncontrolled, yet two poor witnesses of Christ are unsufferable: And, 3. Why
the Lord often upon the back of a begun rise of the Gospel will suffer an
exceeding nipping storm to arise against it?

For the first, faithful Ministers, especially in times of declining, may be
said to torment the earth these six ways, 1. Their word and testimony has
influence on the conscience, when it forcibly discovers and reproves the
ill, which a hearer is guilty of: it is said ( Acts. 7.54.) that Stephens free
witnessing, cut the hearers that were guilty, to the hea^, that is, when they
cannot get leave to quench all challenges, and to sleep on, but these
witnesses, by the power and evidence of the Word and Spirit, do condemn their
deeds, and consequently themselves, That galleth them, and wants not ifluence
upon profane consciences, though they stop it, as Stephens hearers did their
ears.

2. It tormenteth their will and affection, that when they would sleep on and
delight themselves in these ways of their own, free preaching marreth their
quietness, even as when Elias comes to Ahab with this word, Have thou killed
and gotten possession? and so proceeds in the threatening, 1 King. 21. he
goes home sad and all the pleasure that he expected in his new garden
evanished; so says the same King of Micajab, that he hated him, because he
never prophesied good to him, he was always thorturing him as Elijah did, and as
Moses and Aaron did to Pharaoh.

3. It tormenteth their corruptions and lights upon their Idols, by
discovering and reproving them, and so stirs up their enimity, as John's
free preaching did to Herod and Herodias; they touch folks sores, and that
tormenteth them, though it be tenderly done; yea, some good men, as Asa, (1
King. 16.10.) have been tormented with this and could not abide it; and when
enimity and envy are wakened, they have a cruel torment, as we may see in
Haman at Mordecai. There is no greater torment to a malignant heart, swollen
with enimity against the power of Godliness in the Godly, than to have a
faithful testimony against it: and this pain proceeds not from any
unskilfulnesse and untendernesse in the Minister, but from the desperatnesse of
their corruption, which is like some grievous sore that cannot abide to be
cleansed or purged by the most tender Physician.

4. It affects and tormenteth their credit and pride, when their Religion is
called superstition, idolatry, and no Religion, they cannot away with that; to
be called guilty of such and such crimes, men in nature and as such cannot
digest it; and faithful witnesses must tell them when they go to the left
hand; yea, and to the right also, and lift up their voice for that end like a
trumpet: hence the Pharisees say, they will bring this man's blood upon our
heads, Acts. 4.5. and that tormenteth them, to call the Pope, Antichrist; and
Rome, Babylon, must be pricking. This has ofen made faithful Ministers appear
untolerable, when proud humors disdained to have them meddling with their
actions, much less to condemn them.

5. Their testimony affects the ease and outward quietness of the world;
for, men naturally love so much Religion as never puts them to trouble; but
where faithful witnessing comes, it will not be content with a form, but it
casts their old ways, and brings in new (as they suppose) and that
(ordinarily meeting with Satan's opposition in the world, and men's corruption,)
brings changes, contests, wars and judgments for abusing this Word, which
judgment the witnesses threaten: in this sense Ahab calls Elijah the
troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18.17. And the Apostles are said to turn the world
upside down: and from this, many say it was a good world before, but since
these Ministers arose, there is no peace: hence some places of the world; yea,
some Pharisees have more outward peace with formal Ministers; yea, with
Idolatry than when Christ is preached: therefore Christ says, He came not to
send peace, but a sword; and thus the world thinks if they were quit of some
heady Ministers, all would be quiet. It is no marvel then that worldly men
rage at this, and that it torment these who have their portion here only.

6. Men in darkness have access to their private designs, but light crosses
their interest and so tormenteth them, for, the keeping of a good conscience,
(which Ministers that are faithful must press) makes folks inflexible to
these crooked ends which the world cannot abide to have obstructed or crossed:
thus the Prophet that testified against Ieroboam's worship, crossed his intent,
and so marred the securing of the Kingdom to him, as Jeroboam thought, and this
made him hate that freedom: This may in part vex all sorts, but especially it
is intolerable to great men who fret to be bounded either in reference to end
or midses, and cannot abide to be reproved, which was in Asa's case formerly
hinted; we may see it also in the three Children, Dan. 3. It galleth the King
that a pretext of conscience (as he thought) should impede their absolute
obedience to him: Kings and great men think there is no living with such
Ministers, they are pests and debauchers of the people, that wrong States,
outward peace and all, keeping folks from their own mercies, so some men call
temporal designs, and this troubles them; especially, when no obligation
whereby others are win to flatter them, and heal their wound slightly, will
prevail with them to make them go along as others do; they are then accounted
implacable, and but enemies to men's persons, when they oppose freely their
crooked designs. Seeing then by these Prophets they were so tormented, it is no
wonder they make merry: For, 1. now they suppose that they have much more
liberty, so that they may speak and do and not be presumptuously quarrelled
therefore. 2. Their enimity is delighted, which is like a wasp that feeds on
sores, counting that the time which they desired; and no good reason can be
given for this, yet are they puffed up with it, as if they had obtained much.
3. They have now free way to their own designs: when John is away, none
reproves Herodias; and Ahab stood some aw of Elias, and he might and would
have gotten folks with him better, had he wanted Micajab, etc. Faithful
testifying against Popery, struck at many men's particulars. When John, Duke of
Saxon, did ask Erasmus concerning Luthers Doctrine, he answered, first,
merrily, he had committed two unpardonable faults, which by all means should
have been abstained from, to wit, 1. that he touched the Popes crown. 2. the
Monks bellies: this faithful witnessing is like the Angel to Balaam, who would
sain have been at the wages of unrighteousness and was tormented by his
appearing to hinder him. The Apostle hinteth at this, that he and his Ministry
was despised by many that counted gain godliness, 1 Timothy 6. and would not
suffer for the cross of Christ, Galat. 6.12. This readily is a sore that
tormenteth in all times. And here again, 3. further it may be asked, why the
Lord suffers His Ministers, and His Work (consequently in them) to be so soon
trod upon, even when it is but beginning to peep out and appear; it seems
that the Ministers and Professors of it, are then in a worse case than
formerly? Or, what may be his ends, now to let the witnesses be trod upon, and
all, as it were, to be cast in the hollow, even at the entry, so as in the
event the Pope seemed to be more strengthened, and the Professors of Reformation
to get a further dash than if Reformation had never been intended to be
established? Answer, For these and such good reasons,

1. That He may make it appear, that it is neither might nor power, but His
Spirit that bears through His Work, which is then most clear when these fail,
(as the Temple was immediately interrupted in its rebuilding, and partly for
this very end) for then it appears to be He when nothing can do it, and yet
the thing is done. 2. He will then appear in His glory, Psalm. 102. and the
lower the foundation be laid, and the greater difficulties appear, He gets
the more glory; as when Moses and Aaron go to Pharaoh; and when they are upon
the begun delivery, it fares worse with them for a time, and not only Pharaoh
and his Court, but even the Israelites, Exodus 5. and 6. are offended at Moses,
and their burdens are increased, and Pharaoh venteth more malice, from which
God gets the more glory, and then the work is seen the more to be of Him,
and He has (as He must have) occasion of exalting His glory. 3. He does it so
soon, to be a confirmation to these witnesses and their successors in all their
following straits: when He has in His providence suffered them to meet with
great straits at first, and has brought them through them, these may in time
to come be encouragements to them, as these miracles done in Egypt, were to be
unto the people of Israel confirmations of their faith in following straits for
ever. 4. It is for His peoples profit, they readily are carnal even at the
entry of a good work, and almost think God engaged to own them, however they
carry in it: the Lord by some such cross dispensation, curbeth or preventeth
their presumption; thus Moses, in his going down to Egypt, is pursued and made
to circumcise his son, to make him the more watchful afterward over his own
particular carriage; and so possibly Elias is made to flee, even at his begun
Reformation, 1 King. 18. lest he should think all done, or take occasion to sit
down. 5. It is done for trial at the entry, for many false friends are soon
discovered, that have had but corrupt ends; much corruption, fainting and
fretting unbelief appears among the generality of the Godly, but especially
the carnal hearted, they, like the Israelites, would be back again, and now
they get time to discover themselves. And enemies at the entry by this
occasion, or advantage, are the more hardened, as Pharaoh was to pursue on; and
so God has more occasion to glorify Himself. 6. By this the Lord says, all
that would follow Him, must take His way, and take on the cross, for whatever
be in the end of the day the cross begins, and the morning is foul, and the
wall is built in troublous times, Dan. 9. and He would not have any who
engages to be on His side, putting the cross far behind, but resolving at
first to meet with it; these that have an expectation to eschew trouble by
taking them to such a work, will be mistaken. 7. Ordinarily a people at the
beginning of a work, and Ministers at their first setting to, (for,
proportionally this agrees to all that are sent, at their entry) are most
tender, zealous, and have the warmest frame of Spirit then, and can abide, and
will bear more then nor afterward, when that is gone: at the rise of
Reformation, it is a wonder what zeal and boldness will be amongst Ministers
and People, whereas often readily when either that temper of spirit is off
people, or they sitten up and become cold, they would not endure such trials;
and we may see it confirmed in our own experience. 8. Any opposition to a
Reformation and some bringing of it low, makes it often the more conspicuous
and terrible when it is recovered again; for, now, all eyes are fastened on
them, and looking to them, and when they see them rise while they expect it
not, it does the more affright them, as may be clear in the Verse following
when these witnesses arise. 9. He brings all His works about by degrees and
steps, that He may have out of every step multiplied and renewed evidences and
occasions of His glory, as it were by so many several miracles on Egypt: Now,
if there were no advantage at no time to enemies, there would be but one
delivery, whereas thus one delivery is manifold. 10. There is ordinarily
something of a temporal greatness affected at the beginning of the Gospels
rising, which fault the Disciples fell into; that was also in Germanies this
Christ not only curbeth with the Doctrine of the cross, but with the cross it
self also, that they may be brought to deny themselves, and as He says to
Baruch, Ierem. 45. not to seek great things for themselves. All which are good
ends and profitable to His people, and may make us all reverence His way,
although it look strange-like unto flesh.

LECTURE IIII.
Verse. 11. And after three days and an half, the Spirit of life from God
entered into them: and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon
them which saw them.

12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld
them.

13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the
city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand: and the
remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

14. The second woe is past, and behold, the third woe comes quickly.


ANtichrist and his Kingdom are now very glad, supposing the witnesses to be
quite overthrown never any more to appear in opposition to them; but that mirth
lasts not long, after three days and an half they are revived, and the
public face of affairs quite changed; for, God takes this opportunity of the
low estate of this Church to manifest His work, and brings the preaching of
the Gospel and the prosperity of its Preachers to a more conspicuous visible
condition, than they were into before, by giving these witnesses (supposed to
be killed) a visible and glorious Resurrection: which is set out in these two
steps, 1. Their reviving from the dead, verse. 11. 2. Their glorious condition
after they are risen, verse. 12. and 13. Both which are set forth by several
circumstances going before, accompanying, and following after them.

By Resurrection here, we are not to understand literally the rising again and
taking to Heaven of men once really dead; the frame of all the prophecy which
is figurative, and the scope of this, will not admit that: but this
Resurrection of the witnesses, and their glorious condition after it, is to be
looked on as holding forth a more visible profession of the Gospel, with a
greater number of Preachers following their footsteps, and taking up that same
testimony which these few oppressed ones under Antichrist did formerly bear
witness unto. In this sense they are said to rise again, because their
testimony reviveth, men coming with that same Spirit and Power, as if these
were again brought to the world, as is spoken of John the Baptists coming in
the Spirit and Power of Elias, Matthew. 17.11, 12, 13. That thus it must be
understood, appears, 1. This Resurrection is so conspicuous and evident that
the enemies behold it, verse. 11, 12. which looks liker a public change of
affairs than what particularly concerns two persons, especially considering
(as was hinted before) that the low condition of the Church is described by the
low condition of the witnesses; and therefore a change of the Churches estate
to the better must be described by the raising up of these witnesses. 2. It is
such an exaltation as works fear upon all the opposers. 3. It is accompanied
with a great earthquake, and the ruin of a considerable part of Antichrists
dominions, verse. 13. which shows it must be such a change as proves
prejudicial and destructive to that Kingdom. 4. It is a Resurrection and good
condition, in opposition to their former death and low condition, But that
consisted mainly in the bearing down of their Doctrine and Profession; this
must be therefore in the vindicating of both. Lastly, This change is that which
follows and is expounded by the seventh trumpet, that the Kingdoms of this
world are become our Lords, etc. which we will find to hold forth a more free
and glorious manifestation of the Gospel, after the darkness of Antichrist
shall be over, and the Temple of God again be opened in Heaven, etc. all which
do more particularly explain and prosecute what is generally summed up and
begun here.

The first step of this change, is set forth in these circumstances, 1. In the
time of it, after three days and an half, etc. a definit time for an
indefinit, it is like, alluding to Christ's lying in the grave, and signifies
this, that within a little time after Antichrists seeming to suppress the
Truth and the Preachers of it, God shall again wonderfully bring it and them to
light, as if they were raised from the dead. 2. The mean and manner of their
reviving is expressed, The Spirit of life from God entered into them. It is
like, this alludeth to the Lords creating man at first when He breathed the
breath of life in him, Genesis 2. and to the Lords reviving the dead state of
Israel, Ezekiel. 37.4, etc. which shows, that however it looked impossible-like
to men, yet was it not so in it self, because God, who at first made man, was
to be the worker. And, 2. that the great mean effectuating it, was not humane
might or power, but the Spirit of the Lord, which He has to communicate to
such instruments, and at such times as He shall find expedient for promoving of
His work. 3. It is said, they stood upon their feet, and that so conspicuously
that their enemies saw them: whereby the efficacy of the Spirit of life, and
the reality and certainty of the effect following, is signified; so that
instruments for promoving of the Gospel shall unexpectedly appear when the Lord
shall power out His Spirit, as if dead bones would stand up to resume their
testimony: which is in sum the same with that type, Ezekiel. 37. 4. The effect,
is, great fear fall upon them which saw them: the world a little before was
insulting to look upon them, now their rejoicing turns to terror: for, the
more powerful, glorious and unexpected the restoration of these witnesses is,
who formerly tormented them, the greater is their fear now, when their
expectation of getting them suppressed fails, and nill they, will they, this
Gospel will come to light. The consequent of diminishing their greatness and
interrupting their peace, proves terrible to them.

Their glorious condition after their Resurrection, is further expressed, verse.
12, 13. in these circumstances, 1. There is a call given them. 2. Their
obedience, or the consequent following it. 3. Some effects are marked to
accompany and follow their ascending. The call is several ways set out, 1. It
is from Heaven: to show a divine warrant, and an extrordinary call of God,
which the first Reformers after Popery should have. 2. It is called a voice,
and a great voice, to signify the distinctnesse and clearness of their
warrant, and the weight it had on them for putting them to this duty, either by
some external Authority, provoking them to it, or (which is most probable)
some extraordinary instinct and impulse of the Spirit constraining the
Preachers and Professors of the Gospel now to a public separation from Rome
more than formerly was. 3. And they heard it: whereby is shown, that though God
had given many commands of separating from Antichrist, and of coming out of
Babel in the former ages; yet were they not heard nor understood, even by many
Godly then living in that fellowship, and burdened with their superstitions,
but now God gives these revived witnesses at the beginning of Reformation to
heat, and distinctly to understand His mind in this particular: and it does
imply also, that though many saw their practice, yet was not their call cleared
to all, possibly alluding to that of Paul, Acts 9. where though many saw a
glimpse of the light about him, yet he only heard the voice that spoke to him.
4. The great thing in the call, is, the duty called-for, Come up hither, that
is, to Heaven, as the words following do clear. That the term from which, is
the antichristian Church and World, and the low condition that Christ's Servants
had by her means, is evident. The term to which, to wit, Heaven, we conceive is
not properly to be understood of the glorious seat of the blessed, but of a
glorious visible Church State upon earth (it being ordinary especially in this
Book to set forth the visible Church under this name) and so the meaning is,
they shall not continue in their former sackcloth-condition, but God shall
erect a visible Church distinct from Antichrist, which shall be, as to the
purity and beauty of Ordinances and to freedom from Antichrists tyranny and
persecution, in comparison of what formerly the Saints were obnoxious unto,
like an ascending to Heaven. That thus it must be understood, beside what was
said at the entry, appears, 1. It is a Heaven in opposition to the world
formerly mentioned, which was that of Antichrist. 2. It is an happiness,
opposite to their former low estate: now when they are revived, they are not
permitted to live within the precincts of Antichrists dominion, and under his
tyranny as before, but are called up from without his reach. 3. It is the same
Heaven mentioned under the seventh trumpet, verse. 19. that is, where the
Temple, Ark and Covenant is; and their ascending is the opening of that Temple,
etc. 4. It is such a Heaven as that ( Chap. 12.) that Satan is cast down from,
as that the Man-child is taken up into, verse. 5. and 8. and such an Heaven as
the everlasting Gospel is preached into, Chap. 14.6. and that after the beasts
begun ruin; but all these are to be understood of a visible Church State.
Therefore this must be so also, especially considering that these witnesses are
called Stars, they are now fixed to shine in this Heaven of a visible
Church State, as put on a candlestick that they may give light to the world
more than formerly they were in capacity to do.

Their obedience follows, they ascend up to Heaven, etc. meaning their taking
on them that public owning of the Gospel which they were called to, and the
certainty of the effect, following the former call, such a condition followed
indeed as they were called to. 2. The manner of their ascending, was, in a
cloud, that is, gloriously and safely, as the Lord is said to be clothed with a
cloud: their glory and safety is by divine Power; it is like with allusion to
Christ's ascension, Acts 1. both these Resurrections being by one Power. It is
said also to be in a cloud, because though it were discernable to onlookers,
yet was it mysterious and dark to them, who could not discern, (through the
many reproaches and imputations put upon the first Reformers,) the beauty of
the work in their hand, and the glory of Gods dispensation to His Church in
them. 3. It is marked that their enemies beheld them: they saw them dead, they
saw them raised to their feet, and now they behold them ascending; which
shows still a visible and remarkable change in the steps and progress of His
Church, and the reality and greatness of it, which could not be marred by
their opposers though they beheld it; which certainly would provoke their
enimity, and increase their envy the more. They are called their enemies, not
for any particular wrong these witnesses had done to them, but, for the work in
their hands, these witnesses should still have enemies retaining their enimity,
yet were restrained from marring their exaltation, which shows that the
reviving of the Gospel and down-bringing of Antichrist will be by degrees. In
short, these two verses say, that the Gospel shall again flourish, and the
witnesses thereof shall be placed in a honorable condition suitable to their
profession, in despite of all their opposers.

In the 13. verse. this glorious condition of the witnesses is set out by four
glorious concomitants going along with it, or consequents following upon it,
1. And the same hour was there a great earthquake. By earthquake, Chap. 6.12.
and verse. 19. of this same Chapter is understood great and sudden temporal
mutations. By this we understand the great commotions which usually accompany
Reformation, whereby Kingdoms are put in an uproar, Satan and his instruments
wakening up enimity against the Gospel, and the Lord powerfully carrying on His
design, makes the earth, as it were, to shake till He accomplish it. This did
really fall out, (and it may well be thought to be the fulfilling of this
prophecy) in Germany, France, Holland, England, Scotland, etc. when at first
the witnesses were brought to a visible Church State separated from Rome.

The second effect following upon the former, is, a tenth part of the city
fell. It has no name here, and therefore must be understood to relate to that
called the great city, verse. 8. that is, the city having dominion over the
Kings of the earth, Chap. 17. verse. 18. that is, Rome, to be taken not strictly
in respect of that particular Town, but more largely in respect of its Empire
and Dominion, as was formerly said. It is said, a tenth part of this Dominion
falls, because by this public preaching of the Gospel, and the witnesses
separating of themselves from her, a great and considerable part of that
Dominion is diminished and brought down: or, as Chap. 14. by that expression,
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, is set forth not the destruction of a City alone,
but the ruin of Antichrists Kingdom; so here, by the fall of a part of that
City, we are to understand the begun ruin and destruction of that Kingdom,
which was to accompany the reviving of light in the world, as is said, and was
actually fulfilled in the withdrawing of England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden,
and a great part of Germany, France, Helvetia, Polland, Low Countries, etc.
from their former dependence upon the beast.

The third effect following on this, is, a great number of men, even seven
thousand men were slain. In the Original it is Names of men, pointing at some
more eminent than others in this City: the meaning is, that as by the sudden
ruin and fall of Cities, especially by earthquakes, many inhabitants usually
are destroyed; so by this begun ruin of the Romish antichristian Dominion,
many of her followers shall be destroyed, and that of the most eminent and
renowned among them: which may be fulfilled, partly, in the overthrows and
defeats of Popish Armies, but especially the overturning of Abbayes,
Monasteries, Cloisters, and religious Orders, whereby indeed a great part of
that Dominion was eclipsed, and many of Babylons Citizens were cast out, and
their habitations destroyed and brought to naught.

The fourth effect follows, And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory
to the God of Heaven: which is not to be understood of a real work of
Repentance upon all the remnant of that Kingdom (for Chap. 16. even when the
vials are powered forth, we find they repent not) but as at Christ's crucifixion
( Matthew. 27.54.) Gods hand was so discernable that it made many onlookers smite
on their breasts, and acknowledge something of God to be there; so this sudden
begun overturning of Antichrists Kingdom, and particularly the pulling down of
Monasteries and Abbayes (formerly so sacred) shall be so remarkable, that many
of that Kingdom shall at least in profession renounce fellowship with it, and
others be made to acknowledge something more than humane in this business. The
scope is, to show the extraordinarinesse of Gods appearing, and the impression
which it should have upon many formerly friends to Antichrists Kingdom.

This 14. verse. ( The second woe is past, and behold, the third woe comes
quickly) is to be expounded as verse. 12. Chap. 9. By it the march of the
seventh trumpet is cleared to be at the begun change of Religion in the world,
and to show that what formerly has passed, does belong unto the former
trumpets, tending to that scope, that John and the people of God might be
comforted against the sad things foretold by the fifth and sixth trumpets:
therefore, that which formerly was under a type revealed to John, Chap. 10. is
in this Chap. by word (for his greater confirmation) renewed and repeated.

Before we leave this part of the prophecy, it will be needful to inquire, 1.
If these 1260. days of the Gentiles treading under foot the outer court, and
the Prophets prophesieing in sackcloth be expired? and if the killing of the
witnesses be past? 2. How, or what way this prophecy is fulfilled? that so we
may take occasion to consider this time more particularly, and compare the
event in story with this prophecy. In clearing of the first, we would not be
understood as supposing all the trial of the Saints and Ministers to be past,
or that, by analogy from these witnesses killing immediately after the
finishing of their testimony, it might not be gathered that the work of God
often suffers great obstruction even after its begun rise, and that the
saints and witnesses are most subject to great difficulties and straits, when
the Gospel in their hands is even come to the birth, and bringing forth, as in
the examples of Moses, Elias, Zerubbabel and the Apostles may be seen: we
grant, that by proportion, such doctrines may be raised from this prophecy;
yet, if we will more seriously consider the particular event and time
prophetically aimed at by the Spirit in this place, we will find that these
days here intended, are expired, and that this killing of the witnesses is
fulfilled, and so that the seventh trumpet has sounded, and our time is to be
reckoned as under it: for making out whereof, we offer these considerations,

1. The sounding of the seventh trumpet, and closing of the second woe, do
immediately, or without long intervall, follow the absolute and uncontroverted
dominion of Antichrist, and his treading under foot the holy City forty and
two months; So that the controverting of Antichrists power, and diminishing of
it, must necessarily infer the expiring of these forty and two months, and
the sounding of the seventh trumpet. Now, any acquaintance with the state of
the Church during these 100. years past, in comparison of what it was before,
will evidence Antichrists power to be in a great measure shaken, and his
kingdom to be eclipsed, and that this cannot be called the time of his absolute
and universal tyranny, and therefore must be subsequent to it.

2. It is clear, that this ruin of Antichrist, is not instantly brought to a
height, but is perfected by seven vials, Chap. 16. whereof the seventh trumpet
is a sum. Seeing then the expiring of these 1260. days of his domineering,
cannot be restricted to the time of his total fall; because at the close of
these days he makes war against the witnesses and prevails, and not the
whole City, but a tenth part thereof by their Resurrection falls, and the
seventh trumpet follows whereby his ruin is accomplished: It will therefore
follow, that we must reckon the fulfilling of this prophecy of the expiring of
these days, and the raising of the witnesses from the begun decay and the
ruin of Antichrists Kingdom by the vials: and it being certain, that the vials
are already begun to be powered forth, and also certain, that these vials belong
to the seventh trumpet, which goes along with, or immediately follows
after the witnesses ascension, It must also follow, that this time falls
under the seventh trumpet, and so is beyond these former events, and supposes
them to be fulfilled.

3. That time, when Nations become the Lords, and when the Temple is open, and
the Ark of the testimony is seen therein, does belong to the seventh trumpet,
as the exposition thereof will clear, it being supposed that before the blowing
of the seventh trumpet, and during these 1260. days, that the Kingdoms of the
earth were not the Lords, that the Temple was shut, and that the Ark of the
testimony or Word of God was not seen into it; and it being now clear, that
these events are fulfilled in our days, we must therefore look upon this time
as belonging to that trumpet.

Before we confirm it further, we would remove somewhat objected against the
fulfilling of this prophecy by some Learned and worthy men, ( Mede and Roberts
upon the place) endeavoring to prove this prophecy of the witnesses killing
to be yet to be fulfilled, and so those 1260. days not to be expired.

The 1. Object. is, This prophecy cannot be fulfilled so long as Antichrist
continues in such power, and reigns with such freedom: Therefore the
fulfilling of it is yet to be looked-for. Answ. This supponeth the fulfilling
of this prophecy to depend upon Antichrists complete destruction, which being
carried on by many degrees under the seventh trumpet, as is said, cannot be
granted. And therefore we say, the fulfilling of this prophecy, and
Antichrists absolute dominion, are not consistent; this is granted: but the
fulfilling of it, and his begun ruin, though continuing to reign in part, may
stand together, and must go together, as it said. Now it is granted by the same
reverend Authors, that the ruin of Antichrist is begun, and, Therefore this
prophecy must be fulfilled also. Otherwise we must say, that this begun ruin,
and his height can consist together.

2. It is objected, That the fall of this tenth part of the City is the same
with the overturning of the seat of the beast under the fifth vial, Chap. 6.
But that is not yet fulfilled; Therefore neither this prophecy. Ans. This
objection is grounded upon an unwarrantable supposition: For, 1. the City here
spoken of, is not properly the beasts seat or Rome it self, but the dominion
thereof, as it is expounded by that same Learned Author, upon verse. 8.
preceding. 2. The expression here of a falling of a tenth part thereof, does
evidently and manifestly differ from that total overturning prophesied of by
the fifth vial, it being certain that the overturning of the tenth part is here
to set forth a partial, and so a begun overthrow, distinguished from a total
overturning threatened by the fifth vial: and therefore cannot be understood of
the same event; But here the rise and beginning of that ruin is hinted at,
which is perfected by the seventh trumpet and vials following.

The ground of this their mistake proceeds from this, that they make the
vials, at least the first six, to be contemporary with the sixth trumpet, and
not to be comprehended under the seventh. For clearing this therefore, beside
what is said in the preface, Chap. 6. and afterward on the seventh trumpet and
vials, whereby is held forth the successive dependence of the first vial upon
the blowing of the seventh trumpet, We shall further add.

A fourth reason to the former three. That act of killing the witnesses, is the
very last part of the height of the reign of Antichrist; for, he reigns
during the 1260. days preceding, which is the time of their prophesying in
sackcloth, and insulteth and rejoices in a most eminent way when these
witnesses are killed, Therefore cannot that be contemporary with any of the
vials which do succeed to Antichrists height, and successively carry on his
ruin: seeing therefore it is granted by all, that Antichrists ruin by the
vials is begun; and it cannot be denied but Antichrists triumphing over the
witnesses, is, as it were, the last part, and very Crisis of his uninterrupted
tyranny, and so inconsistent with his decaying Kingdom; It must therefore be
esteemed to preceed the vials, and so to be fulfilled. And therefore this being
the last act of the sixth trumpet, wherein Antichrist is at his height; and
seeing the vials each after other carry on his ruin, it cannot be thought that
any of them, much less the first six, can contemporate with it.

5. It may thus appear, If the vials express a different estate of the Church
(to wit, its flourishing and Antichrists weakening,) from that which the fifth
and sixth trumpet expresses (to wit, Antichrists height, and the Churches low
condition) Then they cannot contemporate together, but the one must be supposed
to preceed the other; But this is true, that they hold forth different estates
of the Church, as the exposition of them will clear, Therefore cannot fall in
one time.

6. We may add, that by the same Learned Author the time of Antichrists full
reign, and the Prophets prophesying in sackcloth, are demonstrated exactly to
be contemporary, having one beginning and continuance: and the expiring of
either of them will prove the expiring of both, and infer the killing of the
witnesses, which is immediately upon the back of both. Now, the time of
Antichrists absolute dominion being expired, as is said, it must also follow,
that the other two events in the prophecy, to wit, the Prophets prophesying in
sackcloth, and their killing, must be fulfilled also.

Again if these 1260 days be accounted for so many years, and the beginning of
them to contemporate with the opening of the seventh seal and first trumpet (as
the same Learned Author does assert) Then it will follow, that they must be ere
now expired: for we have formerly cleared the first trumpet, and opening of the
seventh seal to begin about the three hundred year or thereby, and therefore
these days cannot be running (according to these principles) till now: yea,
from that first Author, these things are clear, 1. That the witnesses
prophesying, the woman's flying, Antichrists reigning, and the treading of the
outer Court by the Gentiles, do contemporate, and that with the first six
trumpets. 2. That the woman's traveling, her bringing forth, and the lifting of
her child to Heaven, Chap. 12. do contemporate with the first six seals. 3. He
makes ( Chap. 12.) that taking up of the child to Heaven to be fulfilled in
Constantin's reign and his admission to the Empire, as also that the woman's
flying and wildernesse-condition (which to him speaks out a freedom of the
Church to Religious exercises though abused by her to much defection and
idolatry, as was in the people of Isreal's wildernesse-estate after their
delivery from Egypt) does take in the whole estate of the Church from the close
of Heathenish persecution immediately till the seventh trumpet blow. And seeing
both these will fall about the 300. or 310. year, It follows that this
prophecy in sackcloth must begin then also, and so cannot be continuing till
now.

To be more particular in the application thereof, we think, that conceit or
dream of the Papists expounding all so literally of an Antichrist who shall
come of the Tribe of Dan, and that shall reign just three years and an half,
sitting in Jerusalem, and building that Temple, and the two witnesses of Enoch
and Elias. This dream invented by them to keep their Pope from being
apprehended as the true Antichrist; this (I say) is not worth the insisting on
to refute, as being so contrary to the frame of the prophecy past, and also of
that which follows concerning the beast, Chap. 13. for, certainly this trial
being so long, as the great part of the Revelation is spent on it, and so many
things to be done under it, it cannot be performed in so short a time.

In the application of it, we shall, 1. see what general characters may be
drawn from the Text for helping us to fix the time. 2. See how the application
may be made out.

In the first we intend not to be peremptory, yet these things may be concluded
concerning it, according to the grounds formerly laid,

1. It is clear that the end of these forty and two months of the witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth and Antichrists tyranny, is discernable, being so
clearly evidenced by the witnesses laying by their sackcloth, their death and
glorious appearance again in a settled and secure condition. This certainly
will fall in about the time that Religion was reformed, and the Popes tyranny
in a great part discovered and rejected. The forty and two months then must
be acknowledged immediately to preceed this time of Reformation. This also will
be confirmed if we consider that the sounding of the seventh trumpet does
immediately succeed to that time, and that the vials which begin to be powered
out upon the Kingdom of the beast, do immediately follow this his height, and
begin the change; which does also evidence, that this change must be reckoned
from the begun fall of Antichrist; and so consequently his height and dominion
during these forty and two months must be antecedent to this.

2. For its rise, we will find it immediately to follow upon the back of the
Heathenish persecution under the seals, and to be reckoned from the sixth seal
as immediately knit to it, for, this trial of the Church during these forty
and two months under and by Antichrist, does begin with the trumpets, and
immediately succeeds to the former trial she had by Heathenish persecution.
Therefore during the sixth seal, before the seventh be opened ( Chap. 7.)
provision is made against Antichrist by sealing the Elect, as it were, marking
and setting a part some few to be kept clean from his corruption: which
sealing, being especially against Antichrist, and so sollicitously to be gone
about before the seventh seal be opened, or any of the trumpets found, it does
evince this, that we are to reckon the beasts rise (and so the beginning of
these forty and two months) from the close of the sixth seal, and opening of
the seventh or a little before: it does also confirm this, that the beast, and
the number sealed ( Chap. 7.) in reference to him, are wholly contemporarie;
but that sealing contemporateth with the beginning of the seventh seal which
succeeds to the sixth, and continues with the beast to the end of the sixth
trumpet, as that Learned Author Mede, part. 2. Synchron. 1. does demonstrate.

Again, the same thing is clear from Chap. 12. for the Churches flying to the
wilderness and continuing there for 1260. days, is the very same trial, having
the same rise and close with the beasts dominion, and the Prophets prophesying
in sackcloth: Now from verse. 6. and 14. (being compared with what goes before)
we will find, that immediately this flying of the Church to the wilderness is
upon the back of the Heathenish persecution, and the Dragons waiting to devour
her; and immediately she gets civil Authority on her side. From which
grounds we gather, 1. That the close of these forty and two months of
Antichrists absolute tyranny will fall in Anno 1559. or thereby, in which year
by public Authority in a Diet of the Empire at Ausburg the liberty of
Reformation and Religion was established, and the free profession thereof
without any prejudice to men's estates, or civil privileges was enacted; for,
though before that time Religion was practiced in many places of the Empire,
and other Kingdoms of the world; yet was there immediately before that so great
an eclipse in Germany, England, and other places, that we cannot reckon the
witnesses to have ascended to Heaven before this. 2. Neither before this time
was there public Authority for the profession of Religion, but profession was
a crime, men's liberty and privileges were restrained by it, the Protestant
Princes Commissioners were not admitted to the Council of the Imperial
Chamber; which, after that this pacification was concluded by Ferdinand, was
remeaded.

Again, it is most usual to count the change of periods in the visible Church
by the change of events in the Empire, and also to account these from its
authoritative conclusions, as we will see in the close of the first period of
Heathenish persecution, and Satan's casting from Heaven, reckoned Chap. 12.
following. Beside, it is not inconsiderable, that about this time Religion was
again established in Britain by Queen Elizabeth's coming to the Crown, Queen
Marie having begun her reign, Anno 1554. and continuing in it for five years
and some odd months, died the same year. Also it was revived in Scotland the
year before, as it was in France at the entry of Charles the ninth his reign,
Anno 1560.

2. We gather that the rise of this forty and two months reign, is to be
reckoned from the year three hundred or thereabout, when the Heathenish
persecution ceased, and liberty was brought to Christianity, as was formerly
cleared, Chap. 6. This upon the former grounds must be acquiesced in, for
timing the rise of the Churches flight, and Antichrists underhand working,
whatever objection arise from the application it self, as being too soon; yet
that flight of the Churches being the second period of her condition, and
succeeding immediately to the first, must be contemporated with the trumpets.
And now, having thus fixed its rise and close, we may gather the duration
thereof, which being supposed to be from Anno 300. or thereabout, to Anno 1560.
or thereabout, it will extend in whole to us to 1260. years. And although at
first we did not think it convincing to build the account of so many years upon
the number of so many days, for the reasons formerly mentioned; yet
considering that this definit number is five times mentioned under the same
exact account, though in diverse expressions, which seems purposly to point
out one particular definit number beside others; and considering that the event
answers this, or comes near to it upon the former suppositions, We think, in
this place, it is not unsafe to account days for years, seeing by the former
characters of its rise and close, it is indeed found to comprehend so many
years. And although at first (as is said) we durst not lay the weight of this
simply upon the number of days; yet, being expounded materially by these
foresaid characters, to signify so many years, as that is more plainly
interpreted, Ezekiel. 4. we think it is not unsafe to yield to the light of the
former reasons in this, (beyond what at the entry we were convinced of) that
the time is definit here, as also in any other place where the like grounds can
be given from the Text, for demonstrating of the time, without laying the
weight upon the particular number alone. There are two objections to be removed.

Object. 1. That this reckoning seems to begin the Kingdom of Antichrist too
soon while the Church enjoyed great outward liberty and much purity also, And
therefore it cannot be said, that she was tread upon, or did flee while she
continued to be in so good a condition. Answ. This objection does not arise
from the Text, but from the seeming difference of the event in the application;
and if it appear by the series of this prophecy, that the Church is no sooner
delivered from Heathenish persecution, but she flees to the wilderness, and
has wings given her for that end, There is no seeming reason can have weight
against that. 2. In the Scripture, periods of time are counted from the main,
or last part of them, as when it is said to Abraham, Genesis 15.13. four hundred
years thy children shall be strangers in a land that is not theirs, and shall
be afflicted four hundred years; yet being compared with other Scriptures, we
will that the continuance of the children of Israel in Egypt was not so long;
beside, that for a time while Joseph lived, they were not afflicted, but well
entertained. 3. It is often the manner of reckoning, used especially in this
Book, to reckon a whole period of the Churches estate from what is most
predominant in it: as for instance, three great periods of the visible Church
are reckoned successively to each other in this Book. The first under the
seals, is reckoned a time of persecution under Heathens; and the Church ( Chap.
13.) is said to travel all that time, although there were many and
considerable long intervalls of peace. Again, under the vials, Christ and His
Saints are said to reign, although Antichrists Kingdom and profanity continue
long very high in the world, yet is it called the time of his reigning, and of
Antichrists down-coming, because from the beginning of that period it tends
to that scope: so here, the first six trumpets being accounted one period, and
Antichrists tyranny being the most prevalent event under them, and his rise
being long working under ground before it came to a height, even from the
Churches first outward peace, if not before; we conceive, upon these grounds,
it is not unsuitable to Scripture, or this Book, to reckon Antichrists rise
from the beginning of that period wherein he rises, comes to his height and
reigns, which is during the prophecy of the trumpets. For this also more may
be seen, Chap. 12. and 13.

The second Object. is, That even according to this reckoning there will not be
found 1260. years, seeing Constantin's public peace will be about the year 310.
and it would seem that some years would be allowed for the witnesses killing
that follows after the 1260. days and goes before the settling of Religion
by Authority, which is their lifting up to Heaven. For Answer, we say, 1. It
will not be unsuitable to comprehend the witnesses killing within the 1260.
days; for, it being the lowest step of their sackcloth and the highest step of
the beasts tyranny, or at least of his success against them, it may well come
in as the consummating of their trial, and last act of his absolute supreme
tyranny; and it must be so, otherwise Antichrist will reign longer than forty
and two months, if he kill them not for that time, Therefore some render these
words, when they shall be about to finish their testimony, and go off the
stage, then he shall kill them; which agrees well with the Greek. 2. If
Antichrists rise should be reckoned during the sixth seal, and so supposed to
preceed a little the first trumpet that gives the allarm upon his approaching
appearance, the odds will not be so considerable as to mar this calculation,
though by the number of eight or ten years of so many it does not jump:
especially if we consider, that the Scripture, in the reckoning of years,
strikes not so upon the particular time, but takes some definit number near
unto it, as if we will compare, Genesis 15.13. and Exel. 12.41. Acts 7.6. Gal.
3.17. In some of these places, the reckoning is 400. years, in others 430.
Beside, however they be reckoned, the beginning of them must preceed either the
Israelits coming to Egypt, or their afflicted condition in it, seeing, Gal.
3.17. these 430. years are reckoned to interveen between Gods Covenanting with
Abraham long before his posterity came to Egypt, and the giving of the Law
after their deliverance from it. However if the periods of its rise and close
hold, there is the less cause to differ in the particular account of the years.

For verifying the event according to this exposition given, these things are
to be made out, that the Pope (whom we take to be Antichrist) has tread upon
the Church, and that his followers have possessed the title of the visible
Church during that time, which we may the less insist in, because it is
gloried in, and boasted of by his followers; and as Bellarm. alleges, lib. 3.
de pontif. cap. 2. before the Pope was pointed at as Antichrist by us, he
universally flourished, but since that time did never grow but decrease, and
lost many Kingdoms, reckoned there by him. Beside, it is evident from story,
that though Antichrists height be not reckoned so far up, yet that he came to
tread all under his feet during that period, experience through the world can
bear witness thereof.

The second thing will not need much clearing either, to wit, that the true
Church was few, and in a great part latent, and where it was discerned, ever
persecuted: That which especially is to be made out, is, 1. That though they
were few, yet was there ever some Church and witnesses kept pure from
Antichrists abominations until Reformation was restored in the Christian
world. And, 2. that about that time of the Reformations springing up, the
Professors and Witnesses of this Truth were brought exceeding low for a short
time, to their exceeding great contempt before the world, and to the exceeding
great joy and insulting of the Popish party; which yet continued not long, but
ended with a more full authoritative settling of Religion than formerly it had.
The first, to wit, that there was still a Church and witnesses during
Antichrists height, may appear from these considerations,

1. If we consider the particular catalogue of witnesses which God raised up
one after another to witness against the corruptions of that time, whose names
and testimonies are particularly recorded by several Writers, particularly,
Illyricus, catolog, testium veritatis, Cent. Magdebur, Fox, book of Martyrs;
Alstedii chronologia testium; Usheru^ de successione Ecclesiarum Christianarum,
and sundry others. And if so much be known, we may gather much more indeed to
be, considering the darkness of these times, and the great propension there
was to suppress all that tended there away. 2. It is made out by Master Fox,
White in his Way to the true Church, Jewel, Usher, and others, that Britain
received not the Gospel from Rome, and that in England there has been always
some opposing his errors, until the time of Reformation came. 3. This may
appear by the confession of adversaries, They grant that the Calvinists now are
the same called Waldenses and Berengarians before; but these they say have been
ever most dangerous to the Church of Rome, 1. Because it is of longest
continuance, being from the time of Sylvester, who lived in Constantine the
great his time; yea, from the time of the Apostles themselves say some of them.
2. Because it was more universal, and almost in all the earth. 3. Because it
has a great show of piety, having a good life before men, and believing all
things well concerning God, being only blasphemers of the Church of Rome, as
Reinerius contra Haereticos, cap. 4. affirms. Inter omnes sectas quae sunt
aut fuerunt, non est periculosior Ecclesiae Dei quam pauperum de Lugduno,
tribu^ de causis, 1. Quia diuturnior; quidam dicunt quod dur averit a tempore
Sylvestri, quidam dicunt quod a tempore Apostolorum. 2. Quia generalior: fere
enim nulla terra est qua haet secta non serpit. 3. Quia cum omnes aliae sectae
immanitate blasphemiarum in Deum audientibus borrorem inducunt; haec, scilicet,
Leonistarum, magnam babet speciem pietatis, ^o quod coram hominibus just
vivunt, and been de Deo omnia credunt, and omnes articulos qui in symbolo
continentur, solummodo Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant ac oderunt, cui multitudo
facilis est ad credendum. This Reinerius, as Bellarmine asserteth, praefat. ad
libros de pontif. wrote above three hundred years before him.

If we look Bellarmine in that preface ad libros de pontif, and sundry others
of their writers, we will find them very near draw a series of opposers of this
usurped Authority of the Popes. It is true sometimes grosser faults are imputed
to these Waldenses and Pauperes de Lugduno out of hatred, than they were guilty
of; yet if we will consider Bernards writings against them, Sermon. 65. and 66.
in Cantica, and Epist. 240. it is evident that no manifest gross crime is
imputed to these (beside their opposing the errors of of the Church of Rome)
but such as they were calumniate with by the ignorance or iniquity of these
times, as the great Historician Thuanus does vindicate them. 3. If we will look
particularly to the Church-storie, we will almost ever find some visible party
stand against the Church of Rome: for, the Eastern Greek Churches did never
fully submit till the second Council of Nice, (which was Anno 786. according to
some, or, 789. according to others) Neither was that submission full without
all contradiction, nor of long continuance; for, Bellarmine, in the preface
formerly cited, reckons their secession or schism, as he calls it, to have
begun about the 800 year, and to have continued long after. In the year 1439.
the Greek Churches being affrighted of the Turk, sent Ambassadors to treat
with the Pope and these in the West for supply; and these to obtain it,
condescended to some articles different from their Churches, as the
acknowledging of the Pop's supremacy, the doctrine of Purgatory and procession
of the holy Ghost, and the practice of unleavened Bread, for which they were
Excommunicated by their own Churches, while the Council of Basil sat. About
the year 1170. The Waldenses or Pauperes de Lugduno began, (before that close
of the Greek Churches with the Pope) as Bellarmine, ibid. cites out of
Reinerius. The occasion was this, one Waldus being stricken with fear by the
sudden death of one walking in company with him, was put more seriously to
seek God, and make for dying; whereby he came to discover the vanity of
Popery, as the badges of antichristianity, and so to drink in the sincere way
of Faith in Christ: these who followed him, though exceedingly persecuted, yet
continued in the Alps, and other mountanous places and in Province, at
Merindol and the parts about it, from the year 1200. till the year 1545. These,
after hearing of Luthers preaching and doctrine, sent two of their Ministers to
him, with whom generally in their Doctrine they agreed. These continue also to
this day in the valleys of Piedmont, Angrongue, etc. under the Duke of Savoy.
After him followed the Albigenses in France, Anno 1190. according to some, who
did both in their disputes and sufferings confirm that the Pope of Rome was the
Antichrist, and that Rome was Babylon, and also sometimes by arms did defend
themselves, as in the memorable seige of Toulouse, where God wonderfully
protected many of them against great violence. After them arose John Wicklif,
an Englishman, Anno 1370. ( Bellarmine calls it 1390.) he revived the
Doctrine of the Waldenses and Albigenses; and it took such rooting in many
places, especially in Bohem, Hungary, Germany, etc. that they came to have
great Armies in the fields; and after that John Husse and Jerome of Prague, who
came to the Council of Constance, upon the Emperor Sigismound his safe
conduct, were contrary thereunto burnt; they brought great Armies to the fields
under the command of Zisca, he would have had forty thousand men under him; he
defeated the Pope, Emperor, and other Popish Princes in eleven several
battles, although he had lost both his eyes: they continued also strong after
him under one Procopius Magnus, and were called Thaborites. At the Council of
Basil they had granted unto them the Scripture in their own language, Priests
Marriage, and communion in both Elements, etc. All Bohemia were divided in
three sorts, one acknowledging the Pope fully, another seeking Reformation in
some points of Doctrine, the third accounted him Antichrist. They continued
till after Luthers days, who wrote to them to confirm them, as Sleidan
records, lib. 3. page 34. neither was their former courage daunted till
division fell first in among their own Ministers of the new and old City of
Prague, and afterward among the Soldiers.

Lastly, Although we could deduce no such thing by story, yet being here
asserted to be during that time, we are to believe that it was truth, even as
there were seven thousand during Iezebels persecution who had not bowed their
knee to Baal, who yet possibly might be unknown to others, as to Elias, till
the Lord revealed it to him in the general, without showing their names or
where they dwelt.

It remains that we should make some application of the witnesses killing and
their Resurrection afterward, which according to the former grounds falls
immediately before the year 1558. in which time we will find these things to
fall out.

1. Anno 1546. Began that war between the Emperor and the Duke of Saxon,
Landgrave of Hessen, and other Protestants in Germany: the year thereafter the
Duke is defeated and taken prisoner; the Landgrave is shut up in prison, the
whole face of affairs is changed, Protestant Magistrates exauctorated, many
hundreds of Ministers banished, and others put in prison, if they did not
receive the interim, which with a safe conscience they could not do: so that
the face of affairs was very sad, the Protestants were made a prey, their
Castles demolished, a great and incredible number of Cannons, and other Arms
taken from them, and they, and prisoners with them, sent out through several
corners of Europe, as trophies of the Popes absolute victory and subduing of
Lutheranism: whereupon great insulting followed through the Popish world. At
this time also persecution was at a great height in France, in the Netherlands
under the Duke of Alba, and in England, during the reign of Queen Marie which
began in the year 1554. It is marked by some (to wit, by Alstediu^, Chron.
restium) that from the year 1540. and some years after there were 900,000.
Christians massacred for the cause of Religion, so that the Professors of the
Gospel had not suffered more than they did immediately before that year 1560.
having standing Laws in all Kingdoms against them, forefeitours, proscriptions,
banishments, death, etc. exercised for the destroying of them, and they as
infamous made incapable of all privileges and dignities. We may add, that
about the same time, Anno 1545. fell out the great massacre of the poor
Waldenses, in Provence in France, the burning of Merindol and other Cities
where they lived, and the total destroying of their Country by the Lord O^e^s
means: which, though it had been often formerly assayed, yet till this time
could they never get it effectuated. Beside, at this time also was the
persecution by the Duke of Savoy in the valleys of Piedmont: considering
therefore the great and universal persecution rising at one time and with such
success; considering also the persons upon whom it especially seized, being
either these called Waldenses or Albigenses, who being the stock of these who
witnessed against Antichrist in much suffering and sackcloth whiles there were
no other, may well be accounted eminently the Witnesses; considering also that
this persecution seized especially upon Ministers, who by their office are
witnesses, the heat of it was against them; Bohem, being of these Albigenses,
lost two hundred it alone, so that none were admitted to stay, but such as by
receiving that interim gave submission; considering also the time that this is
trysted in, being immediately at the height and turn of Antichrists absolute
tyranny; and considering the great insolency and joy expressed by the Popish
world with many indignities and reproaches against the poor witnesses of Jesus
Christ, which were evidenced by their solemnities and the reproaches that in
write were put on all that were called Protestants, and many other ways, as
story holds it out: And lastly, considering the great, universal and
unexpected reviving that the work of God had, and the happy condition that His
Ministers attained immediately after these overthrowes and that insulting;
partly, by the change which Mauritius, Duke of Saxon, made in Germany, with the
edicts and statutes that followed thereupon, as was formerly hinted; partly, by
Queen Marie of England her death, and other means trysted by God together
almost at the same time throughout the Churches: I say, upon these
considerations, it is not unsuitable to apply this killing of the witnesses to
these persecutions; and their rising again and ascension, to the happy estate
which the Church was immediately advanced to after that, and has been since in
some measure continued in, which, though it be not every way so glorious and
prosperous as to be absolutely free, yet being compared with the former state
thereof, may well be said to be in Heaven in respect of it, and we may
warrantably conceive, that such extraordinary events trysted together would not
be passed by the holy Ghost, and are not for no purpose timed so in this
prophecy. Hence Observe,

1. Neither the sufferings of the Godly, nor the joy and insulting of the
wicked are perpetual, but both have an end, and that speedily. Three days and
an half is here the term of the wickeds joy; it is not worth the having. 2. The
joy of the wicked does ever end in more shame and confusion to them, and the
low condition of the Godly has ever the more glorious outgate to them. 3.
Oftentimes the wicked are surprised when they look least for it, and God takes
opportunity from the lowest condition of His people to work their deliverance
and to get Himself glory in the doing of it. 4. When God has any singular
thing to do, He will not only singularly fit persons for it, but
extraordinarily or eminently call them, as it were, with a voice from Heaven to
it. 5. When God minds the promoving of the Gospel, no enimity or opposition
of enemies can mar it, though they be onlookers upon it. 6. There will be great
odds between the success and respect that Ministers will get at one time, and
at another: these Preachers who were formerly in contempt, are now in credit;
this flows not from the efficacy of men's gifts, nor dexterity in mannaging
things, but from the Lords call, designing some for suffering at one time, and
others or possibly the same for the active promoving of His work at another.

Concerning the Waldenses.
HAving made mention of the Waldenses from the testimony of two Authors, it
may be not impertinent to insert a little word more concerning them; partly,
because the Books may not be at hand to every one, and partly because some
Jesuits, and particularly Gretserus in his preface to Reinerius, imputes
(though injustly) to Illyri^s, that he had mutilated this Author in his edition
of him: and he does also impute many absurdities to them which we will not own,
and therefore cannot claim them as witnesses: he denies also, that these who
were persecuted at Merindol, and the places beside were of that stock, we may
therefore lay down more largely what the forecited Authors say, whose
testimonies they cannot refuse. That Gretserus, in the fourth Tome of the
Bibliotheca Patrum, does insert several Writers their writings against the
Waldenses; to this purpose, as he says, That the latter Heretics may be
confuted not only from new disputes, but from old writings, (and if there were
not a likeness between their tenets and outs, this end by this could not be
expected) amongst these are Reinerius, who, as he writes himself, Chap. 3. was
often upon the inquisition of these Heretics, Petrus de Pilichdorf, Lucas
Tudensis and some other writings, and catalogues of their errors, without the
names of the Authors. In the 4. Chap. Reinerius has these words that were
formerly cited, so that it may be a wonder how they could be charged with
heresy and so persecuted as they were. Again, Chap. 5. He draws their errors
to three heads, 1. De blasphemiis, quibus blasphemant Romanam Ecclesiam. 2. In
their errors concerning the Sacraments and Saints; 3. Notat detestationes
quibus omnes honestas and approbatas Ecclesiae consuetudines derestantur. A
taste of all may be given shortly, 1. They say the Church of Rome is not the
true Church, but Ecclesia malignantium; and that it began to decline in
Sylvesters time, when poison was powered in the Church; they say that they were
the Church, because they followed the Doctrine of Christ, of the Gospel and
Apostles, both in word and deed; that the Roman Church is the whore in the
Revelation, and these who are in her almost none of them keeps the Doctrine
of the Gospel; that they care not for the Pope and his statutes, but accounts
him the head of all errors; that none ought in the Church office; to be above
another, or (as the next catalogue has it) that Pope or Bishop had no dignity
above the Priest by the Word. For the second sort of errors, they overturn all
Sacraments: First, they say that the additionals profit not, the exorcisms and
benedictions they reject; but never rejected the Sacrament it self. 2. The
Sacrament of the Eucharist is denied by them, because transubstantiation sit in
manu indigne consicienti^, sed in ore digne sumentis; they reject the canon of
the Mass, and repeat Christ's words in any language, the other five Sacraments
they expunge. The third sort of errors about the customs of the Church, are,
in general, that what they read not in the Gospel they reject; as festum
luminum, palmarum, etc. festa Sanctorum, the adoration of the cross; and use
to work quietly on the feast days. All consecrations and benedictions of
candles, fleshes, palms, fire, wax, agui paschatis, and such numbered there,
are derided by them; that prayers are not of more worth in a consecrated Church
than in another place; they called Images and Pictures Idolatry, and many such
like; they reject Indulgences, Peregrinations; Soul-masses of the dead,
Relics, visiting of Sepulchers, etc. are in nothing profitable for souls but
for gain to the Clergy. When he has laid down all these, he gives this for
the reason of them, because, says he, they deny Purgatory, saying, there are
but two ways, one of the Elect to Heaven, another of the damned to hell, and
where the tree falls there it will ly; and that all sin is mortal. He adds
in the close these three errors to them, 1. In that they would not swear,
though some of them would do it when they were constrained. 2. That they
condemned all Magistrates and Church-judicatories especially which were for
gain. 3. All punishment of Malefactors. But in these we will find them
calumniated: for, rash swearing, only then in common use, they abhorred; the
Magistrates and Clergies practice of that time they condemned, but not their
places; for, still they were obedient; and that revenge which they did condemn,
seems to be the rigor of Church-mens persecution, otherwise it is known that
themselves used defensive Arms, and were in subjection.

Chap. 7. He characterizeth them how they may be known; by their manners, says
he, and their words: their manners are compositi and modesti; they have no
proud clothing; they abstain from merchandise for eschewing of lying, swearing
and deceits, and live on the work of their hands, and therefore their Teachers
work; they multiply not riches, but are contented with necessaries; they are
chaste, especially, Leonistae; temperate also, they go not to taverns and
dauncings, and they restrain anger,

Their words are precise and modest; they eschew scurrility and detraction and
lightness in word, and lying and swearing; they account Vere and Certe to be
oaths, etc. These seem not to be heretical characters; Yet, Chap. 10. they are
four ways to be punished, 1. To be excommunicated. 2. To be deposed from
whatever dignity Civil or Ecclesiastic. 3. Militari persecutione and manu
armata, all that they have are to be taken from them. If they turn, their goods
are not to be restored except on grace. And lastly, if they have vassals, they
are loosed from their obedience; if they be under Superiors, their Superiors
are to persecute them under pain of excommunication, and having their Subjects
absolved from their obedience to them, and their lands are to be given to, and
may be occupied by the Catholics; and for these he cites many decrees of
Popes: yea, the sons and the children of their favorers are not to be admitted
to any office, as the decree that is at length set down there does bear.

In the other Treatises, the same things are insisted on, that they derived
their original from the Apostles, and said that the Church had begun to make
defection in the days of Sylvester; and, in a word, that they disclaimed the
present Church of Rome, and said they were few that would go to Heaven, and
though they mention community of goods, and impute that to them; yet story is
clear, that they had their own distinction in their possessions and riches, etc.

Again, if we consider what the famous Thuan (whose testimony cannot be
refused, being a popish President at Paris of great esteem) does write of them
in the sixth book of his histories; we will find, first, that he deriveth these
at Merindol and other places formerly mentioned, from the old stock of these
Waldenses: to whom he attributes out of old Authors (particularly one
Perpinianus, who was an inquisitor in them) these tenets, 1. That the Church of
Rome was the Babylonish whore; because she had forsaken the Faith of Christ,
that therefore the Pope and Bishops who sustained her, were not to be obeyed;
that the Monastic life was a corruption of the Church; that the orders of
their Clergy were marks of the beast mentioned in the Revelations that the
fire of Purgatory, worshipping of Saints, Purgatory sacrifices for the dead,
and such like, were inventions of the devil: to these, says he, their certain
Doctrines, some others were without ground added and imputed to them, he
(meaning Waldus) left his own Country and settled in Bohem, where to this day,
these who embrace his doctrine, are called Picards; he had a companion, one
Arnoldus, who, taking another way by Alba Augusta, descended toward Toulouse:
for which cause, these that followed him were called Albigenses, or Cathari:
unto whom, says he, these in England, who are called Puritans, are answerable:
he does also show how when Cassianus minded to extirpate these at Merindol,
Alentus a noble man, who was also a good man and learned, did dissuade him from
it, because they were diligent worshippers of God, obedient to Magistrates, and
no ways guilty of the gross things imputed to them; whereupon enquiry was
made in their lives, that the King might be certified of the truth thereof,
which he compriseth in this sum, That these whow ere called Waldenses, 300.
years before that, had gotten the possession of some barren parts which by
diligence they had made fruitful, they were patient to labor, abhorring
strifes, toward the poor liberal, in paying tribute to their Princes; and
giving their Landlords what was due, exceeding faithful, assiduous in the
worshipping of God, by Prayers and innocence of manners; again, that rarely
they entered the Temples of Saints, except for their affairs of merchandise or
other bussinesse they were out of their own bounds, and when they entered they
did not fall down before the Images, nor offer wax candles nor any gifts to
them, nor did entreat the Priest to sacrifice for them, nor did they sign their
foreheads with the cross as the manner of others is; when it thundereth, they
sprinkle not themselves with holy water, but direct Prayers to God; they go not
for Religions sake to Peregrinations, nor discover they themselves before these
Images of the cross as they go, they perform their holy things in another
manner, and in the vulgar tongue: and lastly, they give no honor to the Pope
nor Bishops, but do choose some of their own number for Pastors and Teachers;
This is the sum of that which was sent to Francis the first: after this, says
he, two Commissioners were sent from them to the Parliament at Aixe, to whom
they gave a confession of their faith, agreeing almost with the Doctrine of
Luther. This was sent to King Francis, who having given it to the Cardinal
Sadulit to be examined, the said Cardinal returned this report to the King,
that he ingenuously confessed that what was imputed to them beside these
things, was merely done to make them odious without any just ground, as he by
his inquiry had certainly found; and that though there were shortly somethings
set down in it, and other things more sharply against the Pope and Prelates,
yet could he not advise to any rigid course against them: he says also that
the former Commissioners desired a hearing, and that they should not be
accounted Heretics before it was disputed and they convinced; and, says he,
though for a time this sisted the persecution, yet by the hatred of Cardinal
Turon and others, and by a forged calumny that the Waldenses had gathered
16000. men together, and were intending commotions, they procured letters from
the King to proceed in the intended persecution, which Mi^erius Lord of Pedar
(as this Author calls him, whom Sleidan called Odep) did cruelly execute in
the most heinous and abominable manner that has been heard of; which afterward
the said King exceedingly repented of, leaving it in his last commands to his
son Henry to enquire in that cruelty; which in part was done, especially on a
Monk who had invented new torments for them; and although, says he, some by
the prevalencie of some Courtiers, especially the Guisians, were kept from
condign punishment before men, yet were visibly pursued by God, as this Author
does observe, page 122. From which we may gather, 1. the conformity betwixt
their Doctrine and the truth which we do now profess. 2. How maliciously
slanders are invented by Papists against these who maintain the truth, and how
little weight is to be laid on their testimony in that respect. 3. That this
opinion of the Churches begun defection in the days of Constantine is no new
thing. 4. The horrible cruelty and unreasonablenesse of the Popish persecutions
against these innocents that are so well testified of, which can be no other
thing, but the cruelty of the beast here mentioned.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 15. And the seventh angel sounded, and there were great voices in
heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

16. And the four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon thrir faces and worshipped God,

17. Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and
art to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned.

18. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the
dead that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small
and great, and should destroy them which destroy the earth.

19. And the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his
Temple the ark of his testament, and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.


THe Lord, having cleared and confirmed his people in reference to the fifth
and sixth trumpets, He now proceeds to the blowing of the seventh, which
brings the last great woe: for understanding of it, there are two things to be
observed,

1. That it depends upon and immediately succeeds unto the second woe, so
that where the second woe has its accomplishment, there this third takes its
beginning. Now, the the second woe, having its end at the earthquakes shaking of
some of the Romish Dominion, the same hour when the witnesses are taken up to
heaven immediately after Antichrists absolute domineering, this woe comes
quickly upon the back of that, verse. 13, 14. and so must contemporate with the
breaking forth of Reformation and its establishment in the Empire: we conceive
therefore Antichrists height to be the march between these two trumpets, the
sixth leaving him in his last act of supremacy at the very turn, and the
seventh carrying on his ruin; for, these events of the witnesses ascending to
heaven, a part of Romes falling, and this seventh trumpet, are not linked
together as successive one to another, but as contemporary one with another,
the same hour, there being an hint given of that under the sixth trumpet, which
is carried on and perfected by the seventh, to show where the march is to be
fixed. Beside, the height of Antichrist and ruin, being woes of a distinct and
contrary nature, it is not like that any considerable part of both should be
comprehended under one trumpet which contains but one woe; and therefore it is
certain, that his dominion belongs to the sixth, and his ruin to the
seventh: we think therefore it is safest to begin the seventh at the beginning
of his ruin, especially considering that by this trumpet comes the news of
the Kingdoms of the earth their becoming the Lords; which consideration does
also confirm what formerly we laid down of the vials their being contemporary
with the seventh trumpet, and none of them with the sixth.

2. We would observe the sibnesse and identity of this trumpet with the seven
vials, Chap. 15. and 16. So that (as we conceive) these seven vials do more
particularly in several steps declare the same events which are more generally
here comprehended, which will be clear by considering, 1. The nature and titles
of both: this seventh trumpet is called a woe, and the last woe; these seven
vials are called plagues, and the last plagues of God; which is, upon the
matter, the same with the last woe. 2. They have one object and earand, and
effects common to both, to wit, the executing of Gods vengeance upon Antichrist
and the Kingdom of the beast, the destroying of them that formerly destroyed
the earth, and the bringing Religion to light from under Antichristian
darkness. 3. The rise will be found to be at one time, the seventh trumpet
begins immediately after Antichrists begun ruin, as is said; and ( Chap.
16.) we will find the first vial to be powered on these that have the mark of
the beast, whose Kingdom is not yet fully overturned until the sixth; and
therefore must be in strength when the first begins. Beside, Chap. 15.2.
they succeed immediately unto the victory of the sealed number, Chap. 7. and
there is, upon the matter, the same song as is here: whereof see more, Chap. 6.
preface. 4. By comparing this with Chap. 15. which is as a preface to the seven
vials, it will appear they are exceeding parallel, yet one and the same, as the
exposition of particulars going through all the parts will manifest: which
ground being laid, will be of great use to understand, 1. this seventh trumpet.
2. the prophecy of these seven vials: And, 3. the interveening prophecy,
Chap. 12, 13, 14. by which the principal typical prophesies, expressed in
sevens, are interrupted; which is again made up by the vials which are to be
knit in the series to this seventh trumpet, the Lord here giving a little hint
of the coming events, by way of preface, and opening the Temple, verse. 19.
which formerly was shut: and what follows upon that? Chap. 15.6. out of the
Temple, thus opened, come seven Angels having the seven last plagues, which are
the particular instruments of this last woe, expressed generally under the terms
of lightenings, thunderings, earthquakes, in this Chapter. We may add, that
the whole prophesies of this Book, and so that of the seven vials, is
comprehended in that Book which the Lion of the tribe of Judah opened, Chap. 5.
And seeing, Chap. 10. the finishing of the mystery of God is applied to the
seventh trumpet, these vials then must contemporate with, and belong unto that
trumpet, seeing the event that is applied to it, is, Chap. 16, 17, and 18.
particularly described, and to be fulfilled by them; and if they belong not to
this trumpet, it could not be said that the event fulfilled by them, to wit,
the avenging of Gods people on the Antichrist and the whore and their
destruction, were also fulfilled by it.

A special weight of the whole series laid down, does lie in the confirmation
of this, to wit, that the seventh trumpet and the seventh vial do contemporate
and belong to the same times and events: we therefore further add, that we
must either say that this trumpet does contemporate only with the seventh vial,
or with all the vials, or at least with some few of them and not with all; But
neither the first nor the last, can be said: not the first, to wit, that the
seventh trumpet and the seventh vial only do contemporate; because if so, then
the six first vials immediately preceding, behoved to contemporate with the
six trumpets or these which preceed the seventh; But that cannot be, 1. Because
the six first trumpets and the seventh are different prophesies, six of them
continuing the height of the Churches enemies and her low condition, and the
seventh contrarily; and all the seven vials continue matter of one kind, to
wit, the Churches rising condition, and her enemies down bringing: they cannot
therefore be said to contemporate with prophesies of diverse natures. 2. If the
first six vials should belong to the sixth trumpet and contemporate with it,
Then it will follow, that the Churches lowest condition and most flourishing
condition did belong to one prophecy; yea, to one step of one prophecy, to
wit, one trumpet: and on the contrary, that the heighest and lowest condition
of the Churches enemies, to wit, Antichrist, did belong to one period; yea, to
one step of the same period of the Churches condition: for, it is clear, that
the Church is never lower than under the sixth trumpet, as the exposition of it
does clear, and what preceedeth in this Chapter does confirm, and enemies were
never higher, treading all under foot: on the contrary, during the first six
vials, the Church begins to flourish, the plagues are powered out upon his
kingdom and seat, and himself taken and cast in the lake by the sixth vial; But
this is absurd, that such contrary events, as Antichrists height and ruin,
should belong to one period; yea, to the sixth part of one period; and the like
can be showed in no other step of this prophecy wherein two such contrary
events are comprehended, either amongst the seals, trumpets or vials, They
cannot then be comprehended under the sixth trumpet; they must therefore all
belong to the seventh. 3. These vials, as they contain matter of one kind, so
are they one principal prophecy; and therefore they are no more to be
divided, so as to contemporate some with the seventh trumpet and others with
the sixth, than we ought to divide the trumpets to contemporate some of them
with the seventh seal and others with the seals preceding, considering that
the spirit keeps the same form in expressing this principal prophecy by
seven vials, as in the former by seven seals and seven trumpets. 4. This does
confirm it also, that the contemporating of the first six vials with the sixth
trumpet, would certainly lengthen it to an exceeding disproportionablenesse;
for, Antichrists height and dominion, take up a long time; these six vials also
take in a long continuance: it is safer therefore to contemporate all the vials
with the seventh trumpet, and so their beginning being at one time as well as
the close, their duration must be the same also. 5. This seventh trumpet
blows immediately on the back of the second woe (which is the matter of the
sixth trumpet) Now, the six first vials cannot belong to the second woe; for,
its called a woe, because of the hurt and prejudice that comes by it to the
Church. Now, these six vials that destroy Antichrist, contain a great and
unspeakable benefit to the Church, and are plagues in respect of the judgment
that comes on Antichrist by them, neither could well the seventh trumpet be
called the third woe, as bringing a woe with it to Antichrist and his kingdom, if
so be the six first vials did preceed it (for they destroy him) they must
therefore begin together.

The great reason that makes some press for the contemporating of the first
six vials with the sixth trumpet, is, that thereby they may bear out the seventh
trumpet to be yet fully to come: and so (although the vials be begun) there may
be the freer access to divine concerning supposed strange events of that
trumpet; but from what is formerly said (in the preceding Lecture) and what
further may be said, Chap. 20. it appears that the seventh trumpet is blown
already, which does confirm the Synchronism laid down.

There are two main objections here, 1. That the seventh trumpet supponeth an
absolute freedom from Antichrist and all enemies, because of these expressions
The Lord omnipotent reigns, the kingdoms of the earth are become the Lords,
etc. which cannot be verified during the first six vials; in the last whereof,
Antichrist is high by his frogs, conveening Kings and Nations against the
Church, etc. Therefore this seventh trumpet must contemporate with the seventh
vial only. Answ. This argument does proceed from the misunderstanding of the
meaning of this Text: for, this does not show events preceding the blowing of
this trumpet, or what case the Church and world shall be in when it shall blow;
but by anticipation, these phrases do express what was to follow upon the
blowing thereof, and what a wonderful change might be expected by it: and this
agrees with the manner used in all the other types of this prophecy whereby
the Churches estate is painted out according as by the effects typified it was
to be. It does therefore rather infer the contrary, thus, If by the sounding of
the seventh trumpet, Nations become the Lords, etc. Then the seventh trumpet
does not follow Antichrists final overthrow, but is to carry it on, because by
it Nations are to be gained from him; But the first is true from the words:
Therefore it is not to be posterior to his final overthrow, but is immediately
to follow that time when all Nations worship him. See further, Chap. 6. Lect. 1.

The second objection, is, that before the seventh trumpet blow, the beasts
Kingdom is said to be shaken with a considerable ruin; which say, some must
belong to the vials, some whereof therefore must contemporate with the sixth
trumpet. Answ. What we have said in the exposition will abundantly clear this:
in a word, the sixth trumpet hinteth the turn which the seventh does
consummate; and it shows, that immediately upon the back of the witnesses
killing, there succeeded a glorious face of a Church in comparison of what was;
which being compared with the application formerly given, will bear out this,
that the Lord turned Antichrists highest fury against His Church and witnesses
to be the occasion and mean of furthering his own ruin, and bringing of His
Church to some footing; which we acknowledge to belong to the sixth trumpet,
and makes way for the opening of the Temple in heaven which was before shut,
out of which the Angels with the seven vials do proceed; which shows that
there is some shaking of Antichrists kingdom antecedent to the vials, (as well
as to the seventh trumpet) even as much as belongs to the sixth trumpet; for,
the first of them supponeth a visible Church State, and some victory over
Antichrist to be begun. From all which, the contemporating of this seventh
trumpet with these seven vials, does the more evidently appear: which we have
insisted the larglier upon, because it is a main pillar that supporteth the
series laid down, Chap. 6. and does make the connection clear here, although we
professedly spoke of it before.

To come particularly to the words then; the sum and scope of these following
Verses, is, by anticipation, to give a little view what the vials express more
fully from Antichrists begun ruin to its close: and this is brought in here
for the confirmation and consolation of Gods people, that before he insist in
the particular explicatory prophecy of the Churches trials from the beast in
the Chapters following, they may have a hint of the happy outgate following it,
and it does lay open a full view of the Churches militant condition to her
close, before he again begin to deduce it from its beginning.

This happy outgate is three ways expressed, 1. by a heavenly proclamation of
good news, verse. 15. 2. by an excellent song of thanksgiving, verse. 16, 17, 18.
3. by a type or vision, verse. 19. All which are but generally hinted, without
mentioning any particular, because that is reserved to be done by the prophecy
of the vials. The general proclamation, is, There were great voices in heaven,
saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the Lords, and his Christ's, and
he shall reign for ever: where we have to consider, 1. the news. 2. whence they
come. The news have two branches, one is concerning the present happy change,
The kingdoms are become the Lords; and the other is concerning the continuance
thereof, He shall reign for ever.

By Kingdoms of this world, we understand not all Kingdoms, but some or many;
called Kingdoms, in opposition to persons or families, or parts of Nations.
Now, the body of Kingdoms and Nations are brought in, as is expressly said,
Chap. 15.4. parallel to this, All Nations shall come and worship before thee.
They are called Kingdoms of this World, to show, that such Nations as formerly
did not acknowledge God should now submit to Him. The scope is to show the
increase of the Gospel after Antichrists begun ruin, in opposition to the
former paucity that was in the true Church.

They are said to become the Lords and His Christ's, in opposition to what
formerly they were; they were His by creation, but were not of His Church, nor
did not acknowledge His Christ as Head, but owned another master; now they
become the Lords by special acknowledging of Him, and they become His Christ's
by the profession of faith in Him alone. In a word, this their becoming His
now, is to be a pure Church to Him, such as no Nation formerly were, and as
once the Jews were His in a peculiar manner. Beside, this is expounded, Chap.
15.4. All Nations shall come and worship before Him, by giving their professed
subjection to Him. It is said He shall reign for ever; this is not only to show
the perpetuity and eternity of Christ's Kingdom in it self, as it is expressed,
Dan. 2. That of His Kingdom there shall be no end: for, even under Antichrists
height of tyranny this was true, our Lord Jesus had a Kingdom then; but this
reigning relates to His visible continuing of a Kingdom in the world, such as
he seemed not to have immediately before this, as may be gathered from verse. 17.
In a word, Christ has now taken on Him to have a visible Kingdom in the world,
and that shall continue without such an universal eclipse by Antichrist or any
other, to the end.

These news are proclaimed by great voices from Heaven: which may be understood
either properly of the joy in Heaven and praise which God gets there for the
conversion of one sinner, much more for the conversion of Nations, or, (which
especially we rest in) figuratively of the visible Church which is just now
constituted, and the witnesses set therein; they before this spoke silently,
now, with confidence and boldness they cry and praise: the rather we conceive
this to be the voice of the witnesses and faithful Ministers, because in the
Song following we find only mention made of the Elders, and yet it is not like
that the Ministers or beasts were silent, who ( Chap. 4. and 5.) use in their
thanksgiving to go before the Elders: this therefore is like to be from them,
it being one of the delightsomest messages of the Ministers of the Gospel (
Isa. 52.7.) to say unto Sion, thy God reigns. 2. The event of this trumpet is
set forth in the thanksgiving Song of the four and twenty Elders: where, 1.
their posture is set down; next, their praise. By Elders (as on Chap. 4. was
shown) are represented the Believers, who now also having got to seats again
and a visible profession (which was not heard-of during Antichrists reign and
the Temples measuring, and the woman's being in the wilderness) they do also
publicly acknowledge this mercy and praise for it, and, by falling down before
Him, acknowledging their having that settled condition from Him; and that
humility and reverence is no less requisite for praise in a prosperous
condition, than it is for prayer under adversity. The subject of this Song,
points at two particulars in the event of this trumpet, 1. Gods taking to
Himself a Kingdom for His peoples good. 2. His pleading against His enemies and
executing justice upon them.

In the first, verse. 17. they begin with Gods title, Lord God Almighty, which
art, and wast, and art to come: it was spoken of before, and is here applied,
to show, 1. that God rightly taken-up is the ground of praise for deliverances,
as well as the ground of Faith and Prayer under straits. And, 2. to show a
suitablnesse in Gods work to Himself, this being a proof that He was indeed God
Almighty, etc. And, 3. this shows the right way of thanksgiving, which is to
be led, in by the consideration of Gods works, to have right impressions of His
own excellency, and also suitable expressions of these. This word, we give
Thee thanks, implies not only the duty of a people for spiritual mercies;
But, 1. it supponeth an excellency in the work. 2. A majesty in the Worker.
3. An acknowledgement of His Hand and Grace in the performing of it. 4. A
reckoning of themselves obliged to Him for it. 5. A heartinesse and
cheerfulness in the expression of this.

The first ground of their praise, is, because thou have taken to Thee Thy
great Power, and have reigned: which does imply, 1. that in the time of
Antichrists full domineering, the Lord seemed not to reign, having had His
Power obscured by that tyranny. 2. That the Lords having a Church in the
world, especially in any flourishing condition, is the great evidence of His
Power and Government in the world, and a notable effect thereof; and that it
ought to be exceeding refreshfull to Gods people when He exercises His Power
for having of a Church in the days wherein they live, that they may see Him
glorified in the flourishing of His Ordinances.

The second part of their praise relates to the work of Justice against
enemies, verse. 18. This work of Justice is five ways amplified and set forth,
1. In the nature and height of it, and thy wrath is come. God sometimes seems
to oversee wrongs, but He has a time of calling to a reckoning, when wrath
will not be delayed, as is threatened by the Angel, Chap. 10. 2. It is
amplified in respect of these on whom it came, and the Nations were angry: the
world was in tops with Christ's Church, having hatred against His people; even
then seasonably God trysteth the vengeance, and that not on particular persons
only, but on Nations. 3. The greatness of this work is set forth by the low
condition of these that were to be delivered, they are called dead, as being
appointed to death, and so accounted amongst the men of the world; which
looks to the reviving of the Prophets formerly spoken of, and to that
Resurrection of the Professors, Chap. 20. as impossible and improbable, it
being no less Power to bring the Church through that desperate-like condition
she was under, than to raise the dead. The last two amplifications of this
judgment are the universality and equity of it. Its universality is expressed,
in that it is called the time of judgment wherein small and great shall be
called to a reckoning. It is said, the time is come, to show Gods appointing of
times and periods even before they come, and that every event is beautiful in
its season, and ought to be welcomed by Gods people in His time. The equity and
justice of His proceeding is two ways expressed, 1. His keeping promise to His
own, That thou should give reward to thy Servants the Prophets, and to the
Saints, and to them that fear thy name, small and great. This recompense of
Grace, is called a reward, 1. Because God has knit it to His promise and tied
Himself by Grace to the performing of it. 2. Because He accounts Himself
bound by the right He has given them to it. 3. Because He allows it in liew
of the former sufferings and afflictions which they lay under: the Prophets are
first named to be recompensed, because both their work and suffering is
greatest: Then all His Saints follow, even small and great; there are none who
endeavor faithfully to keep their garments clean, how mean soever their parts
be and obscure their place be, that shall miss of the recompense when Gods
time of rewarding comes, and this looks particularly to the suffering
Prophets, formerly mentioned, verse. 4, 5, etc, who are now vindicated, when God
makes it appear there is a reward for the righteous, and a God that judges in
the earth, as, Psalm. 58. and it is this judgment which principally is related
unto. 2. It is expressed in the equity of His proceeding toward His enemies,
they destroyed, or corrupted, the earth; here God meets them in their own
measure: which is particularly marked in the pouring out of the vials, Chap.
16.5, 6. This work of Justice does not principally relate to the last
judgment, as the scope does clear; but to the Lords vindicating His people
from Antichrists tyranny, thus expressed for the reasons given, Chap. 6. where
His vengeance on the heathenish persecuters is set down, In sum, it is as if
they had said, We thank Thee for this dispensation whereby thy wrath is
manifested upon Antichrist, and Thy goodness to Thy people; and as Moses sang
to the praise of God, Exodus 15. after the delivery from Egypt, so now do we for
Thy deliverance from spiritual Egypt, verse. 8. on which consideration ( Chap.
15.) their Song is called the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb also: which does
confirm the co-incidencie of this trumpet with these vials.

The third way whereby this event is expressed, is, by signs, verse. 19.
pointing at the same scope, to wit, the spreading of Reformation, increase of
knowledge, and wrath against enemies. The first is expressed in two, one of
them being the effect of the other, 1. And the Temple of God was opened in
Heaven: there is no Temple properly in Heaven, Chap. 21, 22. but here is meaned
the visible Church: the allusion is to the manner under the Old Testament in
times of universal corruption and defection, such as that of Ahaz was, (to whom
in several things Antichrist may well be paralleled) then the Temple was shut
and the Ark was not seen. Again, in the time of Reformation, such as the days
of Hezekiah were, the first step was the opening of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 29.3.
and the people had again access to the public service: so here in Antichrists
time, the Temple is shut, the service of God is dishaunted, and in Gods secret
way the Temple is measured by for a few, and the testimony is sealed up to the
Disciples: now, the days after the witnesses reviving shall be as the days of
Hezekiah, the Temple shall be opened and there shall be a public, pure
profession of the Gospel. The second expression, is, And there was seen in His
Temple the Ark of His testament: the Ark was in the most holy, and the seeing
of it, imports a greater increase of knowledge. We may consider it two ways
which will agree in one, either, 1. as it was typical of Christ, so it
signifies that Jesus Christ who under Popery was obscured by superstitions,
multitude of Mediators, merit of works, etc. and was scarce discernable to
people, now not only is the Temple door opened, but, as it is, Isa. 25.6. the
vail is drawn by, and Christ Jesus the true Ark becomes discernable and
visible in the efficacy of his Offices: Or, we may consider the Ark as it
included the Law, therefore it is here called the Ark of his Testament, so it
implies, that the Word of God formerly veiled to the people, so as they durst
not read it nor have it in their own tongue, Now by this reformation it is
become familiar to them, they hear it in their own language, may read it in
their Family, carry it about with them. The vengeance of God against enemies is
set forth in these words, and there were lightnings, voices, thunderings, and
an earthquake, and great bail; expressions that are used, Chap. 6. when the
great temporal judgment of God against heathenish persecuters is consummated;
it is also mentioned, Chap. 16. We take this to be the general hint of what
the seven vials afterward express, as is said: for, Chap. 15.5, 6.
immediately after the opening of the Temple, the seven Angels with the vials
come forth, as being formerly kept up, now they appear.

By this similitude of opening the Temple, this is set forth, that as in the
Jewish times during their greatest defections, there was still some Temple and
Church, and at the time of Reformation there was no new Temple built, nor new
Circumcision instituted nor Priests appointed, but corruptions were removed,
and the Temple and Priests put again to their own proper use and duty; so,
during the defection of Antichrist, there should still be a Church, Temple,
Ordinances, and Ministers; and that the bridging of the Gospel again to public
in the world after that, should not be by erecting a new Church and new
Ordinances or appointing new Officers, but should be by the purging away of the
former corruptions and applying of the Ordinances and Officers to their own
former use: for, it is the same Temple after Reformation which was before, but
now it is opened; the woman ( Chap. 12.) is the same under persecution, while
she is in the wilderness during the 1260. days, that she was before her
fleeing, and continues to be the same after her return from the wilderness;
only that which by Antichrists additions was veiled and corrupted, now by their
removal becomes more visible and pure. Upon this ground it is that the
reviving again of Religion is commonly called Reformation, not as bringing in
any thing new, but as purging what formerly was corrupted. Upon this ground
Baptism continues to be Baptism though transmitted through them, and a
Ministry continues to be a Ministry, except we say there were no Ordinances
and Ministers before the time of Reformation, and so no Church, which is
expressly contrary to the scope and letter of this and the following Chapters.
From this also it appears, there needs no new constitution of a Church that
is brought from Popery, such as might be called for from heathens who are not
Christians, but the purging away the dross of Antichristianism, and the
practical adhering to the purity and power of the Gospel, even as there was
great odds amongst the Jews in the recovering of them from their grossest
defection, and the admission of Pagans unto the Church.

Neither can it be inferred from this, either that then the Church of Rome was,
and so is now a true Church, or that we have our ordination from it, and are
beholden to Antichrist for that. This first is much urged by Papists in this
dilemma, Either the Church of Rome was the true Church, and so there ought not
to have been a separation from it; or she was not the true Church, and so there
was none for many years, except she be acknowledged for such. To this we
answer, 1. by distinguishing the Church from Antichrist and his worship brought
into the Church, and added to the Ordinances thereof for obscuring the worship
of Christ. There is a true Church that is the subject, that is not denied, on
which Antichrist usurpeth, and as an extrinsick accident sets himself down
in that Temple, yet is the Temple and Church now different from his additions,
as the Temple of the Jews was from the corruptions that were accidentally
brought in upon it in the times of corruption. Thus, the word of God,
Sacraments, Prayer, Ordination, etc. are continued, which are as the material
worship of God, and, as such, are not Antichristian. The adding of traditions
to that word, putting of false glosses on it, corrupting of the Sacraments by
superstitious and Idolatrous additions, praying to Saints and Images, erecting
an Antichristian Hierarchy in the place of ordination, and these who should be
Officers in Christ's house, and many such like things, These are Antichristian
indeed, and may, as we see, be separated from the former. Again, 2. we may
distinguish Professors, who are either such as receive the complete worship of
the Popish Church, receiving indeed the Scriptures, but with such traditions
and glosses, as do, upon the matter, make the commands of God of none effect,
that pray, but to Angels, Saints, Images, etc. that use Sacraments, but withal
their superstitious and idolatrous additions, and so in all other things. Or,
they are such who close with the materials (to say so) that are abused in
Popery, and do abandon all these destructive additions, that is, who
acknowledge the truth of the Gospel, and the way of free Grace, and hate their
merit of works, satisfactions, pennances, etc. who receive the Sacraments, but
abominate their Transubstantiation, Mass, and all that depends on these,
that pray to the true God in the Name of Jesus Christ, and abhor their
Idolatries, etc. so in other things. Now, in the application we say, 1. That if
we consider the Popish Church in the large extent thereof properly, and its
worshippers or members that without choice drink in their Doctrine complexly as
it is holden out by them, and worship according to these principles; in that
sense, the Popish Church is no Church of Christ, but is truly Antichristian;
and these two cannot stand together, to be Antichrists Church and Christ's
Spouse at one time: but if we consider the Church materially, as distinguished
from these additions of Antichrist, in her Ministers and members, concurring in
the faith of the true Doctrine, and in practice and Worship accordingly hating
and abominating these superstitions, and Idolatrous corruptions and inventions;
we say, that was the true Church of Christ, which did not receive these, but
kept the former principles materially both in faith and practice: and
therefore it will follow only on the former objection, that that Church on
which Popery obtruded it self, and which yet did abhor it, that was the true
Church; which we grant: but that as distinctly considered as pure from their
Antichristian inventions, at least so far as Antichristian. Now, from the
Church which retained the foundation, and did adhere to the Doctrine and
Worship that is in the Word, we did never separate, nor from those that
continued so; but did separate from the Antichristian Church that did obscure
and corrupt these, and would neither amend them themselves, nor suffer others
to do so: and this separation is necessary, and called for by that command,
Come out of her, my people, Chap. 18, and without this there had been no
communion kept with that which was the true Church of God, who although for a
time she did live in that Babylonish captivity, was yet never of that
communion: and both these, to wit, that there were ever some such who kept the
foundation, and did reject the Popish inventions, and that they in so far
joined not with them, and so had not fellowship with Antichrist and his works
of darkness, but did reprove them, we suppose is clear from what is already
said. Neither ought the Papists to think this strange, that we apply such
distinctions to the Church under the true Antichrist, considering that they use
the same in reference to the time of their forged Antichrist, who, say they,
shall overrun the Church, and by Idolatries and violence cover the face
thereof; yet shall there be a true Church who shall not be locally separated
from Him and His followers, but in respect of their adhereing to the former
purity: and so by them the question where the true Church during that time is
to be, is answered, thus, It is under Antichrist, but not of that defection;
His Church is the company of these that shall not decline from their former
purity; the true Church are the few here and there that shall retain it. And
thus generally they expound the woman fleeing, Chap. 12. (which to them also
belongs to that time) to be no local mutation of the Church, but a decay of
her conspicuousnesse and beauty, by the defection of the great part, and the
overspreading of Antichristianisme; and the Remists do illustrate it thus, that
as now in England the Church may be said to be fled in respect of what it was,
and the public face of things; yet, as there are in it many true professors
who are not of that Church, but adhere to the Romish; So, say they, will it be
in Antichrists time; and may not now that same be more rationally said of the
true Church even in these times and places where Popery has covered the
public face of all.

The second objection may be cleared also from what is said, That we have not
our Ministry and Ordination from Antichrist, more than we have the Word and
Sacraments from him, although through their hands the Lord did conveigh them to
us; but we have these from the Lord, whose Ordinances they are, and to whom we
are obliged for purging them from antichristian corruptions, and transmitting
them pure to us, which Antichrist would never have done. Neither can it be
thought strange that we should have Ordination and Ordinances transmitted to us
through Antichrists reign, considering that there were such, even in his time.
Now, we must either deny that any such were during that long time, which is
absurd and contrary the scope here; or, we must say, that it is more impossible
for us to continue Ordination and Ordinances in a distinct separate way from
Antichrist, (as we through Gods goodness have them now,) and not to be obliged
to him for them, or not to have them derived from him, Than it was to the
Ministers and Church that lived while he was in his height. For, if we say that
their Ordination and Ordinances were antichristian, then shall we have no
Christian Church; if we say they were Christian, though sometimes coming
through impure hands, because they separated what was antichristian from them;
so that may be said here also, and so it is. We therefore apply these
distinctions here, and say, that we may consider our Ordination materially in
it self, or complexly in respect of its additionals, and the former Church in
respect of the multitude who declined, or the few that kept their garments,
and were not antichristian. If we consider Ordination and Ordinances
materially, so we have them from the true Church and Prophets that were during
Antichrists reign, and our Church succeeds them: and although it descend by
the Church under Antichrist, yet is not antichristian, more than she was
antichristian, as is said. Again, if we consider Ordination complexly, in which
sense only it is antichristian, so we have not Ordination derived to us from
her, because we have none such at all. It is not enough to make Ordination and
Ordinances antichristian, that they be so, or by such transmitted, as the
former instance of the Church in that time, and what is formerly said does
clear, but that they be transmitted as such complexly: Now, these are not as
such transmitted to us, Therefore cannot be called antichristian.

Beside this, we may draw some conclusions from this Song, the first whereof is
this, That a National Church is not only not inconsistent with the flourishing
estate of the Gospel in the world, but is concomitant with it; yea, is a
manifest proof of it, and a great ground of rejoicing to Gods people and of
praise to Him. For clearing and confirming whereof, we may consider, 1. That by
Nations and Kingdoms here, is meaned the generality and body of such Kingdoms
and Nations. 2. That by being the Lords here, is meaned a special Church State
and relation: which two being made out, it will consequently appear that what
we call a National Church (which is the combination of a Nation as one unto
God) does well suit the time of Antichrists fall, and of the Gospels
flourishing.

The first, to wit, that by Kingdoms here, or Nations, Chap. 15.4. are not to
be understood some few of a Kingdom or Nation, but the generality and body of
them, may appear 1. From the scope, which clearly is this, to set out the
largeness of the extent of the flourishing of the Gospel, or the enlargement
or wonderful extent of the Church after Antichrists begun ruin. If it were
but some few, there would be no such ground of praise, nor no such difference
from what was before, even then, some of Nations and Kingdoms were the Lords.

2. Kingdoms, becoming His, is to be understood as the like phrases used of
Cities and Families, their becoming His; but that does import, not only some of
such a Family or City, but the whole or generality of them, as instances will
clear. See what is said of Lydda and Saron, Acts 9.35. which certainly is more
than can be said of other Cities, where yet He might have many: therefore it
must be so here. 3. These Kingdoms become His as once the Kingdom and Nation of
the Jews were His in a peculiar manner; for, this seems to relate to the
Lords manner of calling the Jewish Nation; and as they were His, so shall these
Nations be His, seeing no other so clear parallel can be given of expounding
here a Kingdom becoming the Lords; so Israel is called His Nation, Isa. 51.4.
It is true, this will not hold in typical and ceremonial things, but in
things common, and essential to a National Church, it will, as we may
conclude the relation of a particular person to God now, by paralleling it with
the particular relation between God and one of the Jews, though it could not be
extended to what is typical and ceremonial in that respect. 4. The opposition
makes it clear, Nations now become the Lords as formerly they were
Antichrists, that is, they give now the profession of purity by a public
acknowledgement as formerly they gave it to the beast; now they reject him and
take Christ in his room, but the first was done nationally. 5. Nations become
now the Lords as they were not His before; for, thus the opposition is to be
understood also, but that was in respect of the complex body the generality of
them; and if now the phrase be, such a Nation is not the Lords, because the
generality and complex body do not publicly acknowledge Him, Then o^ the
contrary, a Nations becoming His, must import His having His public worship
n^tionally among them. 6. Nations now are to become His, and to be admitted to
the Church under the Gospel, as they were formerly secluded before Christ came
in the flesh, Ps. 147. Thou have not dealt so with every Nation, etc. but that
which was peculiar to the Jews then, from which other Nations were excluded,
was not in respect of particular persons of Nations; for, even many Gentiles
were admitted with Israel to the Church, but the difference was in respect of
the collective body of other Nations, none whereof were so admitted. 7. We may
consider this phrase of Nations and Kingdoms their becoming Christ's here, as it
clearly respects the many promises and prophesies that went before of calling
Nations to Him; this is marked as the fulfilling of these promises, whereby
great things have been expected by the people of God, and they cannot be looked
on but as holding forth more ground of joy than can be gathered from the
conversion of parts of Kingdoms. Consider these two places, the first is, Romans
10.19. cited out of Deuteronomy. 32.21. I will provoke them to jealousy by them that
are no people, and by a foolish Nation will I anger you. Where two things are
observable, 1. That this provoking of Israel by a Nation, is somewhat penal,
punishing them for their contempt, when, as it is Matthew. 21.43. they shall see
the Kingdom of God, and their National Church State translated from them to
another people and given unto a Nation who shall nationally be invested with
their privileges, as ingrafted in their room. 2. That the end thereof is to
provoke them to jealousy, when they shall see a whole Nation, nationally owned
of God (which they esteemed to be their peculiar privilege) and acknowledged
by Him in their room; the calling of particular persons of Nations could not be
so effectual either to anger or provoke them, seeing that has been common to
all times. The second place, is, Isa. 19. verse. 18, 19, 23, 24, 25. where Egypt
and Assyria are called the Lords people, even as Israel is; and that must be
nationally considered.

8. Take this place as including the re-ingrafting again of the Jews (as no
question it does, seeing their incoming belongs to the same time) It is most
probable-like that their Church will be national in the former respect, 1. If
we consider these expressions, Romans 11.26. All Israel shall be saved, which is
certainly in opposition to the parcels of them, and singular persons whom God
called, and continued in His Church, even when the body of them is broken off.
2. They may be expected to be ingrafted into that estate they fell from; for,
says He, Romans 11. They shall be grafted in again, but that estate was their
national Church-state-relation, and apparently had they received the Gospel,
they had continued a national Church to God, and not lost their former
privilege, though it had not continued to be typ^call, or peculiar to them.
Now, this which they fell from, was not from being privileged with particular
Churches; for we may see by the Epistle to the Hebrews and History of the
Acts, that after their rejection, there were particular Churches among them. It
would seem therefore that their ingrafting must be as broad as, and of the same
nature with, their breaking off.

9. This phrase, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our
Lords, is to be understood with respect to the commission given to the Apostles
for calling in Nations and Kingdoms, so that this is marked as the fruit and
success of that: but that commission, Matthew. 28. Go, disciple all Nations,
etc. looks to the body and generality of Nations, it being a warrant to
invit, disciple, and gather in a whole Nation: and although sometimes in the
event, but some of Kingdoms and Nations are gathered in; yet it cannot be said
that upon supposition that a whole Kingdom or Nation should yield, but they
might be by this warrant received and admitted; even as by this warrant
indefinitly the call and offer is made to all the Nation in common. And
although not one should yield, yet this commission and warrant shows it is
neither inconsistent with the Gospel to call a Nation, nor to admit them upon
the former supposition.

10. This phrase, Kingdoms or Nations are the Lords, must differ, and seems
expressly to be contradistinguished from that, Chap. 5. Thou have redeemed us
out of all Nations, Tongues, Kindreds, and yet that will take in some of
Nations distributively; this therefore must include more: and considering that
this speaks of a visible Church State, and that of the Elect and Redeemed
only, there is reason that the expression should be more broad, and apparently
it relates to that, so that as our Lord will have His Redeemed gathered out of
Nations and will take none universally for such, yet to be a Church in which He
will erect His Ordinances He will call Nations, collectively considered.

For the second, that by being the Lords here is meaned a special Church State
and relation to Him by visible profession, and consequently that which we call
a national Church does belong to this time of the Gospels rising, and
Antichrists fall, will be clear, if we consider these particulars, 1. that to
be the Lords here, is not to be His as all the world is; for, so were they
always, this is some peculiar thing. Nor, 2. to be the Lords here, is it to be
His by saving Faith, That will not agree to a whole Nation, neither to the
scope, which is to show a visible and public Church State and condition. It is
then to be His, 1. by visible profession of Faith in Him, and a public
Church-relation between Christ and them, as Israel is often called His Nation.
Isa. 51.4. though all in it were not converts. Now, it is not only Israel, but
other Nations also that are ingrafted and come in their place, Romans 11.24.
Again, 2. to be the Lords, it is to be His as once they were not His, but
Antichrists, bearing his mark, worshipping him, as Chap. 13. The opposition is
clear, they that were under the whore are now turned to Christ. 3. They are the
Lords as Families and Cities in the Acts are said to be His; but that is to be
Churches, as the Lord speaks to Paul at Ephesus, I have much people in this
place, that is, a flourishing, numerous Church to be converted here by thy
Ministry, who being gathered become a Church, Revel. 2.1. and so a peoples
being the Lords is their becoming a Church; and therefore when a Nation is said
to be the Lords, it is equivalent as to say, that Nation is a Church to the
Lord, as these in Ephesus are written unto, Rev. 2.1.

Out of all which may be concluded, If it be all one to say, that Nations shall
be the Lords, and Nations shall be Churches, Then the Scripture does assert
national Churches in the days of the Gospel, not only as consistent with the
Gospels administration, but as an evident commendation of it; But the first is
true from this place: and therefore the last also; for, a Song is given to God
for it.

There are some objections to be removed, the first whereof, is, that there is
no mention made of any national Church in the New Testament; yea, where sundry
Families and Churches of one Nation are converted, they are styled Churches,
and not one Church, so may it be here. Answ. 1. It will not be safe in some
things to stick literally to words, so as none other may be admitted but what
is expressly in the letter if the thing be written; for, the Church being then
in its infancy, it is no marvel that no whole Nations or Kingdoms were
converted, and so could not be called by that name, seeing that Magistrates who
are prime parts, were long after that, the Churches enemies: and though a minor
part be called by Churches, and not by the name of the Nation, it is no
marvel, seeing the Nation and Church were not of equal extent, and in that
respect the Church was not national. Ans. 2. Yet the equivalent is in the New
Testament, two ways, 1. When many Churches in one City are called the Church
of that City, as Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, which were more than one
Congregation: and may it not by the same reason be given to many Churches of a
Nation as well; compare 1 Corinthians 1.2. with 14.34. it will be found that one
Church had more in it. 2. It is equivalent when many Churches of one people,
are, upon the matter, counted as one, and called one in the New Testament, so
the Hebrews are all, when they are written to, called one house, H^b. 3.6. yet
had many Officers, Heb. 13.17. and the visible Church only is the object of
writing, and by Peter, one flock, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. and the Churches of Galatia
are called one lump, Chap. 5. and written unto in common to cut off them that
troubled them, and to prevent the growing of a rent amongst them: which
certainly shows us, that Churches in one Nation have dangers common to them
all, which are not so to others, and duties lying on them respectively, and
rents and strivings wherewith they peculiarly are bitten and devoured. It
shows also there was some peculiar unity to be rent, some greater ^ye and
union that made them as one lump to be in hazard; and some ground giving them
accuse to go unitedly about these duties (which otherwise were impossible to
them) some way peculiar to them in that one Nation more than with others that
were not of it. Answ. 3. The Scripture expressly calls the Churches of Judea
by one Church, which apparently was that same with the Church of Jerusalem and
having the same Officers; for, it is not like, that all the Believers reckoned
in Jerusalem, dwelt in the town.

But it is clear, 1. that Church which Paul persecuted was one Church, Acts
8.3. but that was especially the Church of the Jews, not a particular
Congregation of them, but all that called on Christ's name, Acts 9.1.2.14.
wherever they were, all of that way, 9.21. especially Jews; wherefore he has
Letters and Authority from the high Priest which reached not to Gentiles (for
the high Priest had not Authority over them) and he entered in Synagogues to
persecute, yet that Church which he persecuted was the Churches in Judea, who,
upon his conversion from persecution, are said immediately to have rest, Chap.
9.31. compare with it, Acts 26.9, 10.11, etc. Yea, from that we may argue,

The Church which Paul did persecute, was one Church, Chap. 8.3. But that
comprehended all the Jews of that way, and the Churches of all Judea, Samaria
and Ga^ilie, as appears, verse. 1, 2, 31. Chap. 9. Therefore they are one
Church. Or thus, If the Churches of Judea may be one, there may be a national
Church, But they are one. These who had rest by his conversion, are the same
who were troubled by his persecution; for that, Chap. 9.31. is mentioned as a
fruit of Paul's conversion; But these who had ^^st are many Churches, and these
who are persecuted are but one. Ergo these many, are one, and that one is many.

Take one other place, Gal. 1. compare verse. 13, 22, 23, 25. There is one
Church spoken of, verse. 13. there are Churches of Judea spoken of, verse. 22.
and yet both are one, Therefore it must mean as much as the Church of Judea.
These Churches of Judea are many Churches to whom Paul was unknown; But these
Churches were these whom Paul persecuted (say they) verse. 23. He that
persecuted us, that is, Us the Churches. Ergo that one Church whom he
persecuted, verse 13. was the Church of the Jews, including the Churches of
Judea.

Neither will it be of force to say, this makes the Church national as it was
proper to the Jews, because for a Nation to be a Church, differs from making
the Church national, or proper and peculiar to that Nation, which was the Jews
privilege beyond all Nations: neither is it good reasoning, persons are of
such a Nation and stock, Therefore of the Church, as if it followed that seed
be what they will, it may be doubted if Israel was so; But this is good
reasoning, Such a Nation have given and engaged themselves to Christ, Therefore
they are a Church. Again, in that respect a City or Family is not more
consistent with the Gospel to be a Church than a whole Nation; for, no
particular City or Family have promises beyond others under the Gospel, yet any
City or Family becoming Christians, becomes a Church, and all their Members
are Church Members: and what more is pleaded-for, or can be denied unto
Nations? Neither can it be excepted, that a Nation are many, for many
Professors are promised to Christ, and is an evidence of His reign by their
multitude, as their purity or holiness is another, when joined together.

Hence also secondly, we may from the former grounds argue for the baptizing of
children, thus. If whole Kingdoms and Nations may in a peculiar manner be
Churches to Christ under the Gospel, and it be Christ's glory to have it so,
Then are many children to be baptized; But the former is true. Ergo, etc. The
consequence will appear by considering these two, 1. That under Nations
becoming the Lords, children must be comprehended and be His also. 2. That by
becoming His visibly in a Church State and relation, there is an actual right
to the Sacrament of Baptism, as a visible badge of that relation.

For the 1. we say, if Nations be Christ's, Then children must be His; they are
a great part of every Nation, and are included under all the former acceptions;
yea, although it were but some of all sorts in a Nation, yet even in that sense
children could not be excluded; no Nation will be His, if children be not His.
2. These Nations come in the room of the Jews, but their children were a great
part of that Church. 3. Nations there take in the Jews re-ingrafting in what
they fell from, but they and their children were broken off: Beside, if the
Jews had not their children restored to Covenant with them, it might seem that
in that respect their privileges were less by Christ's coming than formerly.
4. Nations here are to be understood in reference to the promise, Genesis 12. In
thy seed shall all Nations be blessed: and if children cannot be secluded
there, but that blessing must be understood to reach them, why should they be
excluded here, or in that commission ( Mat. 28.) to go and baptize Nations,
seeing that is the promulgation of the fulfilling of the former promise and must
be expounded by it? 5. When judgments are threatened on Nations, or when it is
said that Nations shall be brought to judgment, it does ever comprehend the
children with the rest; and by what reason then can they be excluded here in
this privilege?

And if this be granted, then will their Baptism be easily evinced; for, to be
the Lords here, is not to be restricted to being His by Faith savingly, as is
said, but looks mainly to being His by a visible profession, discriminating
them from others who are not His: and how can that be without Baptism? or is
there any other discriminating seal for children? or can they be His as members
of His visible Church, and neither be baptized nor have right to it?

Again, we may thus argue. If Nations be to be discipled and baptized, Then are
children to be baptized, and that by virtue of that command and commission,
Matthew. 28. But the former is true, Nations are to be baptized. Ergo. That which
needs to be made out here, is, that under Nations, children are to be
included, and that in that commission; which may be thus evinced, If under
every consideration of a Nation, children are to be included, then they must be
included here also: For, we cannot conceive of a Nation, as considered either
collectively in singulis generum, or distributively, n generibus singul^rum,
But children must be considered as a prime constituent part, as may be seen in
all the former acceptions of Nations that are mentioned, children are included
in them all, and we say must be included in this very commission, Go, teach all
Nations, and baptize them, 1. Because this commission respects particularly
Gods promise to Abraham, Genesis 12.3. that in his seed, that is, in Christ, not
only the Nation of the Jews that should come of him should be blessed, but all
Nations; and this commission is, as if the Apostles were told now that that is
to be fulfilled, and the partition is taken down, as was said to Abraham when
the Gospel was preached to him, Gal. 3.8. and so as was promised then, that the
blessing that was to come by Christ should not be confined to one Nation, but
should be extended to many, now accordingly is it fulfilled: we must therefore
expound Nations here, as it is in the first promise; but in that promise under
all Nations, must be understood children; otherwise we must say, that children
have no right to the blessing by Christ, and that His purchase has no
influence on making any of them blessed: which is absurd. And if the blessing
be derived to them by Christ, it must be derived to them as they are contained
in that promise, and so as they are included under that collective expression
Nation, that being the great Charter of their title: and if under that title
the inward blessing be derived, why may not the external initiating seal and
privilege? and certainly by this collective, it would seem that many more are
to be admitted to Baptism than to the Lords Supper, there being no such warrant
given in such expressions for that as for this, Children then must be included
in it. 2. By this commission all Nations are to be taken in as the Jews were
formerly, for by this the Jewish privilege is not lessened, but the partition
is declared to be removed, and other Nations with them to be admitted to share
of these privileges which the Jewish Nation formerly did peculiarly enjoy; But
that extended to children, This therefore must also do so. 3. If by this
commission one might baptize a whole Nation and enchurch them, Then must the
children be so also; for, the Nation were not a baptized Nation, if children
were not so; But the former has been formerly cleared, that this does warrant
Ministers as they are called to preach to any Nation, and, upon their
submission to the Gospel, to baptize them also; and although the effect
followed not always, yet upon supposition that it do, this is a warrant, as has
been said.

Lastly, If all disciples ought to be baptized, and if such who are capable to
be Churchmembers ought to be sealed, and that by virtue of this commission,
Then ought children to be sealed: these two are knit together, disciple them
(as the word is) and baptize them: and none can deny this consequence, but
children of believing parents are disciples, and are capable to be
Church Members. This arises from what has been said, thus, If a Nation may be
enchurched to God, Then children are capable to be Church Members, children
being a prime part of a Nation, as has been said; But a Nation may be the
Lords and a Church and Disciples to Him, Therefore may children be so also; and
therefore ought to be baptized.

Concerning the constituting of true Churches by Reformation out of such as
have been corrupt.
THirdly, from this it follows, that a people, or persons, renouncing the
abomination of Antichrist, and accepting of, and submitting to, the Truth and
Ordinances of the Gospel, does ipso facto constitute them Churches of Christ or
Members thereof, and is sufficient, as to essentialls, to make them to be
accounted so. This is clear here; for, that these Nations do become the Lords,
does say that they are Churches to Him, yet is there no other way conceivable
how they become His, but that the witnesses are taken up to Heaven and public
preaching is again restored, the Temple is opened, and the Ark of the
testimony is made visible: all which, does suppone a peoples quiting of
Antichrists way, and betaking them to Christ's, upon which they are so
accounted, as is said. It is a great question to men, how they can be true
Churches that have arisen as it were out of Antichrists Dominion without any
accurate constituting of them as to the members thereof? Also some are ready to
think all the reformed Churches to be as no Churches, because to them they and
the Ordinances which they possess, have been derived from Antichrist:
whereupon they are brought to look upon the world as having no Church in it,
and to be put to wait and seek for some new manifestation, as we may gather
from Saltmarsh his description of the Seekers smoke of the Temple. And indeed
if we begin to dispute this principle, whether the reformed Churches be true
Churches, there can be no guard against this: for, if they be not Churches,
there are none indeed in the world; and if there be none in the world, we
cannot expect that a new Church shall be begotten, except it be by some
extraordinary mean, whereof yet there is no warrant, in the least, from the
Word; Beside, that the Church of Christ is to endure here on earth to the end
of the world, and the gates of hell is not to prevail against her. Now this is
the very place where that event is foretold of constituting new Churches out of
Antichrists Dominions; and therefore it cannot be unfit to enquire how this
same is accomplished.

Concerning this, we premit, first, that there is a threefold way of entering
or being admitted to the Church, 1. by conversion, that is, when one simply
without the Church, is, by the Power of God accompanying Ordinances, made to
submit to the Gospel. Of such we have many examples in the History of the Acts
of the Apostles. A second, is, by birthright: this is the privilege which
Church Members children have. Thirdly, There is an admission of Members for
constituting of a Church, not simply of these that are without, but of corrupt
Members, who pretend to be within: such was the re-establishing of the Church
of Israel often after their defections, when indeed the people had fallen to
Heathenish Idolatry, and, it may be, for sundry years continued in it, yet was
their readmission to the use of Ordinances and privileges of visible Members
far otherwise gone about than the admission of Heathens, supposing them to
have renounced their Idolatry. The second of these we have nothing to do with,
Therefore we lay it aside.

Secondly, We premit, that there is great odds between the manner of
constituting (to say so) a Church, or a Churchmember, out of a corrupt
declined Church, and the constituting of a Church or Member of such as are
simply without. Neither is there such exactness to be required in the search
of these particular Members, nor so many things to be performed for the
accomplishing of their membership in the former case as in the latter. This is
clear by considering, first, the example of the Jews formerly mentioned: that
was a very different thing to them, to admit declined Members in respect of
others that were without. Secondly, The one was under the initiating Sacrament;
for, their Circumcision was never questioned, which the other cannot plead.
Thirdly, There is this reason also, because God having still a visible Church
as a Mother though not conspicuous, that in every time or in every place there
can no Christian be conceived to be pure in essentials, but must be supposed to
be of her ^eed.

Thirdly, In sum, we say, that for constituting a Church or persons to be true
Churches, or to be true Members of Churches out of Antichrists Kingdom, there
needs no more but a public disowning of his abominations and erecting of the
Ordinances of Christ with a professed subjection thereto according to the
Gospel, and that as to the essentials of a Church, this is sufficient, though
it may be there may be still some defects which yet do not mar the Truth of the
being of such a Church. For making out of which we offer these considerations,

The first, is, what might constitute a true Church, or a Member thereof, after
defection and corruption in the Church of Israel, or after Antiochus his
abominations, That may be sufficient to constitute a true Church after the
defections and corruptions of Antichrist; But renouncing of former errors,
erecting again of the Ordinances and professed subjection to them, was enough
then. Therefore it ought to be so now. There can be no question of the minor,
but that this was sufficient amongst the Jews, any who reads the Reformation
that followed the defections under Ahaz, Manasseh and others will be abundantly
convinced of this. For Hezekiah opened the Temple which his father had shut,
erected again the public Ordinances to which the people submitted. If it be
doubted if that will follow in our case, these things will confirm the
consequence; first, the unity of the Church Catholic visible, they and we
being one Church, It may well therefore be argued from the example of the one
to the other, as what made them no Church, will make us no Church; and so what
does make them a Church, must also have that same weight with us. Secondly, The
allusion to the manner of the Old Testament is so plain in this place, that it
does both confirm and illustrate this same. It does confirm it, that it
expresses how the Kingdoms of the earth become the Lords, in the last Verse,
and it says, The Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in His
Temple the Ark of His testament, etc. which words allude to that defection of
Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 30. where the Temple was shut, the Ark of the Testimony was not
seen until the days of Hezekiah, who opened the Temple and made the Ark in
due manner to be visible and the Word to be brought to public, whereby the
face of the visible Church was recovered; and so this remarkable event, is
illustrated by this, that so the Ordinances shall be obscured amongst many
Nations during Antichrists height, as the Temple was shut in Ahaz time, yet
shall these clouds be blown away and light be brought forth to Nations by a
public profession of the Gospel, whereby they shall become visible Churches to
the Lord. This Argument is from the very scope of the place.

Secondly, Consider if renouncing of Antichrists gross abominations and a
separate adhering to the Truth of the Gospel with a subjection thereto, was
enough to constitute a true Member of the visible Church, while Antichristian
darkness was at its height, Then after Reformation that is sufficient to
constitute a true Church or a true Member thereof; But the former is true, to
wit, there was no more to constitute a true Member of the visible Church during
Antichrists height. Therefore, etc. The first cannot be denied: for, what must
be sufficient then, must be sufficient now, seeing it is still this same Church,
this same Woman, and the same Door of entering: and to deny this, would say
that Christ's visible Church during that time was not constitute rightly as to
her essentials; and so, upon the matter, was none at all. Neither can the
second proposition be denied; for, the Woman, the Church, but flees from his
abomination, and de facto what more can be alleged during that time? Beside,
this is certain, that any born and bred in Popery who did afterward receive the
Gospel and renounce these former errors, Such were to be accounted Members of
the visible Church of Christ and not of Antichrist.

Thirdly, Consider, such Nations and Churches as having renounced Antichrist in
profession, and having submitted to the Gospel, must either be Churches of
Christ, or they must belong to Antichrist, or to be accounted without as
Heathens; But neither of these last two can be said. Ergo, etc. To say that
they are fit matter or materials for building of a Church, will not satisfy:
for, 1. the Scripture does not speak of fit materials among baptized persons,
so as to contradistinguish them from the visible Church. 2. This prophecy
says, that such as in this manner separate from Antichrist, shall not only be
fit materials to make a Church to the Lord, but they shall be His Churches de
facto. 3. If they have had Ordinances and Officers for many years, and have
begotten children to the Lord by them, Then there must be more than matter of a
Church; for, these are the privileges and blessing wherewith His true Church
is privileged; and none can bring forth ^eed to Him but she. And, 4. if these
Churches be but matter, and that as contradistinct from Churches, Then it will
at once strike at all the Churches of Christ these many years, and put us to
join with the Seekers in their hopeless expectation of a new Church.

Fourthly, Consider, that all Nations and Persons so reforming after that
defection, do actually become Members of the visible Church, which formerly was
more latent: for, they become one in hating the whore, one in acknowledging the
Truth, one in submitting to the same Ordinances. And therefore what reason can
there be to account them no Churches, seeing she by these characters has been
justly accounted the Church of Christ?

Fifthly, The consideration of this prophecy to be fulfilled in the
Reformation that has been these hundred years past, will strongly conclude,
that these reformed Churches must be true Churches, though it may be that
several of them be in many things defective; for, if by this prophecy it be
clear, that the event that follows Antichrists height must constitute true
Churches and a Kingdom to Christ after a more conspicuous and visible manner
than formerly; and if it be true, that this Reformation which has come unto
the world in the generation last past, is the very fulfilling of this
prophecy, and the very event foretold here, Then it cannot but follow that
this Reformation must be acknowledged to have brought true visible Churches
unto the world: otherwise the Truth of this prophecy will be put in question.
Now we suppose, that by what has been said of this in the former Lectures,
that both the former will be seen to be true. Therefore this must necessarily
follow: for, this Reformation is either what is prophesied of here, or it is
some other thing; But it can be applicable to no other thing. And if it can be
applicable to no other thing, Then these great events must be understood to
carry along with them the visible Kingdom of Christ; and the event must be
answerable to what is foretold: and if it were not so, there were no such
ground of a Song as is here insisted upon. This Argument from the event of a
prophecy being fulfilled, even as the Jews that lived under the second Temple
were to account that dispensation to be the fulfilling of the many prophesies
that went before, although many were not fully satisfied in their expectation;
and, no question, several things were defective though the essentials were
there.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the
Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve Stars:

2. And she being with child, cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be
delivered.

3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold, a great red
Dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads.

4. And his tail drew the third part of the Stars of heaven, and did cast them
to the earth: and the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born.

5. And she brought forth a man-child, who was to rule all nations with a rod
of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne.

6. And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of
God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore
days.


THe seventh trumpet in the former Chapter gave a little touch of the events
that are to be expected by it; Now, before he come particularly to insist on
them, in these three Chap. 12.13. and 14. the first explicatory vision,
contemporary with what went before, is wisely and seasonably inserted, and he
returns then to the third principal vision in the seven vials, Chap. 15. and
16.

Before we speak particularly to the words, we shall lay down some general
observations conducing to the clearing of this vision and the scope thereof,
and more particularly of this Chapter.

1. The principal matter handled in this vision, is not different from, or
belonging to any other time, but in the matter for substance, and in the time
it does agree with the former prophesies of the seals and trumpets. It is added
now, and not before, for explication of somethings in them, because the thread
and series of the story is deduced in a little view from Christ's days to the
end of the world: and it is less violent now to begin, than if between the
seals and trumpets some part of this had been inserted. Beside, neither would
the matter have been so clear, if it had been divided: neither is it less
consistent with the series of the prophecy to interpose something for clearing
bypast visions here, than it was to insert something for clearing what was
coming, Chap. 7. That it treats, I say, of the same things, and belongs to
the same time, appears; for, the matter of this belongs either to
Heathenish persecution and the Churches travailing, or to Antichrist, the
beast, mentioned, Chap. 11. in his rise, reign, and begun ruin: all which, are
the very matter of the former prophesies. And the rise and close of this vision
will be found contemporary with the former two visions, Therefore it must
belong to the same time.

2. Observe, That in this vision the principal scope is to point out Antichrist
in these chief periods of his rise, reign and ruin, but especially the former
two: wherefore these are most insisted on as the scope of the whole Book, and
almost all the explicatory prophesies, as this here, and that other, Chap.
17.18.19. are spent upon that; God thereby minding to rid marches between His
Spouse and the whore, therefore other events are less touched, and not so to
be pursued in the exposition.

3. If it be questioned, why these things are repeated? Ans. It is not unusual
for prophetical visions to be so delivered, as in Pharaohs dreams, Genesis 41.23.
and Daniels visions, and Joseph's dreams: and there are two reasons of it, 1.
for confirmation of the truth of the thing, as Joseph says to Pharaoh, verse.
32. 2. For further explication and clearing the same thing; both which agree
well here.

4. The reason of the inserting of the explication here, would also be
observed, 1. That it comes in well on the back of the 11. Chapter, where two
things were shortly hinted,

1. Concerning the beast which was to destroy the witnesses. And, 2. their
persecution and prophecy, 1260. days: both which were but named there; here
they are much cleared in their forerunners and other circumstances. 2. It is
seasonably premitted to the vision of the seven vials, which brings the
overthrow of the beast, which certainly could not be well understood, did not
this express description of the beast preceed. 3. It insinuates, that now, at
the seventh trumpets blowing, this prophecy that concerns Antichrist will
become more clear to the Church in that time, wherefore it is subjoyned here,
as also to give together a general view of the Church, and of the beast in two
distinct representations, the one more general, which is past; the other, more
particular, which follows.

5. The altering of the manner of expressing this vision, which differs from
the two visions that go before, and that which follows in the seven vials, is
not to be passed. It is expressly done, not only for clearing of that which in
other types is expressed, but that also the series of seals, trumpets and vials
may be kept unconfounded. Therefore here when he breaks off the series
which he had formerly continued, he does change his ordinary way of expressing
by sevens and types of that kind, till he come again to take up the series
where he left, which is done by the vials, Chap. 15, and 16. where he does
again proceed as formerly he had done, till he carry the matter to the end; and
then alters again, Chap. 17.1, etc. when he explicateth that vision of vials,
as he had done in this.

For understanding of this Chapter, Observe, 1. That it sets forth the
Churches first trials from the beginning till Antichrists public appearing,
and so contemporateth with the prophecy of the seals, and the first four
trumpets; and therefore it is to be divided again in two main battles of the
Church, suitably to the matter and time thereof, as will after appear.

Obs. 2. That which is spoken of the Dragons watching the woman and the child,
verse. 4. and his war, verse. 7. and the woman's flight, verse. 6. which is again
repeated, verse. 14. does not point out two several battles of the Church, but
the same one trial and event; which is, First, summarily and by anticipation
set down, and thereafter more particularly resumed and described, so that that
war of the Dragons with Michael, is the same with his watching of the woman and
his seeking to destroy the man child; and that flight, verse. 6. is that same
with what is set down, verse. 14. otherwise it would be inextricably difficult
to show two successive flights of the same continuance, how she returned, or
when, and how she did flee, verse. 6. when yet wings are but given her, verse.
14, etc. These are all obviated by saying that what is but shortly and in the
general hinted at first, is afterward more fully explicated: and considering
the time of the continuance of both, and other circumstances, it does make this
unquestionable, as the exposition will clear.

3. Concerning the scope of the first part of the Chapter, which is to verse.
13. we are to Observe, That it is to show the first sufferings of the Christian
Church, and the devils seeking to destroy her seed, which is Christ mystical,
with her deliverance therefrom; and we are not to understand it of Christ
personal His being brought into the world, and the persecutions that followed
Him, and that neither considered as having Mary for His natural Mother, or the
Church of the Jews for His Mystical; neither of which can be understood here
by the woman thus described, as He personally considered is not to be
understood by the child: For, 1. that which is here, is prophetical and
revealing some new thing to come to the Church. Now, both these applications
were before this time already passed, and plainly and historically set down in
the Gospel; and therefore it is not to be thought that these are here again
under such dark expressions repeated. 2. This war is of the same parties, and
to the same scope, with that which follows, to wit, the devils casting of a
stood out of his mouth, etc. The woman here and there is one, and considered as
such: and seeing these events afterward mentioned, and what is spoken of the
woman her fleeing to the wilderness, etc. can neither be applied to Mary, nor
to the Church of the Jews; but must be applied to the Gospel Church and her
troubles, that contemporate with Antichrists Dominion that falls within the
same time, Therefore this first part must be understood of the same Church, and
her trials which preceed that time. Beside that this glorious description,
holding forth a Church in opposition to the former Jewish typical ceremonies,
cannot well be otherwise applied to any of the other two. 3. This child here
is not to be understood of Christ personally, because they are expressly said to
be brethren, verse 10. and such as overcome by the blood of the Lamb, verse 11.
and the woman's seed that have the testimony of Jesus, verse 17. and so are
expressly distinguished from Jesus the Lamb, and from Michael, verse 7. who is
their Captain. Beside, the bringing forth of this man-child has outward peace
following thereupon in the Church, which Christ's birth had not. Therefore the
many declamations concerning the blessed Virgin Mary, which are heaped up by
some Popish Writers upon this place, are most impertinent, groundless and
ridiculous. Yet, 4. this description of the Churches infancy is set down with
special allusion to the manner of our Lord Jesus Christ the Head His coming
into the world, 1. as He was a child, born of a woman in many outward wants;
so are His People brought forth in many straits. 2. As Herod watched to ^estroy
Him, as soon as He was born; so does the devil by other persecuting instruments
watch the Church to crush her seed, immediately after their birth, as it were,
and in their very infancy, even as Pharaoh sought to destroy the Jews male
children, Exodus 1.23. 3. As Christ was born, and preserved till He had finished
the work committed to Him, notwithstanding of all the enemies malice and craft;
so shall it be with the Churches seed. 4. As He immediately after His birth,
was pursued, made to flee, and carried to Egypt; so shall it be with the
Gospel Church, who should be made to flee immediately after the first delivery.
This allusion is the more probable, if we consider that the time of Christ's
being in Egypt will be found to be about three years and an half: (which is
here the time of the Churches wildernesse-condition) for He was born in the
thirty year of Herod's reign; He did not flee immediately, as appears by
Mary's continuing till her purification, Luke 2. and by Herod's killing the
young children of about two years old, Mat. 2. and He returned from Egypt
immediately after Herod's death, who reigned full thirty four years, whereby the
suitableness of this time may be gathered: and lastly, as Herod vented his
malice upon the Children of Bethlehem, where Christ was born, after His escape;
so does the devil here vent his malice upon the Churches seed after her
deliverance.

We come to speak of the first part of the Chapter, which contains the
Churches first war with the Dragon (not but the Dragon fights also under
Antichrist, but more covertly and in another shape, here more palpably) which
is first summarily proposed to verse. 7. Then, 2. prosecuted more particularly.

Verse. 1. In this first part, the parties are described, 1. The defender is set
out in three things, 1. She is a Woman, that is, the Church, as she is
ordinarily called; partly, 1. for infirmity, and being obnoxious to wrongs. 2.
As in subordination to Christ as her Husband. 3. As the Mother of Believers;
and she is one Woman, (though here the whole Gospel Church be represented) to
show an unity in the Catholic visible Church, which is the only object of
persecution; and that she is but one Church, Woman, Mother, or Wife: and there
cannot be more.

2. She is described by her adorning or stateliness, in three things, 1. She
is clothed with the Sun, setting out the pure Doctrine that she professed and
the shining conversation of Believers in that primitive time, who had put on
the Lord, Romans 13. and owned His Word and Testimony, which is called the Sun
in the eight Chapter, especially what concerned His imputed righteousness and
satisfaction. 2. The Moon is under her feet: whether by the Moon here we
understand earthly temporal things, which are mutable and spotted like the
Moon; or, Jewish feasts, new Moons, etc. called the rudiments of the World,
Col. 2. it comes to one, to wit, to set out the deniednesse and mortifiednesse
of the Church at that time, despising worldly things and adhering to Christ,
and having a conversation heavenly, which the Apostle exhorts unto, Col. 3.1.
in opposition directly to the resting on these new Moons and other elements of
the world, as well as is in opposition to worldly things. 3. She has a crown
of twelve Stars, that is, faithful Ministers carrying the Doctrine of the
twelve Apostles and following it; so the Church is builded upon that, Ephesians.
2.20, 22. and Revel. 21.14. the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles are written
on the twelve foundations: this is a Crown, that is, it is her glory and credit
to have faithful Ministers, and to be following and avowing their Doctrine, as
Paul calls the Thessalonians his Crown. This is a well adorned Church in a
suffering time: We take these three more particularly to be expressed, verse.
11. The first, by the blood of the Lamb, that is, the Garment. The second, the
word of the testimony, that is, the Crown. Thirdly, They cared not for their
lives, and loved them not unto death, that is, the trampling of the Moon under
their feet, or undervaluing temporal things; for, the life is most cared for,
as Job 2. Skin for skin, yea, all that a man has will he give for his life.

The third part of the description, is, verse. 2. in her travailing and crying,
expressing two things, 1. A fruitful condition of the Church in this beauty;
so travailing and bringing forth does signify in Scripture, and is well
applied to the Gospel Church, which is a Mother, Isa. 54.1. Gal. 4.19. with,
26, 27. 2. And although it does signify a fruitful condition, yet also it is
a sorrowful and afflicted condition, as ye know the travailing of a woman
ordinarily holds forth, and Christ calls it ( Ioh. 16.21.) sorrow, or pain
till the child be brought forth. In a word, this primitive Church is pure,
fruitful and afflicted, as her crying imports: with great pains do Ministers
beget, Gal. 4.19. and with great hazard is the profession of Christianity
owned, and great wrestling has she in Prayer to God and sufferings from men,
to be rid of this sorrowful condition, ere she get free of it.

The enemy pursuing, is described verse. 3, and 4. in four or five particulars;
and it is called, as the former, a great sign or wonder, represented to John in
Heaven, because great things were signified by these; here the parties are
exceeding unequal, she a woman, the enemy is a Dragon: some say there is an
utter antipathy between Men and Dragons, whereas other ravenous creatures for
meat destroy men, these for delight do it, and whereas men can endure to look
on other creatures, yet not so well on the Dragons and Serpents; however, it is
a most ravenous beast, by which is represented, in Scripture, sometimes the
devil, sometimes some great persecuter acted by the devil the supreme
commander, so was Pharaoh called; and as he was the first oppressor of the
Jewish Church, so this represents the first oppressors of the Christian
Church; both come in here, the devil first, that is clear, verse. 9. then the
Roman Empire primely isntrumental in persecuting Christians, that appears by
the description of the Dragons shape, he has seven heads and ten horns; which
seven heads ( Chap. 17) are clearly to be expounded seven Hills, and seven
Kings, or sorts of Governments: and these ten horns to be ten Kings, which were
to arise out of the ruins of the Empire; (they had not then received power,
Chap. 17. Therefore they have not here Crowns, as Chap. 13.) and expressly she
is ( verse. 18. of that Chapter) called the City which reigned over the Kings of
the earth, at that time, the devil is chief, and the Roman Empire or Emperor
his Depute in this: for, the devil acts not immediately, yet what he does by
instruments, is attributed to him, as Chap. 2.10, This is a great Dragon, to
show his power; Red, to express his cruelty; and having seven heads and ten
horns, to express him who especially is isntrumental in exercising that
cruelty, the Roman Emperor, like Pharaoh, who is called a Dragon, Psalm. 74.15.
Isai. 27.1. Ezekiel 29.3.

Verse. 4. His carriage is set out in two things, 1. He has a tail, that is,
power, and flatteries to persuade with temporal allurements; and by these two
he prevails to draw Ministers and others, who ought to be lights, from their
heavenly posture, to an earthly subjection. This alludeth also to Dan. 8.10.
where the casting down of the Saints is expressed so. 2. His other practice,
is, to wait for the child to devour it: in a word, he leaves no mean
unassayed to destroy all professing Christians that bear Christ's name, and to
keep them that they should never win to any outgate or comfortable condition,
as Pharaoh did to the children of Israel, and Herod to Christ, seeking to
destroy them immediately at their birth, so that none should sooner be a
professed Christian, but he was liable to the hazard of the Dragons Laws. This
now is an unequal encounter; yet, behold, the event is happy, the child is
born and kept safe, and the woman flees: how this came to pass, that a weak
woman and a child, are kept from a watching cruel Dragon, is afterward
cleared, to wit, by Michaels fighting and taking her part.

Verse. 5. The event has three steps, 1. The woman's delivery and the child's
description. 2. The child's exaltation. 3. The woman's fleeing, verse. 6. By this
delivery, in general is set out not only her bringing forth of Believers or
Professors, but such a delivery as one bringing forth a man-child is said to
have, Ioh. 6.21. a comfortable delivery, and which, in place of crying, gives
her a Song afterward, as verse. 10. for, she had children before, but had not
her pains taken from her, and was not at freedom to bring forth without the
enemies watching. The child is described most for her comfort, and with
respect to our Lord Jesus Christ. It is mystical Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. who in
His Members is brought to a flourishing condition, and His Church set at
liberty from persecution, and some of her sons exalted to Heaven to an
honorable condition, from which Lucifer is said to fall, Isa. 14.12. This
shortly is fulfilled, when after Heathenish persecution for three hundred years
had prevailed, Christians were advanced, Constantine being made Emperor, and
Christianity was established by a Law. That thus the delivery, Child, and
Heaven to which he is taken, are to be understood, will appear in these, 1.
This is the delivery which is the ground and subject of this Song, verse. 10.
Now is Salvation and the Kingdom of our God, etc. that is, a full evidence of
Gods reigning, delivering them from these persecutions and giving them liberty,
But that is this delivery. 2. Such is the childs taking to Heaven, as is the
devils casting from Heaven, for these are opposed, But that is the spoiling of
him of the Authority of the Emperors which he abused before; now he has not
the Throne, as in the Church of Pergamos, Chap. 2. verse. 13. but Laws and
Authority are for Christians. 3. It is as the witnesses were taken to Heaven,
Chap. 11.12. that was by a public authorized Church-condition and state after
Antichrists persecution; so here, Religion authoritatively is established,
which never was before: and Christians countenanced after Heathen persecution
is over; and seeing it is usual to the Scripture to call Magistrates gods, it
is not unsuitable to express their station and state above others by Heaven.

The property of the male child, His ruling, etc. we show how it is to be
understood ( Chap. 2.27.) of Christ in His Members, and, it may be, here to
show the great Dominion that our Lord Jesus should have in the world in
Constantin's time, when His Members should be exalted to a honorable
condition, called ( verse. 10.) the Kingdom of our God and the Power of His
Christ, in opposition to the usurpation of Satan in the seven headedbeast
before, and as was, Chap. 11.15. in opposition to Antichrists Dominion: for,
when the Church is up, Christ exercises and manifests His Power in them; so
by this child, is not meaned Christ personally, but such as kept His
testimony, verse. 11. and ult. Nor particularly Constantine, but Christ
mystical, whereof Constantine was but a Member; and that outward Government of
his but a little shadow, type, evidence, and effect of this great Dominion of
the Lords, and made use of by God to be the external mean and cause of His
Churches peace. However, this shows the case to be exceeding joyful and
different from what it was, which, being before the Churches flight to the
wilderness, can be applied to no other time but that delivery aforesaid from
under heathenish persecution, and she being brought now to a glorious settled
and quiet condition, like a Heaven in comparison of the former.

The last part of the event, the woman's flight, is set down, verse. 6. by way of
anticipation, as is clear, the place of it being properly verse. 14. It is so
soon subjoyned, for these reasons, 1. To let see how soon on strait is on the
back of another to the Church; and specially, to show that Antichrists rise and
the Churches decay in their beginning are contemporary with the outgate from
the former trials, and is (as it were) ^arked as a consequent of the former
delivery: for then, (as Platina writes of a voice) was poison sown in the
Church, and prosperity, being abused to pride, sooner defaced the Church than
persecution. 3. It is subjoyned to give a little view of the case of mother and
child together, that the children of the Church readily are no sooner
promoted, but she is in a wildernesse-condition, as it were, decaying and
declining much from that beauty and pure glory and visibility she was into
before; a sad thing that the childrens prosperity often banisheth the mother,
and obscureth her beauty; seldom has greatness, and temporal prosperity,
zeal and self-denying singleness dwelt long together; and it is the last, and
not the first, wherein her native beauty does consist.

This consideration of this Verse we leave till verse. 14. Only now by fleeing
we are not to understand a local mutation of this Church from one place to
another, but from this forth a decay of the former beauty of it, that whereas
there was in Rome, and other places, glorious Churches before, and the Bishops
were Martyrs, as all in Rome were before Sylvester and Constantin's time: now
that is by degrees veiled by pride, pomp, hypocrisy, heathenish and
antichristian dressings, that the few that remained the true Church, are (as it
were) Chap. 11.1. closed up in a secret corner of the Temple, while the
multitude possessed the Court; that, to wit, the Temple is called the place
prepared of God, and there is she fed by the witnesses with the true Word of
God, while the world are swollen with pride, traditions and superstitious
inventions. And so the P^^^phets prophesying, and the Churches staying in the
wilderness to be fed, are of equal duration, 1260. days: which Verse being so
near subjoyned to the former, gives a clear hint at the sum of the second
state of the Church, to wit, that which was ^atent, and when it begins, even
when the other ends.

Two things remain to be cleared, 1. Why this beast here under the Dragon has
the Crowns on his heads, and on his horns, and that beast ( Chap. 13.1.) has
the Crowns on his horns, not on the heads. The reason is, because when the
Roman Empire was heathen, and under that notion persecuted the Church, the seat
of the beast, Rome, had the royal imperial dignity; and these ten Kingdoms
were then Provinces subject to her, as appears, Chap. 17. These ten then were
but to get royal independent dignity, but when the Empire turned slaves to
Antichrist, about the year 606. and after, the case is altered; Rome is denuded
of the royal Authority which she had, and these Provinces are now by the
Empires decay turned to be Kingdoms, though in this condition depending still
on Antichrist, as formerly they were united under the Dragon. 2. Why does the
Dragon now but pursue the woman's seed, and after, in the second onset, he
sets on the woman the mother to drown her. Answ. In these three wars of the
Dragon ye will find a difference, 1. He seeks to destroy all the seed. 2. He
sends out a flood against the mother, and his anger is turned against her
when the child escapes. 3. When the woman escapes, (though she cede, which
the child did not; which makes it appear that this fleeing rather holds out
a change upon the Churches qualifications, than of her local residence) then (
verse. ult.) he sets himself not against the mother simply, nor against all
the seed indifferently, as in the first; but against such as kept the
Commandments of God. The reasons are, 1. Because open persecuters look to all
sorts of professors indifferently, and do vent cruelty on them. Hence Arians
would sometimes be put to suffer with Orthodox Christians; and by Arians, the
Novatians as well as others; they know not to make difference, they so hated
the very name. 2. Because the heathen persecuters thought that the readiest way
of destroying the Church, was, to destroy her members in whom she subsisted,
and that they being undone, consequently so would she be. Therefore, 1. the
devil begins with murdering bodies to undo the Church in her members; and
when that fails, he sets on the mother to poison the members or children
by corrupting her, as one, intending the destruction of a child, would poison
the Nurse. This is done not by direct hatred at the name and profession of
Christianity now in request, but by counterfeiting and corrupting Christianity,
that he may once alter the face, beauty and wholsomenesse of the Ordinances of
the Church, which is the Mother, and he is sure the children which suck these
breasts will not be lively. To effectuate this, he makes use not of open
Heathens, but corrupt Teachers that he speweth out, not to taint this or that
person but the fountains, as was seen in the first four trumpets, in which he
spares particular children of the Church, possibly allureing them with rich
benefits, sumptuous buildings, honors and preferments; but in the mean while
carrying on his design against the Church as a Church, even under and by these,
which by the former voice in Sylvesters time (if it be truth) is hinted at, and
that word of Ierom's in vita Matthai, when Emperors became Christians, the
Church indeed increased in worldly pomp, but decreased in spiritual beauty,
Ecclesiam Christianam, post quam ad Christianos venit principatus, potentia
guidem and divitiis majorem esse factam, sed virtutibus minorem.

Lastly, in the third battle, he puts at some of the seed only, because
here he makes use of Antichrist a counterfeit enemy, who will not purposely
and downright set on all Christians, as such; for, his quarrel, and the
devils, is but with these that are faithful and hate his pride and hypocrisy.
2. In this last, he joyneth violence and deceit together, and by deceit he
overcomes many, they have drunken up the fioud, but these that will not drink
of these fornications, he pursues them with violence by the following beast;
and not all Christians simply, but these who kept themselves from these growing
corruptions; and these are called the woman's seed.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 7. And there was war in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against
the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels:

8. And prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven.

9. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the devil and
Satan, which deceives the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his
angels were cast out with him.

10. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and
night.

11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.

12. Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them; woe to the
inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea: for the devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time.


HAving given a little touch of the Churches first battle and the event
thereof, until her fleeing to the wilderness, he returns, from this 7.
verse. unto the 13. more fully to explicate that war, that the strangeness of
the event of a woman's victory and her child against a Dragon may appear not to
be from her strength, but from a good Captain who sideth with her, and fights
for her. The story is resumed in these words, There was war in heaven: By
heaven we understand the Church; not as if one part of it were divided against
the other, but that the Church was the seat, and object of it, the devil
invading her by open proclaimed war against all Christians. He overruneth her
by massacres and persecutions, as invaders overrun invaded Kingdoms. She again,
by Michael and her members, resists that fury, so the war is here. By war we
understand, not secret enmity, as always there is, nor peculiar incursions,
such as come now and then by starts, as in Julian his time and some others, but
open professed and avowed universal war, such as the heathenish persecuters
maintained both in their decrees and in the execution of them for three hundred
years, such war as professedly the Church did not meet with since.

The parties are more insisted on than formerly, 1. In their leaders. 2. In
their followers or soldiers. Michael is general on the woman's side; we take
it to be Christ, who is Commander and Leader, Isa. 55.4. and Captain, Heb. 2.
It is like he is also intended, Dan. 12. to which this alludeth. His soldiers
are both his Angels, properly taken, (for Heb. 1. they are ministering spirits
for the good of the heirs of salvation, and are also at our Lord Jesus His
command,) and also His members in the Church Militant, especially his Ministers
who did fight on Michaels side: for verse. 11. they are such who overcome by the
Lambs blood, their own sufferings and His word, which agrees not to Angels
properly so called: Thus Christ and his followers make one side; for, all the
Armies in heaven follow him, Rev. 19. On the other side are the Dragon and his
Angels, he wants not such as take orders from him. We understand here also
not only spirits, but wicked men, Emperors, Judges, Soldiers, etc. who are
afterward said to be with him cast out of Authority and respect; this is in
allusion to the devils casting out of heaven. Here is insinuated some order
amongst the devils, whereof there are many legions to prosecute their design:
and though all be spirits and devils, yet may there be amongst them an order,
some higher, some lower; some leading, others giving obedience, all concurring
for supporting their work and Kingdom of darkness, without which Christ says
their Kingdom would not stand; which order (if it may be called so) may stand
till the last Judgment when there shall be no more work for devils of this
kind, and, it may be, continue in some respect, as it serves to promove Gods
design of punishing the reprobates, in which they are (some way) Gods
executioners.

If any ask how these parties so different did fight? Answ. The Dragon their
pursuer he fought, 1. by edicts, condemning and inhibiting Christianity: 2. By
violence, fire, sword, and all sorts of tortures, pursuing them that professed
it. 3. By degrading them from places of respect, spoiling them of their goods,
banishing them and leaving them obnoxious to all wrong and injustice without
protection. 4. By cruel calumnies, lies and aspersions made and put upon
Christians and on their meetings and Religion, as the most vile creatures for
adulteries, gluttonies, seditions, etc. as may be seen in the Apologies written
for Christians defense, and many other ways he pursues his old enmity.

Michael again and his Angels fought, 1. by the clear and powerful preaching
of the Gospel, that two edged sword that goes out of his mouth, whereby Satan's
Kingdom was exceedingly shaken. 2. By public Apologies and defenses written
for Christianity and Christians, by Aristides Quadratus, Iustin^ Martyr,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Melito, etc. whereby the enmity of many Emperors and hot
persecution was somewhat abated, as is to be seen in the third seal. 3. By
patient and cheerful suffering, verse. 11. thereby giving a great defeat to
him, when God furnished His servants, so that on-lookers would be forced to
yield to that way. 4. They fought by their prayers, whereby notable effects for
help were obtained; and by their holy conversations, whereby the enemies were
often convinced of their innocence: and beside these, Michael he fought by
filling their hands with other wars, sometime stirring up some within, sometime
some without that diverted them, as the Philistines did Saul from David;
sometime Michael fought also by visible terrors, when Aurelianus had
subscribed the decree, by a terrible thunder he was so stricken with terror as
presently to revoke it, and stay the persecution ere it began; he fought
evidently also by taking vengeance almost on all the bloody persecuters, as
Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, etc. At last also by raising and stirring up
Christian Emperors, and so putting Arms in Christians hands whereby they were
employed by him to execute vengeance on heathen worshippers and their gods, as
in Constantin's time, where this first battle was ended, and the child taken
up to heaven.

Thus have we heard the battle in its parties, now see it further explained in
its event; which is set forth, 1. By narration, verse. 8. and 9. 2. By way of
song and congratulation, verse. 10, 11. and 12.

The narration is in more dark and figurative expressions, the song or
poetical congratulation is more plain; for, praise ought to be clear, and the
songs in this Book help much to the understanding of it, Therefore by it we are
to expound the former.

The narration of the event aims at one thing, to wit, to set out Michaels
victory, which was hinted at, verse. 5. and the devils defeat, which is more
expressly named and insisted on here in four steps, First, The Dragon prevailed
not; more is employed, that is, not only he gained not ground, but he was also
always the further behind, and so will all be that have Michael for their
party; and so will all the Churches trials end in her advantage and victory;
for so speaks the first indiction of this war, Genesis 3. betwixt two seeds.
This is a sure side to fight on.

The second is, neither was their place found any more in heaven; their place,
that is the devils place and these great men's rooms which they filled, their
grandour and authority was overturned exceedingly (for, the Scripture uses to
express folks total overthrow by this, that their place is not discernable,
they are so clean swept away, Psalm. 37.10. Job. 7.10.20.9.) for here all was
quite altered, and they were casten out of heaven, that is, from Authority and
respect and also from public heathenish worship when Christianity became to be
approven, as it was more fully explained in the sixth seal, Chap. 6. Their
Temples were destroyed, idols defaced; and whereas the devil before was openly
worshipped by them, now he wants the estimation of a godhead and divinity
when the Gospel discovers him. It is like Christ's word, I saw Satan fall from
heaven like lightning, that is, from that estimation and respect or rule that
he had amongst the people, while in darkness he sat on his throne, from which
he was cast by the preached Gospel, so as he was never so openly and settledly
admitted to such rule and respect again. This allusion is to Satan's first
casting out of heaven, and Lucifers, Isa. 14. when God (as it is Exodus 12.)
took vengeance on their gods.

3. This is more fully set forth, verse. 9. in two steps, 1. The place whereto
he was cast, and who he is. It is to the earth, as opposite to heaven, 1. in
respect of his throne in Idolatry and Temples he is cast down and put to
contempt, as the earth is sometimes taken. 2. In respect of civil Authority, he
is cast from that, to be among the common sort, the supreme magistracy being
pulled out of his hand whereby he was said to have the throne. 3. As the earth
is opposed to the Church of Christ as well as to a Churchstate, he was put from
treading on her and making her the seat of his war professedly as before, he
was now restrained from raging at his pleasure there, though not altogether; he
does not now openly on the throne reign, but is cast down, as it were, amongst
commons, to endeavor by subtilty what before he assayed openly; like a
Serpent, now he is put to creep with his wiles which follows after; for, his
spewing out heresies after the woman, and his reigning, as it were, by his
lieutenant, says, he was not cast out of the Church simply, but in respect of
what he was formerly, after this he is necessitated to take a more indirect
underhand way.

4. The Dragon is described by some properties, expressed in his names, 1. That
old Serpent, for subtilty a Serpent, Genesis 3. yea old, as not having begun to
deceive then, but now of great experience in that trade; he is an old deceiver.
2. Devil, a calumniator, tearing folks with reproaches and slanders, whereof
that time was full; thus he slandereth Christians before others. 3. Satan, that
is, an adversary or accuser: this looks mainly to him as an accuser and
traducer of the Godly before Gods bar and justice, as he did Job, Chap. 1. This
expresses his serpentine nature, who is in himself deceitful, and the
miserable effect of it to them who trust him, as our first parents did, they
are deceived. Thus is the devil described as a Serpent to tempt and beguile the
world, a devil to slander and pierce through innocents with calumnies, and
Satan to traduce men to God and God to men, Zech. 3. all agree well to him.
Again, his angels were cast out with him: woe to them that stand and fall with
the devil. In a word, his special instruments, idolatrous Priests, and cruel
Heathen persecuters, all they are cast down together; as he wants the supreme
honor in Civil and Ecclesiastic dignity, so as he formerly enjoyed it, so do
they want their inferior dignities and places: when wicked great men are cast
down, many under-instruments ruin with them. The allusion is, as we said, to
Satan's casting from Heaven, that kept not his first habitation, Iud^ 6. and
to Lucifer, Isa. 14. holding forth, that now by this victory not only the great
agent the devil, the supreme commander, but his underofficers were also
pinched and brought low.

The Song follows, in a congratulatory way expressing the same thing in plain
terms without figures. 1. The victory is laid down, verse. 10. 2. The mean or
way whereby they attained it, or their weapons, verse. 11. 3. The use or effects
of it, both to heaven and earth.

This delivery is so notable that it is and shall be the ground of a Song in
the Church, whereby both the greatness of it and the certainty of it is
expressed, and the Churches duty also: the former events are two ways
expressed; the first, verse. 5. The childs exalting, is expounded to be the
coming of Salvation, that is, deliverance from that persecuted condition, which
they had been so long praying for. 2. Strength, that is, the evidencing of Gods
strength in bringing the Church through, and giving her who was weak, strength
to bring forth. 3. The Kingdom of our God, as Chap. 11.15. It is the magnifying
of His Kingdom and declaring Him to be King; which though really it was always,
yet was it not so known in the world before. 4. The power of His Christ, that
is, His taking to Himself power and reigning, as Chap. 11.15.17. which is
called ( Chap. 6.) The day of His wrath: Christ who in the worlds eyes was
thought little of and weak before this, now His power kytheth, and enemies are
made to say, He is a great God, as was cleared on Chap. 6. ult.

The second effect of the devils casting to the earth from Heaven, is expressed
in that he is cast down, that is, dethroned, put from the visible Kingdom and
Authority which he had when the worlds authority countenanced him. Now these
are upon the Lords side, and the Kingdom is His, when this accuser, (whereof
formerly we spoke, verse. 9.) who uncessantly pursued the Godly, is put quite
out of respect be what he was in, and Christianity brought in request, Psalm.
22.28. These words being plain and the scope being to resume the former
delivery in a ground of praise, there is a clear key here to open all this
vision; for, what was casting from heaven, is here casting down or degrading.

This 11. verse. holds forth the weapons, 1. Faith in Christ's blood, whereby
all these accusations were repelled as with a shield, Ephesians. 6. and seeing He
died, who can lay any thing to their charge? Romans 8.34. They are saved before
God through His righteousness, that is the ground of their victory: He is
called the Lamb in reference to the Sacrifices, and so it points out this to
be the effect of His own offering up of Himself; all the Saints victories flow
from this. 2. The word of their testimony, is their steadfast adherance to
their profession, and their confession of that Truth, as Chap. 6.9. called (
Romans 10.) conf^ssion unto righteousness with the mouth; which testimony, in
despite of torments, exce^dingly defeateth the devil. A clear and full
testimony is an excellent ornament to Christianity, and gives a special
charge and defeat to the devil. What a testimony is, we show in the fifth
seal, Chap. 6. which is contemporary with this; this is not only really to be
found within, but in appearance and profession to be so also before men. The
third weapon is suffering, They loved not their lives, that is, when a
testimony was called for they cared not for their life, as Paul said, Acts 21.
It was not dear to them, and they were not swayed with the consideration of
suffering. This may appear, 1. by their joyful suffering of the most cruel
death. 2. By their refusing deliverance at the most seeming easy rate, as was
marked before, Chap. 6. 5. seal: so that as it is in Plinius secundus, they
thought it needless to seek to punish these who more willingly offered
themselves, and more cheerfully suffered than any could pursue them.

The last part of the Song, verse. 12. has two things in it, poetically setting
out, 1. The happy condition of the Godly, who are called dwellers in heaven,
because their conversation is there. 2. The miserable condition of
earthly-minded Professors, or these who were without the Church; the one might
rejoice, for they had a present delivery; the other has a woe coming to them,
or a lamentation or alace pronounced for them, because this succeeding trial
would destroy more souls than the other did bodies, from two reasons, 1. The
devil was come down to them; having no hopes of success against the steadfast
seed, he was now to take another way that would prevail against many rott^n
Professors; or, being driven from the Authority of the Empire, he would rage
more amongst and against other heathenish people both within and without the
Empire. 2. He has great wrath: though his power was broken, yet his enimity
was no whit abated, but rather irritated and stirred up; and the reason is
added, because he saw his kingdom in the world, wherein for a long time he had
kept pre-eminence, was begun to fall, which would by this party be brought to
naught. He took this for an alarm of his final ruin and restraint within the
pit, which he knows is abiding him, and ere long (in respect of eternity or
that time he had before) he was to get that sentence executed on him, so that
the world had no ground to be secure: and, it may be, that what is spoken of
the earths drinking up the flood, which was by him intended to destroy the
woman, is the accidental effect or consequent wherein this woe consists. It
is like that word ( Mat. 18.) Woe to the world because of offenses: for, the
great weight of all these ills which he now multiplieth, falls upon the poor
earthly Professors that make no conscience of watching against them; for the
Churches flying which follows, has safety with it to these who are her true
seed, but it is a woe to the earth, from whom she flees, because then the devil
has all left to him without that public opposition that a standing Church
made to him. It is no l^ttle mercy when there is a public Church State, and no
little curse when she is not so discernable. Hence Observe,

1. When the Church seems weakest, like a poor woman traveling, and enemies
seem strongest, like a great red Dragon, even then the Church is strong and
has more for her t^an against her, if she saw them as the Prophet said to his
servant, 2 King. 6.16. 2. In the Churches weakest time she losseth no battle,
and the devil in his strongest time never prevails; nay, when his instruments
are taking the blood of Christians, they are but pulling down their own throne
and establishing Christ's. Better be a single Soldier on Christ's side, than a
Commander of a whole Army against Him. 3. See what sort of enemy the Church
has to do with, and what cause she has to watch. 4. From the Song Observe,
The sadest conflicts of the people of God have joyfullest outgates, there is an
excellent song here on the staying of the Dragons persecution, as Chap. 11.
before: and it is so in all the difficulties of Believers, there is a delivery
attending every one of them, a day after the darkest night, a fair sunshine
after every shower, a long eternity of joy after a temporary affliction. Bear
your trials the better, and wait for an outgate when God shall be pleased to
give it; and if He delay, think it not long, it is coming, when or how, He
knows, in whose hands are times and seasons, which is not for us to know.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 13. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman which brought forth the man-child.

14. And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might
flee into the wilderness, into her place: where she is nourished for a time,
and times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent.

15. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood, after the woman:
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

16. And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth.

17. And the dragon was wr^th with the woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ.


THis part of the Chapter contains a new trial of the Church: which though it
be obscure, yet these things are clear, 1. That as to the time thereof it does
succeed and that immediately to her first trial and her traveling under
heathenish persecution is over, and does preceed the open appearing of
Antichrist, which follows in the beginning of the next Chapter: and therefore
it must continue the story of the Churches condition from Constantin's coming
to the Empire, about the year 310. until the year, 606. or thereby: which in
the fifth trumpet, Chap. 9. was cleared to be the time of the discovery of
Antichrist. 2. It is from this clear, that it must contemporate with the first
four trumpets, Chap. 8. and so must in the event be the same. It is more
shortly and generally set down here, because it was more largely insisted on in
these, and because the scope of this vision is especially to describe
Antichrists kingdom, which was more obscurely and shortly pointed at by the
fifth trumpet, Chap. 9. and what followed thereon, Chap. 11. And so the scope
of this part, is to continue the series of the Churches condition between her
open sufferings under the Dragon and Heathen persecuters, and the open
appearing of the Beast, or Antichrist: for, though that be the main scope of
this vision, to set forth the Beasts kingdom; yet because that did not
immediately succeed the former, and the Churches declining was not instantly at
its height, and the devil was never idle, Therefore here is shown an
interveening exercise whereby the devil assayeth either utterly to undo her, or
at least to make way for the beasts advancement, which could not without
foregoing preparation be expected to have such universal welcome in the world:
and as John is the more short in setting down this, so may we be in explicating
of it, having already spoken to it on Chap. 8.

In the words, 1. the devils design is laid down, verse. 13. 2. The Churches
safety is expressed, verse. 14. 3. A new mean used by him to pursue his design,
is foretold, verse. 15. 4. The Churches preservation from that, and the mean
thereof follows, verse. 16. And lastly, the devils grand design which he in a
great measure accomplisheth in the following Chapter, is hinted, verse. 17. so
that every verse has a new material step of the Churches exercise, wherein
the devils uncessant malice on the one side, and the Lords gracious care and
sovereignty on the other, do in this contest eminently appear.

The first is set forth, verse. 13. in two, 1. The devils design and work, He
persecuted the woman which had brought forth the man-child: This differs
from what is spoken of, verse. 4. (although that be persecution also) in these
three, 1. In the object whom he persecuteth; it is the woman which brought
forth the man-child, whereas before it was the man-child it self, verse. 4.
The parties are, upon the matter, the same: But the Church, considered in her
complex nature, as an associated body, with Ordinances, of Word, Sacraments,
Discipline or Government, is called the woman, because, as such, she brings
forth, and is a Mother. Again, as she is considered in her particular Members
and Professors, these are said to be her children; so that the difference in
this respect, is, that formerly the devil endeavored immediately to cut off
all professors that bear the name of Christianity, by Heathenish persecution,
seeking to destroy the Church in her Members; for, if there be no Professors,
there can be no Church: here again, seeing that failed him, and he could no
longer command men to take the lives of particular Christians on that account,
he does not now war directly against them, but he seeks to corrupt the Church
indirectly, that by overturning the Ordinances in her, he might mar her former
beauty that she appeared in, verse. 1. as a woman clothed with the S^n; that so
she being no woman, might be no mother, whereby indirectly he might gain his
point, in poisoning the seed: this is done by the awakening and spreading of
schisms and heresies in the Church, which though they do not directly strike
against the being of Christians or particular Professors; yet do they no less
strike against the life of Christianity in the purity and power of its
Ordinances, without which there can be no Church, although men as men continue
to live. Hence we may gather the second and third difference, to wit, in the
instruments that he makes use of, and in the manner of his pursuing this new
design, which is not violently and openly by Heathen men who were without, as
formerly he had done, but more subtly and covertly by professing Christians
he endeavors this. He is now said to persecute: not as if he had not
formerly persecuted; but to show, that although he had altered his way in the
former respects, yet was his design no less malicious in respect of himself,
nor hurtful in respect of the Church than the former was.

2. The occasion of this his new heat against the Church and the change of his
former way, is set down, And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the
earth; which ^^porteth, 1. the ground of his irritation, to wit, the former
foil which he had gotten ^he is so indefatigable an enemy, that having gotten
one defeat, he does (and that the more uncessantly) endeavor to recover what
was lost, which ought to make men most vigilant, even then when they seem to
have most advantage. 2. It shows the reason why now he seeks the corrupting
of the Church, the Mother, in this new subtle way, and does not directly
pursue the Child as he had done, because now by his former overthrow he found
himself cast unto the earth, so that he could not have men directly to ow^ his
designs and to give him obedience as formerly when the supreme Magistrates were
for him. 3. It shows the immediate connection of this his design and what
followed thereupon with the Churches former deliverance; so that no sooner does
he find himself disappointed of one mean, but he does assay another. If it be
asked, how the former deliverance could be such ground of joy to the Church,
seeing this does immediately follow upon it? Answ. 1. It was certainly great
ground of praise and honor to God, and great ground of joy and rejoicing to
the Saints, in it self, what ever effect accidentally through Satan's malice and
men's corruption might follow upon it; for, by it the Lord eminently vindicated
His name, Truth and Servants from former reproaches and oppressions, and gave
unto His Church great freedom if it had been well improven. 2. Although the
devil instantly began this new design, yet it was not at once brought to a
height, and therefore it might be matter of rejoicing to the Church, to have
that intervall which followed between the height of Heathenish persecution and
that of Antichrists which was to come, beside other reasons given in the close
of the former Lecture.

Verse. 14. The Churches safety is set forth in these circumstances, 1. In the
mean by which she was preserved, To the woman were given two wings of a great
eagle: this alludeth to the manner of Gods bringing Israel out of Egypt, which
is said to be as upon Eagles wings, Exodus 19.4. that is, a wonderful and
speedy delivery, so that the means used by the devil to hurt, were not able to
reach his end. We take it to be that same which is mentioned, Chap. 7.1, 2,
etc. of the Lords sealing His Elect against that coming storm, and that same,
Chap. 11.1. of His commanding to measure the Temple: Because, 1. both these
relate to the same persons, to wit, the true Church. And, 2. to the same time,
to wit, immediately after Heathenish persecution. And, 3. to the same scope, to
wit, the preservation of the Lords own from these tempestuous storms or floods,
which by the trumpets were to come upon the visible Church.

2. The place whereto the woman is to flee, is mentioned, that she might flee
into the wilderness. It is called her place, because, ( verse. 6.) it was
prepared of God for her, and does set forth the Lords sovereignty in ordering
her safety, and by special providence carrying out the place of her security,
as having appointed it for her long before the trial came. By wilderness we
are not to conceive any such particular place in any desert, but hereby is
meant that the Lord sees to the safety of His Church in the midst of the
confusions of the world, as if she were locally removed from all fellowship
with them to a desert. More particularly it alludeth to the Lords way of
bringing the people of Israel out of Egypt, who, immediately after their great
and joyful delivery from Pharaoh out of Egypt, were not brought unto the land
of Canaan, but for a long time lived in the wilderness, where though they were
freed from their former oppression, and had much liberty to worship God
publicly, which they had not in Egypt, yet wanted they not many trials, and
through their corruptions many sins; so here is holden forth a
wildernesse-state of the Church, contemporary with, and suitable unto the
Prophets prophesying in sackcloth: which we may take up particularly to consist
in these, 1. in a condition that is safe, as being now out of the way of
hazard. 2. As in a great part latent and not discernable to the men of the
world, as if she had been removed to some desert. 3. A comfortless and
solitary outward condition, with which, although the true Church was not
immediately pinched after Heathenish persecution, yet were the most faithful
ever liable thereto in all the Churches trials; and it came to an height under
Antichrist, with whom this wildernesse-state does contemporate. 4. It holds
forth an eclipse of the visible and spiritual luster and beauty of the Church
which does not now shine amongst men as formerly it did, no more than if she
were removed to a wilderness.

3. In this verse we have the Lords care of her and provision for her during
this time, she is not to starve there, though now the world about her be become
a wilderness; yet she is nourished, that is, 1. has spiritual food provided
for her and blessed of God to her, so that when tradition, superstition,
idolatry, and that which cannot nourish, do abound amongst the generality of
them who are called Christians, even then she has the sincere milk of the Word
appointed for her; and that in such a way as the world knew not whence it came:
in which there is an allusion to Gods way of feeding the Israelites
extraordinarily in the wilderness, and to His providing for Elias by the
Ravens, when he durst not be seen in Israel. 2. This, that she is nourished,
holds forth the Lords kind manner of communicating this provision to His
Church in her strait, so that although she be not feasted as sometimes a
stranger will do another, yet does He nourish her as a Mother or Nurse do their
sucking child. 3. It implies the Lords continuing of Ministers with her
during that time, who should be for number and qualifications fitted for
feeding of her: Therefore, verse. 6. it is said, that she has a place prepared
of God, where they should feed her, etc. that is, the Prophets mentioned in the
former Chapter.

4. The time of her stay, is, for a time, and times, and half a time, that is,
the same with what was mentioned, verse. 6. and Chap. 11. and in the following
Chapter. It is here repeated, 1. to show the certainty of this event. 2. To
show that it is the same with that, mentioned, verse. 6. and contemporary with
these of the same extent, Chap. 11. and 13. And, 3. it is mentioned in these
words with allusion to that of Daniel 7.25. wherein the tyranny of Antiochus
over the Church of the Jews is expressed almost in the same terms; a time, that
is, one year; times, that is, two years: and the dividing of a time there,
shows some odd number of days; but here being half a time, it is to make it
agreeable with the other reckonings of forty two months, three years and an
half, etc. In sum it is to show, that while her Prophets prophecy in
sackcloth, and Antichrist possesses the utter Court, she is to be in the
wilderness.

5. The end of this fleeing, is, from the face of the Serpent, that is, to be
preserved from his fury and rage, as if she had been convoyed out of sight.

To apply this of the Churches fleeing more particularly, 1. We will find it
the same thing, and belonging to the same time with that sealing, mentioned,
Chap. 7. and that measuring that is described in the former Chapter: both which
show a low condition of the Church in respect of the paucity of Professors, her
latentnesse, and inconspicuousnesse as to the former beauty and visible
protection, and the respect, protection and carfulness that is upon the Lords
side, in reference to these few. Therefore, 2. by this fleeing of the woman's,
we are not to understand any local mutation of the Church, but a disappearing
of the true Church in respect of what she was; for, the sealed ones continue
under the storm with the rest, and are preserved from that hurt, Chap. 9.4. not
by any local transmigration from one place to another, but by Gods secret
protection and sealing; and the Temple stands where it was, even when it was
measured by for the Lord, Chap. 11.1. although by the addition of humane
inventions, superstitions and ceremonies, and especially by the swarms of
locusts, mentioned, Chap. 9. who were so numerous in the outter Court, that the
Temple and these few in it who yet retained the true Altar, were scarce
discernable, and that field of the Church, which was pleasant before, by their
corruption is made like unto a wilderness, as to the spiritual beauty which
formerly she enjoyed: and thus the Church is said to flee, when by Antichrists
fitting down on her, and overspreading her, she does not appear as formerly,
but he and his followers who tread the outter Court, are seen to fill the room
where she was. And thus, even Papists expound and apply this place, (as we
hinted at in the former Chapter) illustrating it thus, that as now in England
the Church (say they) may be said to be fled to the wilderness, because that
conspicuous Catholic Church, which was once in her, it is obscured by the
overspreading of Heretics as they called them, although there be yet within
the same bounds a number of true Catholics who remain a part of the true
Church: so (say they) the Churches general flight under Antichrist, is to be
conceived to be her general obscuring by the numerousnesse of his followers,
whileas there shall be still, even in these several bounds over which he
governs, such a number of true Catholics as shall still make up a true
Church. And this we conceive, being rightly applied to the corruption of the
true Antichrist, is the very same thing mentioned here. 3. This
inconspicuousnesse and latencie, i^ not any change on the persons who continue
Professors of the true Church, as Papists absurdly impute to us; but here the
devils design being against the purity of Ordinances and the Church as
considered complexly as a Woman and Mother, it is in that respect that she is
said especially to flee; because, that although the persons continue still
visible, yet the former purity of Ordinances, Truths of the Gospel and simple
way of Church communion, which formerly made her conspicuous, is now made
exceeding undiscernable, and she in that respect is made as it were to flee; so
that now, partly, through the multitude of corruptions, superstitions, etc.
that infect the Church; and partly, through the fear of Professors, and hazard
that there is openly to disown these, it becomes exceeding difficult to
discern purity of Doctrine and the simple way of Worship, and these who
sincerely adhere thereto, although such indeed continue still to be free from
the corruptions of Doctrine, superstitiousnesse of Worship and these who were
infected therewith, but these l^st become so predominant over the face of the
Christian world, that the former is conceived to be removed, and all are
accounted to be of this one corrupt way, the harmony therein is so general.
And what the Papists plead-for in the pretended universality of the Romish
Catholic Religion, is from this found to be in a great part truth, and to be
acknowledged so, it being the very fulfilling of this prophecy. 4. We are not
to conceive, that these who obscure the beauty of the Church, and are said to
possess the outter Court, are indeed persons simply extrinsick to the visible
Church, but extrinsick as to the corruptions, stealing in and infecting the
generality of the Members of the visible Church, by whom the Ordinances of
Doctrine, Worship and Government, are corrupted; which again have influence
upon the corrupting of her Members: this fleeing then of the Woman's is an
inward infection, whereby her former Church State is quite altered and turned
to be another thing, as if she were not in the same place where she was, even
as, under the Law, it is said of the Jews, that by their whoring from God and
defections, the holy flesh passed from them, Ier. 11.15. when they were and
appeared to be unsuitable to their federall relation to God, although they
kept still the pretext thereof; so here, the Church is said to flee from the
generality of these that profess Christianity, when they become, by their
corruptions, unsuitable to it, even although they pretend still to a profession
thereof, it being as inconsistent with the being of a pure Church to alter and
corrupt the purity of Ordinances, as for one to continue in one place, and to
flee from it, at the same time. 5. Thi^ distinction between the Woman or pure
profession and Professors from these super-added corruptions and declining
Professors, is not so much or only to be gathered from a stated division and
separation supposed to be between them, in respect of place, or distinct
profession, as if the true worshippers were in one place, and the declined
Church in another, without any external communion in any part of Worship
together, during this time; but in this especially, that these true
worshippers, though living amongst the others, did yet keep themselves from
these corruptions, and from communicating in them with these who were
corrupted, at least in such things as were inconsistent with the foundation,
although in many accidental and circumstantiall things they might be ensnared
in the common course of the time, yet keeping still the foundation of
essential Truths and Worship, whereby they continue to be true Members of the
Church, and to have the reality and power of Ordinances amongst them, although
much obscured by the building of hay, stuble, etc. and such like thereupon;
which may yet be consistent with their Salvation, as we may gather from the
instancing of many worthy men, who wanted not their accession to many
superstitious ceremonies and practices, who yet, by retaining the foundation of
Gospeltruths, cannot be denied to be true Members of the true Church; and this
failing of such, has no little influence on the Churches fleeing and bringing
of her in respect of her Churchstate into this wilderness and latent
condition, even as in the times of the Jews defections, and particularly, of
that in the days of Elijah, we will find many thousands continuing really to
be true worshippers of the true God in things simply fundamental, and not to
bow the knee to Baal, or totally to partake of the common apostasy, although
they might continue public communion in many things with the rest, and it is
like in every thing not keep such distance with these defections, and profess
the Truth so as became them, as by their continuance in that Kingdom, where the
public pure worship of God was so discountenanced, and by their being
undiscernable even to Elijah, seems to be manifest; and in this case the Lord
might feed and nourish them, by continuing some faithful Ministers for their
cause, as he had done some Prophets even in Israel, although they knew not who
were benefited by them; or, so much solid Truth of His Gospel in the midst of
much superstition and humane invention, which being chosen by them, and
separated from the poisonous additions, might prove solid food by Gods blessing
to them, whereas others of that same society might starve, or poison themselves
by their forbearing of the Truth that was continued, and their drinking in of
the errors and superstitions that were added: and according to this we will
find in the writings of many, where these corruptions are most frequent, yet
sometimes so much solid Truth, that if it be cleanly separated, and w^iled out
from that infectious leaven, may prove useful and nourishing to fouls. And
hence it is, that even among these who had no visible stated-separation from
Popery, there may be said to be continued a true Church, in as far as the Lord
continued these Truths, and, no question, had some amongst them for whose
behove He did continue them, as a Church to Him, although the Popish Church as
such, was not the true Church, but contradistinguished from it; and in this
respect, the visible Church at that time, at least in part, and the
antichristian Church, are to be distinguished in respect of this different
consideration of Professors, to wit, that general declined Church, is
antichristian, as considered in her adherence to him, and owning of all his
corruptions, whereby she carries his mark; but, as considered in respect of
these who retain the foundation and own the fundamental Truths of Christ and
truly adhere to Him, these are the Church of Christ, although in respect of
their declining and partial defection they be an impure and obscure Church;
whereof something is said, Chap. 11. Lecture ult. and more may be said
(Godwilling) afterward.

6. This fleeing of the woman, and defection of the Church, is not to be
conceived as instantly at an height; or, during this whole time, to be
accounted of equal grossness: for although it begin immediately after
heathenish persecution, as is said, and before the beasts public appearing;
yea, before this flood be cast out of the Dragons mouth; yet is she for a time
in sight: therefore it is said, that he cast out the flood after her. And
therefore we are not to account the Church, during the first four trumpets, to
be no Church, but a declining or fleeing Church, as being in her way to this
wildernesse-condition. It would not therefore be thought, that that state of
the Church, during the first four famous general Councels, wherein the Truths
of God were vindicated, is to be paralleled with that corrupt state which
succeeded to these; yet, considering the beginning of the decay of purity of
Doctrine and simplicity of Worship in the Church, and the way that was then
accidentally made for Antichrists public appearing, as we cleared on the first
four trumpets; and considering the way how periods are reckoned in this
prophecy, (whereof more was said on Chap. 11. Lecture 4.) we conceive it is
safe therefore, and only agreeable to the nature of these periods, to fix the
time as is said.

In the 15. verse. we have the Serpents malicious craft against the woman set
down, 1. in the mean he makes use of; it is water as a flood. 2. There is the
fountain this springs from; he cast it out of his mouth. 3. There is (to say
so) the object, in reference to which he directs this flood; it is after the
woman. Lastly, There is his design, that is, that he might cause her to be
carried away of the flood. By this water as a flood, we understand errors, and
that in a most abundant measure and violent manner. Sometimes they are compared
to winds, as Chap. 7. sometimes again to water that is very tumultuous, as Jude
13. the maintainers of them are called raging waves of the sea. They are
compared to a flood, to hold forth, 1. the abounding of them. 2. the sudden
rise of them. 3. their impetuousness. 4. the hurtfulnesse of them, which do
drown souls and overturn the face of the visible Church as floods do fields.
That errors must be understood here, these things will clear, 1. That this
flood proceeds out of the devils mouth, who is a liar and the father thereof,
and sends lying spirits out into the mouths of others. 2. It is clear from
the contemporary prophecy of the first four trumpets; for, this holds forth
the troubles of the Church immediately after heathenish persecution; the event
also being exactly conform, as was clear in the 8. Chap. does confirm this. The
Serpent is said to cast this flood out of his mouth: which imports, 1. that
the original of all error is from the devil the father of lies. And what kind
of waters can these be that proceed out of such a mouth? this is to make men
loath all declinings from Truth; for, the devil has, as it were, disgorged
himself by sending abroad such a thing. 2. It imports a suddenness in the
rise, and a vehemency in the driving on of such errors, that he did not only
spew these out of his mouth, but he did cast them with a kind of violence and
force. Lastly, It shows also his malice that throws such floods after a
fleeing woman. This agrees well also (according to the former application
under the first four trumpets) unto the primitive errors, which indeed were
like a flood, and were most violently carried on to the great hurt of the
Church. This lets us see how impetuous error will be for a time, and what
height in the justice of God it may come unto. 3. It is said to be casten after
the woman: which does not only import his lavelling it at her, and his seeking
thereby to infect the Ordinances, and the Mother that brings forth and the
true Spouse of Jesus Christ; (for, the rest of the world he does not much value
them) But also it does import, 1. That the woman was moving. And, 2. that he
took the advantage of her moving, as it were, to carry her the more easily
away before she could settle: this is clear from the fourth thing, which is his
design, to wit, that he might cause her to be carried away with the flood. It
is not said, that he might drown her with the flood, but that with such errors
he might drive her from Truth and steadfastness therein, and carry her away in
that flood with the rest of the unstable world; and so, in a word, that he
might undo her, that she should be no Woman and no Church. We conceive the
event to be answerable in these two, 1. The Church by temporal pomp and
grandour, and multiplying of ceremonies, and such like, did begin the flight of
the true Church, and did someway by that declining obscure her. 2. When spirits
were grown somewhat carnal and had fallen from their former simplicity, then
the devil took advantage to raise up abominable errors, and did drive them on
impetuously, intending thereby to destroy all, and involve the few that keep
their garments clean in these abominations: which two are clear in story, as
has been formerly said.

In the 16. verse. we have the remedy and covert provided against this storm,
whereby the devils design is disappointed, it is said, And the earth helped the
woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the
Dragon cast out of his mouth. In the general this seems hard to be expounded
or applied, yet we must follow the simple scope and strain of the allegory,
which is this, that as the devil casts out errors like floods to carry away
the Church, as proper floods of water do carry things before them, so the Lord
does provide means to drain and dry up these floods of errors, as effectually
as the earths opening of its mouth will soon dry up a flood. And it being
somewhat certain what the floods are, it will be safest to look to the means,
which in the event were made use of for the restraining of these abominations.

The verse has two things, 1. The mean or instrument of the woman's help, and
the earth helped the woman. 2. There is the manner how the earth administereth
this help, she opens her mouth, and swalloweth up the flood which the Serpent
had cast out of his mouth. By earth here, we cannot understand the world, as
contradistinguished from the visible Church, because there is no way
conceivable of their helping the woman against errors: Neither in the event,
will any thing of that be found Truth; for, these Goths and Vandals that
invaded the Empire, did altogether befriend the Arians, and were enemies to the
pure Church. We must then by earth understand the visible Church at that time,
which was declining from the simplicity of the Gospel and becoming earthly in
her services and administrations, as we heard, Chap. 7. she is called the earth
which the wind was to blow upon. That it must be so understood here, to wit, of
the declining visible Church, as contradistinguished from the pure Members
therein, these things will clear, 1. Because it must necessarily be understood
of the visible Church, and yet it is expressly contradistinguished from the
woman and her seed that comprehends the pure Members. Therefore by earth here
must be understood that part of the visible Church, which was declining fast
from its purity. 2. There is no way of applying of the earths opening its mouth
and drinking up of that flood, but to understand it of that declining Church,
as is said. 3. The event also will clear it, as somewhat was said, Chap. 8. and
what we may now hint, will further evidence. Lastly, There is no other thing
will suit the allegory, as the application will make appear. If it be asked,
how the visible Church can be called the earth during the first four trumpets?
Answ. 1. We must not have respect only to the first four trumpets, but to the
whole period of all the six; and therefore as the woman is contradistinguished
from the visible Church, and said to be hid for the space of 1260. days,
because her low condition came to a height in that time, though for a time she
wanted not liberty, even so in opposition to that, the declining part of the
visible Church, during that time, is called earth, because in that period her
earthlinesse came to a height, although for a time it was but advancing. And
upon this ground, Antichrist and his followers, are said to tread the outter
Court, Chap. 11.2, 3. during all that whole period, though for a considerable
time he came not to a height. And this answer must be admitted, otherwise there
is no agreeing of these prophesies which speak of the whole period as at its
height, when notwithstanding, they have many degrees to pass before they come
to that* ^. That visible Church may be called the earth, because of its earthly
pomp and grandour, having great titles, contests for precedencie, ample
temporal governments in her officers, and such like; whereby she looked more
earthly-like in her carriage and proceedings than the first primitive Church
which appeared clothed with the Sun, and in a heavenly frame in the beginning
of the Chapter. 3. She may be called the earth that helped the woman, because
of the countenance that oftentimes she had of civil Magistrates and the
concurrence that was between the then visible Church and the Magistrates at
that time for the suppressing of errors, 4. It may be said the earth helped the
woman, because of the general concurrence of multitudes of all Nations within
the visible Church, which being compared with the few single ones, might be
called by this name. It is here to be adverted, that when we speak of the
earths concurring to help the woman during that time, that it is not to be
suppo^ed that many of the good Emperors and ancient Fathers are to be
accounted of this declining Church, as it is contradistinguished from the
woman; for though they be distinguished, yet they are not separated in place,
but, as has often been said, they might be in one Council and yet fall under
this contradistinction. Beside, the visible Church at that time is not
denominated from any honest persons that were in her, but from her general
^endencie to earthlinesse in worship during this period, as is said. Also we
will find this necessity of distinguishing many of the woman's seed that lived
under Antichrist from being a part of his Church even in the darkest time.

The second thing in the verse, is, the manner how this part of the visible
Church helps the true Church, The earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up
the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth, By earth we understand, as is
said, the declining part of the visible Church, which in end became
antichristian. And among other reasons why she is called the earth here, we
conceive this is one, because that declining Church was to preserve the Truth
in reference to these four primitive errors, even in its most earthly temper
and in its lowest degree of declining, by which the Doctrine of the Godhead
and of the Person of our blessed Lord Jesus has been preserved for the benefit
of the woman's seed, even amongst their corrupt Writers. Also this exposition of
earth, will answer the allegory well; for, as the earths drinking up of floods,
is the ordinary way whereby they are ^^swaged, So the visible Church, her
opening of her mouth, that is, by serious exhortations in preachings, disputes
in writings, determinations in Synods and Councels, and such like, is the
ordinary and approven mean of restraining error and preserving Truth. It is
said, The earth opened her mouth and swallowed up the flood, which the Dragon
c^^^ ^ut of his mouth. This swallowing does not imply any affection and love to
that flood, for ^he does not kindlily drink it; But it imports, 1. an
indignation at it. 2. a haste and speediness in concurring for drying up the
same. 3. a ridding of marches in some full and eminent manner for the
vindicating of these Truths. In the former verse the devil is called the
Serpent, because he was carrying his design closely; here he is called the
Dragon, because his design comes to be discovered. It is not said that the
earth did swallow up the flood which the Dragon did cast after the woman, but
simply, the flood that he cast out of his mouth: the reason of this is, because
the earth (that is, the declining Church) when indeed materially she was
helping the woman the pure Church, yet had she no discerning of that
distinction, but was only provoked with indignation against these abominable
errors, though as to the event the Lord made good help to His true Church out
of the same.

Now, to consider the application of this in the event, we will find it fully
agreeable to this prophecy, 1. When the devil raised up four gross abominable
errors immediately after the Churches obtaining of peace, there was a general
concurrance of the plurality of the visible Church and Officers thereof for
discovering, confuting and condemning the same, and censuring the abettors
thereof; thus they are, the first heresy, to wit, that of Arius, which denied
the eternity of the Godhead of the Son, was condemned by the first famous
Council at Nice, during the reign of Constantine the great, and by his
concurrence. The second error of the Macedonians, who denied the personality of
the holy Ghost, was condemned by the second general Council, which was the
first at Constantinople: this was convocated by Theodosius the great. The third
error of Nestorius, who divided Christ's Natures, and asserted him to have two
Persons as well as two Natures, was condemned by the third famous general
Council at Ephesus under Theodosius the second. A fourth principal
fundamental error, was that of Eutyches, who on the contrary of Nestorius, did
confound the Natures of Christ and assert Him to have but one Nature, as he is
but one Person: this was under Martianus the Emperor. Now, considering that in
the event there is such a general concurrence of the whole Church, even when
there were failings and a decay in many things: this may well look like the
earths drying up of the flood, and be a part of the fulfilling of this
prophecy; especially if we consider, in the second place, that these Truths
were not only maintained during the first four trumpets, while the Church was
not altogether out of sight (for, the last error, is cast out after the woman,
as well as the first, which imports her to have had some visibility all that
time) but, in her most declining times, she has kept these Truths concerning
the Godhead of the Son, the personality of the holy Ghost, the personal
natures of our blessed Lord Jesus were still kept pure in the time of the
greatest darkness of Popery, In Gods providence the antichristian Church being
constrained to acknowledge these four general Councels, and these particular
Truths maintained in them, in opposition to the former errors: yea, (laying
aside their curiosity) many of their corrupt Schoolmen have done well to this
purpose: wherefore here we would advert, 1. That their keeping pure these
fundamental Truths in that Church, is a thing especially designed of God, and
comes to pass by His providence; and being foretold, as to Him, it could not
be otherwise. 2. We may advert and gather here, that the antichristian Church
is not in every fundamental point of Christianity to be corrupt: for, in
particular it is prophesied of her, that she shall keep these Doctrines pure,
and not receive the flood of the first impetuous errors; for, the earth here,
is that same earth upon which the wind blows, Chap. 7. and hurts with
Antichrists delusions, and the same earth or world, which in the Chapter
following is said to worship the beast. 3. We may enquire after the reasons why
the Lord thinks good to make use of that Church for preserving of these
Truths, First, One reason is clear in the Text, that thereby the woman, that
is, the pure Church, not only during the first four trumpets, when things were
not altogether corrupt, as was said; but also under the fifth and sixth, might
be fed, and these most necessary and fundamental Truths might be preserved for
that end, and for preventing her being overmastered or ensnared by these
errors: for, it is like, had not these Truths been generally acknowledged as
determined by the Church, many more, even of the Elect, had been in hazard by
the subtilty of these Heretics: and considering that oftentimes the sincere
number are few in the visible Church, and there is no attaining of a public
determination for Truth, without the concurrance of many otherwise unsound,
Therefore when the Lord in an extraordinary manner stirs up such to concur
for such an end, it is a great help to the Church. And indeed we see in these
primitive times, even when Truth had been confirmed, that afterward Error got
the advantage of the plurality upon its side, and pretended determinations for
it, as in the history of the Councels may be seen. Sometimes the Arians in
numerous Councels had but few opposers, as Hilarious, Osius, and Paulinus, etc.
who therefore were banished because they ceded not. By which we may see, that
the Lord made use of many men for concurring in the former determinations, who
at other times, when the face of Authority changed, did quite alter: yet to
conclude this, we may see the truth of this prophecy is fulfilled, that is,
that though there be many opposite Councels unto these former, yet have these
always been acknowledged, even in the Popish Church, and many have gotten good
thereof, which has been a great help unto them. Also this may give an hint of
one reason why the visible Church is so soon distinguished from the fleeing
woman. And it is wonderful that when Constantine appears against Arius,
there is such a general concurrance of all sorts against him, especially of
Bishops and Church Officers, and that some few years thereafter, during the
time of the same Emperor, there are so few countenancers of the Truth and so
many favorers of that Error, who, it is like, had sometime condemned the same.
A second reason, is, the Lord would have us loving Truth wherever it may be
found, if it were even among the writings of Antichrists vassals, he will not
have us to measure Truth or Error by men's piety or profanity who maintain the
same, neither will he have determinations of Councels to be casten, or
accepted, because the plurality of the decerners are profane or holy, but He
will have both squared according to the supreme rule. And so we are to welcome
Truth, preserved and brought down through the antichristian Church, as if it
were immediately revealed. A third reason why the Lord will have these Truths
preserved in Antichrists Church, is, that he may be the more va^led and the
snare the greater unto the world, while he looks like a lamb, as is said in
the next Chapter: for, it cannot be thought, that if he should deny any of
these clear Truths, so fully confirmed by ancient Councels and Fathers, that he
could prevail so suddenly and universally to bring almost the whole visible
Church to give him adoration. A fourth reason may be the Lords just purpose to
harden such as are wholly given up to Antichrists delusions, who, because of
their owning of these Truths and their agreeing with the primitive Church in
that, are the more ready to conceit, that they are successors to the first pure
primitive Church, and therefore are the hardlier brought to renounce their
other abominations. Fifthly, It is to show also the Lords sovereignty over
corrupt men, and His care of His Church, who can make even such to be helpful
to her, when they intend no such thing. And thus while generally they own these
Truths, and while particular writers now and then fall to propose and defend
other fundamental Truths, some one, some another, out of all the Lord
provideth a summary of fundamentalls, with which by one providence or other he
feeds and establishes these that are His in the most secure and corrupt time.

We come now to the 17. verse. wherein the devils last grand design is generally
insinuated, but is more expressly followed in the Chapter immediately
succeeding, when he gets some disappointment in the first four trumpets; it
is said, and the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her seed, etc. In which verse we have these three, 1. The increase
of the devils malice, he was wroth with the woman. The Woman, or Church, had
done him no wrong, yet is he wroth that he gets not his own malice vented
against her. It is a most devilish disposition when men are wroth with others
because they cannot hurt them and undo them, especially the woman or her ^eed:
and yet men being naturally of this father, want not this devili^h ^^align^ty
till by gra^e it be subdued, though in some it appear less, in others more.
Again, it will seem to import here, that though the devil was wroth before, and
i^ always wroth with the women and her seed, yet that special disappointment
of his designs, and her particular and extraordinary preservation, do
especially gal^ him. This we conceive is not unsuitable to the curse that he is
under, nor to the Lords glorious sovereignty over him, even to bring about his
own designs upon his own head. 2. His design, as the fruit of this anger, is
set down, he went to make war with the remnant of her ^^^d. Where advert, 1.
That now his design is not against the woman immediately, but against her seed,
that is, not against a visible Church and the constitution and frame of
Ordinances in general, but against particular Members that kept themselves
pure from the corruptions of the time. The reason of the change we conceive to
be this, that during the first four general Councels, and before Antichrist
came to a height, he had still some sight of a visible Church and pure
Ordinances as to essentials (therefore the last part of the flood is cast out
after the woman, as well as the first) But when the fifth trumpet sounds,
which darkeneth the Sun and the Air, and when Antichrist arises, whom now he
intends to bring to a height, there is not such a face of a visible Church or
pure Ordinances to be seen as was formerly; for, she is obscured with a
multitude of corrupt worshippers. The devil knows there is a Church, but
seeing he cannot come at her, he is wroth and turns to her seed, that is, to
particular persons here or there, who preserved themselves pure. 2. It is
called the remnant of her seed, because, during that time, they were to be
exceeding few, even as a very small remnant. 3. It is said, that the Dragon
went to make war with that pure remnant: they are not a party for him, yet now
when he misseth the mother he pursues the seed who were much more discernable
than any combined pure visible Church: This of making war, imports his
streaching himself to the yondmost to undo them. The third thing in the verse
is, the description of the woman's seed, that it may be known what are the
characters whereby he does discern them, and whereby we may discern our selves;
They are two, 1. They keep the commandments of God: which is to be understood,
1. simply, as the word is, Psalm. 119.6. they have respect in their walk to all
Gods Commandments though they attain not to perfection therein; holiness
becomes Gods house for ever, Psalm. 93.5. and is a good character of a child
of God. 2. We may understand it in opposition to the antichristian Church, who,
during this time, spend their devotions in obedience to traditions and
commandments of men, whereby, as Christ says of the Pharisees, they did make
void the Commandments of God. By this we may see that vows, fastings,
peregrinations, adoration of crosses, and the like, though never so many with
never so much devotion and seeming piety, will never prove one to be of the
seed of the true Church, whereas the simple sincere practice of clear commanded
duties, will sufficiently evidence the same. The second character, is, and they
have the testimony of Jesus Christ, that is, they are not only legal in their
practice, but the Mediator in all His Offices is acknowledged by them: this
also is to be understood, first, simply, that they bear testimony to Christ by
believing in Him, as it is 1 Ioh. 5, and have His approbation in the same. 2.
It is also to be understood in opposition to the corrupt multitude, who in
effect deny Christ to be come in the flesh by their Meats, Purgatory, resting
upon good Works, and the like of these; whereby they give not their testimony
to Christ, nor have it in the profession that is proper and suitable to true
Professors, nor will be found therein approven, as having the same before God;
in a word, they are such as have respect both to Law and Gospel, giving each of
them their own due. This was fulfilled when the devil set himself, by the
bringing forth of Antichrist to public view, to make havoc of the Church; the
history whereof, follows in the next Chapter more particularly.

Concerning the unity of the Catholic visible Church.
THis Woman being the Church, and frequently mentioned, we may consider her a
little, and we will see that there is a Catholic visible Church in the days
of the Gospel also: That the Church is here intended, is certain; that it is
the Church visible in this and in the former Chapter, is also undeniable; it is
her purity and defection that is described, it is she that flees, it is she
that has prophets, it is she that is more, or less visible, it is she that is
persecuted by the Dragon and by Antichrist, it is she that is set on by the
flood of error, it is she that travelieth and brings forth seed that will lay
down their lives for the testimony of Christ: the whole scope and strain
runs on this, to set forth the state and condition of the visible Church, as
we gather from this and the close of the former Chapter.

That this Church is one, we may make it out in these three considerations, 1.
The Jewish Church, and the Gospel Church, materially and in essential things
are one; it is that same stock from which they were broken off into which the
Gentile Gospel Church was ingrafted; it is that root, sap and fatness which we
now partake of that they fell from, as Romans 11. Yea, when the Jews came to be
grafted in again, the stock and Church is the same; it is to their old
Church State that they are again restored. If then the Jewish Church State, and
the Gentiles be one, yea, the Jewish Church State before their fall, and after
their recovery be essentially the same on this ground, Then the Kingdoms, or
Nations, becoming the Lords, does take in the Jews re-ingrafting, who now have
had the vail long on their faces, and the Temple shut upon them; for then that
Temple shall be opened, and materially they shall be entered to the substance
of their ancient Privileges and Covenant, although the administration thereof
be changed. This is here clear; for, this woman, ( verse. 1.) is grafted in the
Jewish stock, Romans 11. and becomes Christ's Bride, and continues so to the end
the same woman. This consideration does show how warrantably we may make use of
the experiences of these ancient Believers, plead their general and essential
privileges to us and ours, and build on the moral grounds of their policy
and the administration of this Covenant, and Ordinances amongst them, seeing we
are one Church, with the same essential Covenant and Privileges, although
some things ceremonial were adjoined to them.

2. The Gospel Church before Antichrist, during his reign, and what follows,
is still one Church: this follows on the former, and is clear in that
instance of the Jews who are to be ingrafted in that same root that the
believing Gentiles succeeded unto, before Antichrist arose; so the Temple is
the same, when it is shut, Chap. 11. verse. 1. and some few closed up in it,
with the Temple that is open, verse. 19. out of which many do come, Chap. 15.
The woman also that travaileth, verse. 1, 2. and brings forth and flees to
the wilderness, is still the same woman, Spouse to Christ, and Mother to His
seed, during that time, and also after the expiring of these days.

This consideration shows the continuance of the Church and Ordinances, and
how that series is not interrupted by Antichrists sitting down in the Temple, 2 Thessalonians. 2. but it continues to be the Church notwithstanding, and after his
removal is to be acknowledged for the same Church that it was before he did
set himself down therein.

3. There is an unity amongst all Professors in all parts of the world that
live in the same time, they all are of this one Church; and there is one
integral Catholic Church that is made up of them all: for, 1. there is in all
the world but one Heaven and Kingdom of Heaven that is the visible Church, as
there is on Earth or World distinct from it; and it cannot be said there are
two, there is but one Temple (as there is but one Ark) that in darkness all
are shut up in, and which, when liberty comes, is but that same Temple opened
and is still one, though it be enlarged to receive more. And as all Professors
in a Nation, become one national Church, as has been said; so all professing
Nations do become one Catholic Church by the same grounds proportionably
followed: for now they become His, not only severally, but conjunctly, and
these have their national unity, as being parts of that whole with a
subserviencie thereunto. There is in all the world but one Woman: when she
travaileth, there is an unity and conjunction for delivery, as there was common
hazard; and so all Professors and Churches did join in Prayers, Judicatures,
etc. for this end. There is but one Spouse to Christ, the visible Church;
therefore is it either not Christ's Spouse, nor married to Him, or, there must
be a Catholic visible Church, which is married to Him by the same Gospel-band
every where: for, to say that Christ had many Spouses, would sound
monstruously, and not answer the analogy of that oneness that is between
Christ and His own Church, as between a man and his own wife: there is but one
Mother bringing forth, and all visible Professors, who were either liable to
Heathenish persecution, or antichristian in any part of the world, they are
Children of this Mother, Gal. 4.27. and seed of this one woman, which shows
she must be one: all the Prophets and Ministers wherever they serve, they feed
this one Woman, and are appointed for that end, as is clear, verse. 6. all
professing Christians who possibly belong to no particular Congregation, are of
this Church; for, they are not of any particular Church, and yet cannot be
without even the visible Church, but in that respect have a Mother: This Church
is the Church that the twelve Apostles and all their successors adorn, verse. 1.
and if that be not, there can be no solid exposition of the 11. Chap. and of
this; neither can the Church be considered in this universal notion as a genus
(which is but a philosophic notion) as one might apply the notion Woman,
Mother, or House, to all women, mothers and houses, because that is a genus
including notionally all that kind: Nay, it must be no universal integral, as
the world is not a genus to all Nations, or persons in it, but does comprehend
them all as parts under it self as the whole: and it is constituted of all
these; for, all visible Professors are Members of that Church, as parts
thereof, as all men are of the world. Beside, what sense is it to say that a
genus, which is an ens rationis, should suffer, flee, be more or less visible,
have seed, be fed, etc. These things prove it clearly to hold out the Catholic
visible Church as an integral body and society, whereof all particular
Professors are parts.

Neither has this been accounted strange Doctrine in the Church; for, before
Christ, this Church was one: and if after His coming, her unity were dissolved,
Then she were not the same Church, or Woman, but many Churches, or Women, that
one were many, the primitive times knew no mids; But the Church, and these that
were without the same, who were baptized, were added to one Church, Acts 2.
ult. 1 Corinthians. 12.13, etc. And these who were rejected, were cast out of this
one Church, Ioh. 2. Upon this ground all the Apostles but fed one Church, when
they fed Christ's Lambs any where. Upon this the general Councels are founded;
and there is nothing rifer and more ordinary than such phrases, as, the unity
of the Church, the praying for the Church, etc. renting of the Church,
persecuting of the Church, etc. mentioned both among the Fathers and later
Divines; yet none will think that any particular Church is meaned, or that the
visible Church is not intended. Hence the Novatians, Donatists, and others of
old, and the Anabaptists of late, have been by all the Orthodox branded with
this, that they rent and separated from the Church, which certainly can be
understood of no particular Congregation; and how often is the seamless coat of
our blessed Lord spoken of? thereby to show how they conceive the unity of the
Church visible, which ought not to be rent, being by Him appointed to be one
entire piece: yea, this form of speech, is not abhorred by many judicious men
of the congregationall way, and judicious Ames (whom the Learned Hudson cites)
is express for a Catholic Church, that is integraliter universalis. We will
find also the most solid writer Cobbet of New England, assert it and own that
^s a principle destructive to rule, Antipedobaptism, Chap. Sect. 5. at the
close: so does Cotton, Cant. 69. and Robotham appositely makes the Garden, (
Chap. 6.2.) to be the Catholic Church, and the Gardens to be particular
Churches comprehended under the same, and as parts thereof: though all these,
and the Catholic Church be not in themselves different parties, but she
existeth in them as the world existeth in particular Nations and Persons, There
is no reason therefore to brand this as a principle of Popery: and this being
both the universal judgment, and practice of all Divines hitherto, to account
the visible Church to be one, The expressions that are in their writings are to
be interpreted thereby, as being intended against the Popish catholicknesse;
which we also oppose, and the following words in our hands do destroy: and they
dispute that the Catholic Church is not visible, that is, either not glorious
and of great extent, or not of necessity always to be seen or acknowledged as
such, Therefore (say they) she is visibilis, though not always visa; but they do
not contradict this, that the visible Church has an unity in it and is one
body, although many of them do account that to be the Church, but improperly,
and the regenerate Elect only properly to be the Church; and this is as much
against particular Churches as this general Church, because they look upon the
invisible Church, as that which is the object of many promises, applied by
Papists to their Catholic, or rather their particular Church absurdly; and
there is odds to say the Catholic Church is visible, as they understood it,
and to say the visible Church is one, which is the thing we plead-for.

2. We gather that this Catholic Church is the first Church and Fountain from
which all particular Churches do flow, and of whose nature they do partake;
for, she is the Mother, and they are the seed, which does demonstrate the same;
she is the travailing Woman, and they the birth brought forth and exalted, and
they are Churches as they partake from her, and are of that same homogeneous
nature with her. This first Gospel Church, in which the Lord set the Apostles,
as it were, travaileth and begets more and (as the Prophet says, Isa.
49.20.) when the place of meeting becomes too narrow, then is it sub-divided,
as diverse branches spring from one root; and when it increases in number or
distance, accordingly this springs out still the broader, as branches when
they extend themselves from the root, or shut forth new branches, yet is the
root still one; or, as a family increasing, must have diverse beds, and
possibly diverse tables and diverse rooms, yet still is the family one and the
mother of the rest; so is it here: so the root is first, and bears the
branches, and not the branches the root, which would be inferred if particular
Churches were first. Thus one is entered into the Catholic Church, as to the
Mother, when he may be no member of a particular Church: and if we will look at
the properties and adjuncts that are attributed to the visible Church, they
will still agree primarily to the Catholic Church, as to have good and bad in
her, which can hardly be said always of all particular individual
Congregations: and when the Churches condition is reckoned pure, or impure,
quiet or persecuted, few or numerous, it respects principally the Catholic
Church, and goes upon consideration thereof, which shows that the Church, so
considered, is most essentially the Church of Christ.

Neither ought it to move any, if it should be objected, that Presbyteries are
before Synods, and Congregations before these; because Members that constitute
the one, have commission from the other: and therefore Congregations must be
first, as Shires are before a Parliament or Kingdom made up of them, because
they commissionate such. This (I say) has no weight in it, 1. Because the
Catholic Church has not her being from particular Churches, but does descend
(as is said) from the preceding generation, till it come to the first Church
that ever was, from which all that followed were derived, and did extend
themselves accordingly as they increased, as has been said; and Adam's family
is once Gods Church, thereafter Noah's, then Abraham's is especially adopted,
after that at Christ's coming the Gentiles are ingrafted in that stock, and the
Ordinances that came from Zion prevailed; and that, not to constitute different
Churches, but to increase and enlarge that one Church, which, for its
accommodation, might have its diverse rooms, but be still one family: the
Gospel Church therefore has its being from the Church before Christ, and
particular Congregations have their being from it as parts of the same.

2. The similitudes hold not: for, before there be a General Assembly, there
is an unity of the Catholic Church which warrandeth her Members to conveen in
one, and Presbyteries to instruct for that end, otherwise they could not do it,
even as the Kingdom, as such, is before a Parliament met, and has an unity
before Cities choice: and although Cities, considered abstractly, may be before
such an union, because the union may depend upon voluntary submission; yet, if
they be considered as parts of that Kingdom, it is supposed to be first and to
communicate to them such privileges; and therefore they are free parts of such
a body; not because they give the whole a being, but because they have a being
from it: so here, particular Congregations cannot be considered as parts of the
whole, but the whole must be supposed to be first, which on such occasions are
bound to concur in general, although sometimes in the particular it may be
free whether to join with such or such a particular Church, or any other: From
which, many useful points touching the external order, Discipline and
Government of the Church, will follow: and is the right understanding of the
nature of the Covenant of Grace, does conduce exceedingly to the clearing of
Gospel Truths; so the right understanding of this unity of the Catholic
Church, has great influence upon the uptaking of what concerns her outward
administration in order and Discipline and that communion which is amongst
Ministers and Members of the visible Church, whereof somewhat was said, Chap.
2. verse. 1. To this purpose may be observed, that famous Augustine did long ago
take the defense of Ticonius, writing against the Donatists upon this same
subject, as may be seen in his writings against Parmenianus, lib. 1. cap. 10.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XIII
Verse. 1. ANd I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of
the sea, having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and
upon his heads the name of blasphemy.

2. And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the
feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him
his power, and his seat, and great authority.

3. And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded to death, and his deadly
wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.


THe right understanding of this Chapter, is of great concernment to the
understanding of this prophecy; it has such difficulty in it, that by some it
is accounted as crux interpretum. The difficulty is not (even almost with
Papists) whether the Roman state be designed here or not; or, concerning the
beasts, if by one of them Antichrist be holden forth: both these are palpable
and certain, this being compared with the 17. Chap. The difficulty lies in
these two, 1. To what time, state or head of the Roman Empire they relate? 2.
If different states be meaned by these two beasts? Or, if one Antichrist, as
diversely considered, be set out by these shapes? because one does not
sufficiently paint him out, who stands both in a Civil and Ecclesiastic
relation; so that now Satan, (as it were) being first spoiled of temporal
Authority in his lieutennant the heathen Emperor, and being also disappointed
of his second design of drowning the Church by errors, sets himself to
hasten up a new Kingdom or Deputy, but in another shape, that by joining both
violence and deceit in him together, he may bring to pass, what these, being
essayed separately, did not effectuate. So that this is looked on as the
product of the Dragons third design, wherein his uttermost skill kytheth, and
the greatest strength of his Kingdom lies; which design is answerably
described in a double type. The 1. showing what really Antichrist is, to whom
he succeeds, of whom he has his power, where he sits, and to what height
he comes, etc. The 2. how he appears, what way he carried on and brought
about that design, and what weapons and pretenses were abused for that end.
This we conceive shortly to be the scope and drift of both these types: for
more clear understanding whereof, we shall premit some general propositions,
the particulars whereof will appear more in opening this and the 17. Chapter.

Proposition 1. It is ordinary to the Prophets, especially to Daniel, to set
out temporal Monarchies, by great beasts, as Chap. 7. and 8. And these beasts
do not hold forth individual persons, but a successive series of the same line
on that throne; and it is usual in this prophecy to borrow types from him;
only sometimes that which is spoken in the Old Testament of temporal enemies
or straits of the Church, is applied to spiritual and covered enemies, as many
things literally agreeing to Antiochus are applied to Antichrist, and things
literally true of Pharaoh are applied to the devil. So by a Beast here may be
meaned a State of great power and violence against the Church, though not in or
by a single person in one generation executed, but for a long time, by a series
of one combined body successively under one head. This must be understood that
of the Churches suffering under the Dragon formerly, his first Deputy the
heathen Empire and Emperor being understood thereby, as it was one body,
though under diverse individual Emperors successively.

Propos. 2. Sometimes one state, thing, or person, will be set out in Scripture
by diverse types and beasts: so, Dan. 7. the Persian Empire is set forth by a
Bear, the Grecian by a Leopard. In the 8. the Persian by a Ram, and the Grecian
by a He-goat. See Chap. 7. the Seleucides Kingdom (though but a branch of the
Grecian) is set out by a beast, as different from the other wholly, because in
somethings different. Which says, that though the types be different, yet the
party signified may be one, considered in diverse respects. In which sense (
Chap. 17.) this same Antichrist is called the eight beast, and yet really there
also but one of the seven and the seventh, though in appearance, or upon
distinct consideration, different from the seventh, verse. 11.

Propos. 3. More particularly, the state or power designed here, is the state
and power which has Rome for the seat of it, as the Metropolis of its Kingdom
during its standing, as it was of the heathen Emperors before; for, the Dragon
places his Deputy in that same seat where the former fate before, verse. 2.
Beside, this seat is particularly described ( Chap. 17.) in three things, 1. In
its natural situation for that time, seven mountains, verse. 9. 2. In its
politic Government, to wit, seven sorts, counting-in this beast. 3. In its
present Authority, in John's time, over the Kings of the earth, verse. 18. And
what is and has been the state which has had and has Rome for its seat this
long time, is not hard to determine.

Propos. 4. By this beast is not set out the Roman Empire simply, as under any
head, but as under its seventh and last head or government, whatever it be: for
although the beast have in all seven heads, as it is considered in its whole
body; yet seeing these heads are successive, and the removing of one is the
inferring of another, and contra, it is to be looked on at one time as under
one head only: Therefore that which was in John's time being the sixth, Rev.
17. and this beast having the sixth wounded and healed again before he ex^rce
his power, It must follow, that it is here the Roman Empire under its seventh
and last government. Hence the difference is remarkable between the beast here
and Chap. 12. although it set out the same Empire with seven heads and ten
horns; yet, there the heads are crowned, and the horns were not, because the
Cesars then reigning kept their power, the Provinces were governed by their
Deputies: here the horns are crowned, to show, that the instruments acted by
this beast, have sovereign power, which is more clearly expounded, Chap. 17.
However, this is the Roman Empire, or that Government of it, which is the
seventh. All the effects here agree to the beast after its head is healed, and
after it has gotten the throne and seat of the Dragon. This beast therefore is
completely described to show in what series this last succeeds to the former:
but that of wounding of the head and healing it again (which must be the head
then in being) is to direct us to what state or government of that Empire or
series we are to look for the fulfilling of these effects, and which ought to
be pointed at as great deputy and lieutennant of the devil, to wit, in its
again revived and healed condition, which is the last or seventh Government.

Propos. 5. We would distinguish this beasts beginning to arise, from his
public appearing; because they are in themselves different events, and have
different times: and we conceive it is the public appearing and manifesting of
this to the world that is pointed at here, which differs from its begun
underhand working: even as the Churches begun flight is different in its rise
from its hid private condition at the lowest; so this being contemporary to
that, must have that same consideration; for, as he rises, she flees, and her
flight increases with his rising, like light and darkness. His beginning will
appear to be, 1. after outward persecution; for, the Dragon gives him that
seat and quiteth the chair to him: and so this cannot be the Heathen
persecuting Emperors, but some succeeding them, and that immediately; for,
there is no vacancy of this throne, but the one resigneth it to the other. 2.
It begins as soon as the woman's flight, that is, immediately after Satan's
dethroning, he seeks to advance this beast, and piece and piece he grows
from that time; for ( verse. 5.) his power and commission is for the same forty
two months, and the time being alike, the period of the close is alike (for
when the beast begins to be destroyed, her prophets put off their sackcloth,
verse. 11. and 16.) Therefore the beginning of both must be together also.
Again, this shows it is no French nor German Emperors that can be meaned by
this; for they had not their rise so soon; for this will be about the 300.
year, as is said before. 3. The manifesting of this beast will be found to be
after the devils disappointment of his design to drown the woman (when these
gross heresies prevailed not to gain his end) and also to be contemporary with
the healing of the deadly wound which the sixth head had gotten; yea, to be the
very healing of it in Romes recovering a public Court and Authority by the
papacy, which by the Cesars and Emperors their becoming Christian and removing
their Court from it, had left. It received again in papacy an head, and that
same superscription of blasphemy on it, which it had under its former masters,
which will fall in about the 600. year, or a little after, when both the
peaceable possessing of Rome by Popes and inbringing of Idolatry made forward
together. Beside, in this state the horns are crowned, which from Chap. 17.12.
relates to the erection of new Kingdoms not then in being, which shows,
that the manifestation of Antichrist and the erection of Kingdoms out of the
Empire must go together, and that it is his manifestation which is intended
here.

Out of which Propositions we may draw three Conclusions.

Conclusion 1. It is not any state or branch of the civil Roman Empire that is
holden forth here, 1. not the Heathenish state, as is said. 2. not the Grecian
Emperors, which had their seat at Constantinople; (the first Christian
Emperor had in Gods wisdom transferred his Court thither, that so this beast
might have the fairer access to the Dragons throne) for, these had not their
seat at Rome. 2. They continued not during these forty two months, but are
gone. 3. There was not always so good friendship between them and the Popes as
between these two beasts here, the Emperors being always jealous of them, and
sometimes by their lieutennants afflicting and straitning them, and they again,
by Excommunications, casting down some of these Emperors who were violent
opposers of Image Worship, and of praying, etc. unto Saints departed, as Leo
Isaurus, and Constantinus, Copronymus, and others, called fighters against
Images by them. 3. This beast appears not till the wound be healed. Now, in
the Heathen Emperors time it was but hurt, in these Emperors at
Constantinople their beginning, it was not perfectly healed till a time
thereafter. Neither can it be the succession of French Emperors brought in by
Stephanus the third after Caro^us Marcellus, to wit, Pipinus, Carolus Magnus,
Lodovicus Pius, etc. who were called to defend the Empire, partly against the
Goths and Lombards, who then trod on Italy; partly, for restraining the
insolency of the Exarches of Ravenna, who, being Deputes to the Grecian
Emperor, pillaged and spoiled Italy exceedingly; for these Emperors rise will
not come up to this beasts rise. Their rise was about the 750 or 766. Neither
is it of that continuance, nor will the rest of the characters agree to it of
having that seat, etc. Beside, that Empire is by many counted a special favor
of God to this part of the world, ( Pencerus in vita Caroli Magn^^) which could
never be said of this beasts rise. The like reasons also will strike against
the German Emperors, or that elective succession brought in by Otho the third,
and Carolus the fourth, who may be chief horns of this beast, crowned by him to
execute his decrees, and may be amongst these who give their power to this
beast, but cannot be the beast himself.

Conclusion 2. By this first beast then is understood Antichrist in his
Kingdom, which appears by all the characters given, 1. He succeeds the
Dragon in his seat. 2. His rise, reign, and continuance agree to these forty
two months desolate condition of the Church ending and beginning with it. He
is worshipped not civilly only (that worship is no fault in it self) but
religiously, as no Emperor was; he has absolute dominion and takes ^^ title
to him over all Kindreds, Tongues, etc. Their submission to him is voluntary
and with admiration, which was never to any civil state; he has crowned horns
and Kings under him who reverence him; which will more particularly appear in
opening the words: for, all spoken here, agrees to one beast, and in one state
or condition, to wit, under the last head when the wound which the sixth got
was healed, (things to come bring represented to John as past) the beast thus
healed in his head is admired, worshipped, followed, etc. to him power over the
Saints is given (alluding as is ordinary in the Antichrists case to Antiochus.
Dan.) so either Antichrist is no head of this beast, or he is set out by this
beast who this long continues, and in whom and by whom the Dragon is again
worshipped by the men of the earth: all which can agree to no other. To speak
in short then, here is set out the Roman Empire as antichristian or headed with
Antichrist, having now the sixth head which was wounded by the throwing down of
Heathenish Idolatry again healed by the papacies becoming the seventh; (for,
there are but seven) and to this Empire as under this head agrees all that is
spoken unto here, considering it as representing that same civil state, now the
seventh time carrying another head of blasphemy, yet again repeated under
another type, that it may be known nor to be the same head (though on the same
beast) with that which was wounded, nor of the same kind altogether with the
former.

It is true this is generally otherwise expounded by learned Interpreters,
whereof some do expound this first beast to hold forth the Roman civil Empire
become Christian; others understand it of the complex body of Kings arising out
of the ruins of the Empire (as Mede calls it universitas regum and
incolarum) and so they distinguish this beast as representing some civil power
from the two horned beast following, which to them is Antichrist and an
Ecclesiastic state; yet, upon the matter, there will be found no great
difference: for even these acknowledge this civil power (whether consisting in
Emperors or Kings) to be acted and made use of by this Ecclesiastic beast,
which is the same, upon the matter, that we say, to wit, that the head acting
these horns is the Antichrist; and therefore the beast is to get its
denomination from the head whereby the rest are swayed. Beside, if we look
narrowly to this description, we may well call Emperors, (as they now are) or
Kings, horns of this beast, but cannot account them the beast it self, but as
they are united in and under him; for, the beast here, is that which supporteth
the whore, Chap. 17. which is acknowledged by the same forenamed Author to be
the Ecclesiastic beast. Again, this beast having its beginning immediately
after the close of Heathenish persecution, that can neither be said of the
Roman Empire or of that university of Kings. We may add, that the horns of this
beast, being crowned (that is, having supreme civil power) cannot be thought
subject to any other civil power: and it is clear here, that the worshippers of
this beast are of equal extent with these who bear this mark, and are
contradistinguished from the hundredth forty four thousand that were sealed,
whereby all Papists are included as under his power: and seeing this can agree
to no Emperor (whose dominion is not of such extent) so neither can this beast
be applied to him. Again, it cannot be the university of Kings, for they are
horns acted by this beast, and so may be distinguished from him, as we will
often find them, as, ( Chap. 17.) these horns are turned to hate the whore,
which was supported by this beast, Chap. 19. this beast is cast into the lake
with the false prophet, (and therefore must be understood of this first beast
according to that learned Author) yet can it not be said, that all these Kings
or Emperors go to the pit, as if none of them could remain after Antichrist,
especially considering the prophecy of the Lords making some of these Kings,
who were formerly horns of this beast, to become instruments of his vengance
against the whore. We conclude it therefore, as most safe and consistent with
this prophecy, to expound this first beast of Antichrist, who acts these
horns, and to whom the Kings of the earth willingly gave their power, and so to
be applied to the Pope and his Kingdom, supposing him to be Antichrist.

Conclus. 3. It remains therefore that these two beasts must be, upon the
matter, one; the last holding forth no different state, but the same which the
former held forth, in a different notion. Therefore there is no particular
description of the parts of it, or of its rise in respect of time and
continuance, but it becomes one in all these with the former. Therefore in
this Chapter there is but one name, one character, and one beast or number
always spoken of; yea, they have one Sea, commission, etc. and are designed by
one beast, Chap. 11. verse. 7. spoken of as one Chap. 17. yea, the woman that is
said to sit on the beast, verse. 13. is called this very City or Empire, Rome,
verse. 18. The woman certainly is the antichristian Church, but that woman (
verse. 18.) is not a distinct government or state from that civil state, or from
Antichrists state, but that same supported by its civil power, Therefore they
are one. Thus we see every one of these conclusions do follow each other: if it
be not the civil Empire which is typified by the first beast, it must be
Antichrists, and so both one; for, the last is he. We may add, that in the
Chapters following, when ever Antichrists diminishing is spoken of, or the
destroying of his Kingdom, it is done under the name of the beast, and but as
one, as may appear by these and the like phrases, who worship him, who had
gotten victory over him, his seat, Chap. 16. which by all is expounded to be
Rome. Therefore these two must be one, and such an one as has one seat at Rome
over all Nations with a slavish, superstitious, or rather idolatrous dependence
on him: and therefore when he is here set out, and elsewhere through this Book,
by diverse representations, as a woman carried by the beast, and false prophet,
It is not as if they were two things, but diverse types setting out one
diversely considered, to set out Antichrists two swords Civil and Ecclesistick,
or his twofold means he makes use of, to wit, power and violence, as a beast;
hypocrisy and dissembling, as a false prophet: for, it cannot be thought, that
one can be of such sibnesse and likeness to Antichrist, in all things as this
beast, rising with him, reigning with him, falling and going to the pit with
him, especially seeing two heads are not consistent together, as upon one seat
at the same time, as has been said. This is acknowledged by Bellar. lib. 3. de
Pont, cap. 15. Idem Antichristus per duas bestias exprimitur; per unam, ratione
regiae potentiae and tyrannidis, qua coget homines violenter; per alteram,
ratione magicae artis, qua callide homines seducet, that is, The same
Antichrist is expressed by the two beasts; by the one, because of his kingly
power and tyranny, whereby he shall force men violently; by the other, because
of his magic art, whereby cunningly he shall seduce men. And he alleges
Rupertus for the Author of this exposition. And, ibid. calls Antichrist King
of the Roman Empire, but not under the name of Emperor. This also agrees with
the titles ordinarily assumed by the Pope, who is a good Prince, whereby he
exercises temporal arms, and a holy Pope, whereby he is armed with
spiritual weapons. See the history of the Council of Trent, page 37.

Concerning the Image, mentioned verse. 14. and 15. we also premit, that by it,
is understood no mere civil power, seeing it receives such worship, and that
universally; but it is the same power or state here typified by the first beast
or Antichrists temporal Kingdom under the same notion, as it is described
here. It is called, 1. the image of this beast, which was wounded, because
although it be not in all things the very same Empire, yet does it so exactly
represent the former Roman state, that it may well be called his image, as if a
pattern had been taken from that. 2. It is called also his Image, that is, the
Image of the two horned beast, because it is his creature, and is brought forth
by him, and may be claimed as his, when it is brought forth; and therefore
although it be the Image of the first and second beast, yet in diverse
respects: wherein also we may conclude, that by both these beasts, and also by
the Image here mentioned, is understood the same Antichrist or antichristian
Kingdom. This introduction has been the more largely insisted on, both because
exceeding useful for understanding the prophecy, and also because difficult,
and by Diverse otherwise applied.

We come then to the Chapter, which has two parts. The first sets out
Antichrist in his power, outward glory and cruelty, as in one series with the
heads of that beast, and as now being that same seat and power, but under
another head. This part of Antichrists description is begun at, 1. Because this
is indeed the thing which he is, appear what he will. 2. Because temporal
greatness was the first bait that took with the Pope, and brought forth other
corruptions as they might advance that; this is the end. 3. Because, in this
respect, by his power, seat and predecessors, he is best discerned and known
what he is and who he is. 4. Especially he is here looked on as an head or kind
of government of a body politic, whereof some were already past: he is
described with respect to that series as he succeeds these who went before
him in that same seat, The Roman Empire here, under the first beast, being
considered as with so many heads whereof he is the last. In the second vision
he appears without respect to seat or succession, but as in himself; and so
is described. In a word, in the first vision, to verse. 11. he is holden forth
as a temporal idolatrous Monarch, having the seat of the Dragon in possession.

The second part of the Chapter, (from verse. 11.) sets out the means and
ways how he came to that temporal greatness, and how he entertaineth it, by
spiritual weapons, miracles and censures, with hypocrisy, drawing all men to
give him that voluntary adoration which he desired. In the first beast, is set
forth the nature of the antichristian Kingdom and power completely with the
supreme head and Kings acting under him: In the last, is set forth especially
the head himself. This being compared with Chap. 19.20. will be more clear.
Again, for the first part, 1. Antichrist is typically described, to verse. 9. 2.
Some plain Doctrine and uses are laid down, verse. 9, 10.

Before his description a word is prefixed, I stood on the sea shore, or the
sand. It is to show what posture John was in when he saw this. He was put in
that convenience, that now when the devil goes to renew his war he may see
what it produces. He saw it at no great distance, but was placed commodiously
to discern the rise of this monstrous beast. This word kniteth not only the
series of the vision with the close of the former Chapter, but also timeth the
matter, to wit, the public appearing of this beast, as a fruit of Satan's third
design after the storm of gross heresies by the first four trumpets is over.

To come particularly to the description; it is in many parts or respects; 1.
Its original or rise, is, from, or, out of the sea. By Sea we understand a low
base beginning, rising out of the commotions of a troubled world, and coming to
an height by temporal changes and afflictions on the Empire, yet indeed
proceeding out of the bottomless pit, as Chap. 9. which is that same to ascend
out of the sea, save that this may serve to clear how subservient the tossings
and shakings of the Empire were to its rise. 2. If we take Sea, as it was Chap.
5. it will be a rising out of the bulk of Churchmen and an ascending above
them, alluding in general to Dan. 7. and 8.

2. This beasts rise is set out actively; it was not raised up nor exalted as
lawful powers are, but it raised it self up and by its own working wrought it
self out of its own station to such a height.

3. This rise is palpable, I saw him rise: not that he was not working and
rising before, but that he, who insensibly under the great confusions of the
Empire had been settling his own throne, now he brings his power from the sea
to land, as a settled thing, owning it and appearing in it.

Secondly, After the rise is described, there is given a general character of
him ( verse. 1.) in three things, 1. He had seven heads; not together, but
successively, seven kinds of Governments, though the seventh was not come,
Chap. 17. in John's time, that is, the Roman Empire, having in all seven sundry
Governments, to wit, 1. Kings. 2. Consuls. 3. Tribuni. 4. Dictators. 5.
Decemviri. 6. Cesars, or Emperors, who were then present. This seventh, who is
called the eighth, was not then come. This will be more clear on Chap. 17.

1. He has ten horns, that is, so many, or possibly indefinitly, many Kings,
who when John wrote this, had not received their power, but now at this beasts
rise had obtained it; so Antichrists appearing goes along with or after the
Empire is discerped in several Kingdoms. The red Dragon has these two
characters, Chap. 12.3. yet, with these two differences, 1. He looks more
red-like and appears cruel. This beast was not so bloody at the first, but,
( Chap. 17.) it has a scarlet color. 2. There the heads were crowned, here
the horns and not the heads: This is to show, that now these ten Kings had
gotten their power, Chap. 17. but withal were made use of by this head, as the
other made use of them, before they got their Crowns: whereby it is clear that
the Roman civil Empire, as under this beast, is considered as different from it
self under the Dragon. Compare this with verse. 12. Chap. 17. The third
character, is, that all the heads have the name or names of blasphemy on them.
Blasphemy, is three ways fallen into, 1. When something derogatory to the
holy and excellent Nature of God is ascribed to Him, suppose to say He
repented, lied, or when there is any sinful apprehension that He was weary,
sickly, faint, finit, etc. 2. When some of His excellencies belonging to Him,
are denied, as to say He is not omnipotent, just, infinite, etc. 3. When
something proper and peculiar to the infinite God is ascribed to a creature
which is not God, as when an Angel is said to be omnipotent; so said the Jews
when they mistook Christ, He blasphemed, because He forgave sins, which none
can do but God only, and so did make himself God. A name of blasphemy, is any
usurped title inferring one of these three, especially the last: many of their
Emperors did foolishly require divine honor; and what business Caius made to
get his Image put in the Temple at Jerusalem, Josephus reports, Antiq. lib.
18. cap. 11. In a word, all these heads were Idolaters, blaspheming the true
God, worshipping Idols, giving what is due to Him to creatures; yea, taking it
to themselves to Heathen Idolatry, so did the six former heads, so shall the
seventh do: the Idolatry whereof was spoken to, Chap. 9.20. None takes on him
and has attributed to him what is due to God in Titles, power of
Dispensations, religious Worship, obeying of His Commands more than he who
exalts himself above all that is called God. For the Titles and Scriptures
peculiar to God and Christ, arrogated by him and attributed to him, see Bell.
de Conciliis and praef. ad libros de pontif. By which it appears, that this
seventh head of papacy is immediately linked with the Dragons fall, there being
no head thus characterized till his rise.

This beast is further described ( verse. 2.) in his parts and commission. His
parts are described in three similitudes, 1. His likeness was as a leopard;
that was his shape. A Leopard or Panther, is called loving and a friend to all
creatures, save the Dragon, so says Isodorus; Franzius joyneth the Hyaena and
the Cock, and calls him animal ferocissimum and astutum, Hist. animal. cap.
9. page 60. Beside that he is bountiful and not terrible as the Dragon. By
this the devil shows his subtilty, choosing that shape to appear in wherein
folks would least suspect him. This beast is famous for these three, 1.
Swiftness, Habak. 1.8. for this the Grecian was compared to him. 2. Cruelty,
Hos. 5.14. 3. Subtilty, Ier. 5.6. All agree here.

2. His feet are like a bears. Thus was the Persian, Dan. 7. with three ribbs
in his teeth. By this, cruelty is holden forth and strength, or the exercising
of cruelty by force, not unagreeable to this Antichrist, as cruel as ever the
Persian was against the people of God.

3. His mouth as a lions mouth: partly, to show his capacity toward others;
partly, to show his insolency and audacity against God in wicked bold decrees:
in which respect, the Babylonian Monarchy is compared to a Lion, Dan. 7. This
Lions mouth is indeed ( verse. 11.) the Dragons mouth; and there is allusion to
these three beasts in this one, to show, that one could not set forth such a
monster; and that this which is meaned here, is some monstrous brood partaking
of something of the cruel nature of all other tyrants, and in some things
going beyond and differing from them all.

4. The beast is set forth in his predecessor and author, that is, the Dragon,
who loves this beast so well, and lays so much weight on his greatness,
that now, the power which he usurped in the world by Heathen Emperors being
ranversed and removed, he constituteth this beast his universal vicar, as he is
called, Chap. 9. the Angel and prime Deputy of the bottomless pit; and
accordingly he authorizeth and invests him in that office by his gift and
donation in three steps, 1. He gave him, that is, as he offered to Christ all
the world, or so far as he could reach, he streacheth himself to advance him by
giving him his power; partly, furnishing him with lying miracles, so he comes
after the working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2 9. partly, committing to him and
employing for him all his forces and armies; his might to the uttermost was
engaged to support Antichrist his Deputy. 2. He gave him his seat, that is,
Rome, where he before by the Heathen Emperor held his throne. The Emperor now
is laid by, as such, and this seat made vacant for the Pope. This is the seat,
as is clear, Chap. 17. ult. this is called Satan's throne in an eminent way,
because from it, he gave out his orders, etc. as is spoken in part of Pergamos,
Chap. 2. 3. He gave him great authority, that is, not as if ever his dominion
on that seat by any prescription of time could be lawful, seeing it rises from
this ground of the devils grant who has none to give; But it implies two
things, 1. That by the devils instigation he should venditate and give out
himself to have a large authority and power committed to him, even such ample
large commissions and power as the like were never heard of; his triple Crown
reaches to command heaven, by giving orders to the Angels; and earth, by
disposing of all the Kingdoms of it; Hell and Purgatory, by bringing thence and
sending thither whom he pleases, and at what price he pleases, without any
control, so that none can say, what do thou? he is only countable to the
Dragon who commissionateth him. This is clear from Popes practices and their
Schoolmens writings in defense of his power. 2. That by that same mean never
was any authority so much reverenced, adored and obeyed as this blasphemous
usurpation of the Popes should be, witness the general inslaving of the world
to him so long: what pennances and submissions and pains have been gone about
by great Emperors and Kings, even to the laying of their neck under his feet,
to be trodden on by him? Many instances and examples are of it.

Before he go on to describe the practice of this beast, he puts in a word (
verse. 3.) concerning the wounding and healing of one of the heads of this
beast, and the effect of it, to show that what is spoken of this beast,
belongs to it allanerly under its last policy or seventh head; and the
healing of this head, is the very ground and rise of this wondering. For
understanding this, ye must consider two things, 1. concerning the story in
fact. 2. concerning the phrase of this Book. 1. For matter of fact, as ye have
heard, Rome had seven sorts of Governments, (including the Pope) all Idolaters;
The sixth, to wit, Heathen Emperors, was then when John wrote, it was the
immediate foregoing head to this seventh. By Constantine and other Emperors
this Heathenish Religion was altered to Christian, and the seat of the civil
Empire transported to Constantinople, so that Rome seemed to want an head,
especially an head that had blasphemy on it, till by the Popes stepping up at
Rome both were helped. 2. Consider, that when this Revelation speaks of the
Empire, it speaks of it with respect to its Religion, and as it was the seat
of the Dragons exercising power in all these Governments, even as under the
sixth seal a change of Religion in the world is set out by types, as if the
world were changed; so here the wounding of a head, is not a cutting off of
Emperors simply, but their ceasing to be a head to that beast, and to be
blasphemous and persecuting as before; for, they are not heads to it simply,
but as having on them a name of blasphemy; for, they hold of the Dragon: and
this healed head is his creature, verse. 4. and he is worshipped in it. This
cannot be said of civil Authority in it self, which is Gods Ordinance. The
devil then must have a special hand in this cure, so the wounding or slaying
of a head deadly, will not infer the ceasing of that Government simply, but to
be such as it was, as in other visions and changes in the worlds passing away,
etc. which holds but, not its annihilating, but its ceasing to be such. See
Chap. 6.13. and Chap. 8.

Add, that this wound is not to be given to the head after this beasts arising,
but before it; yea, the healing of this is the same with this beasts rising:
For, all he does, he does it after it is made whole, Then he is admired, then
he fights with the Saints. This head then that is wounded, is that which was
in John's time, to wit, Heathen Emperors. It is here particularly said to be
wounded, which is not said between the succession of any other two heads,
because they succeeding one to another, their Idolatry was not hurt. But here,
when Heathenish Emperors were cast out, Heathenish Idolatry was cast out with
them. Idolatry before kept always its room in all the heads equally, here it
is degraded. 2. It is for a time interrupted before this head be again public,
to wit, between the altering of Heathenish Idolatry and the public appearing
of Popes. Therefore it appears desperately wounded, rather now than between
any other heads before, where the interruption between them was not so
desperate and palpable. 3. At other times, no question, the civil state of the
Empire got many wounds by many Invasions and invaders; but the Dragon, who is
still here represented as chief through all the heads, got never such a wound.
Shortly, this third verse contains three things, 1. The heads wounding. 2.
Its healing. 3. Its effect on the world. The head that is wounded is the
Heathen Cesars, or Emperors; for, five were past, the seventh was not till the
wound was healed. Therefore it was the sixth then present which was wounded.
This wound is in two things, 1. A deadly stroke upon Idolatry, so as it was (
Chap. 6.) under the sixth seal, the Idolatrous body was slain and overturned by
it; that same may be said of the blasphemous head. 2. By an hudge eclipsing of
the chief seat of this Empire, by the Emperors removing his Court to
Constantinople, whereby the glory of that city was diminished; So, when John
speaks of this wound, I saw (says he) an hudge Idolatrous beast with seven
successive Idolatrous Governments (counting both what was past and what was to
come) and I saw the sixth of them thus wounded and that deadly, 1. Because it
was a great stroke it got, and none would have thought that after these two
Rome should have had again an Idolatrous Government in pomp; and yet, 2. but
wounded as it were to death, because I saw the devil after recover that ground
another way which he lost by this.

2. This wound was healed: the curer is afterward pointed at, verse. 4. the
Dragon: it is a birth of his, that is, the bringing forth the seventh head, to
wit, papacy, whereby that Beast, or Rome, recovered both its former losses with
advantage. 1. By the Popes they recovered Idolatry: for, if the want of that is
the wound, the restoring of that is the cure, and it was not done till it was
done by the Popes. This was touched, Chap. 9.20. For the healing of this head,
is not the restoring of the same head and name of blasphemy which was, but it
is the in-bringing of another to succeed that; for, the healed head continues
during the forty two months that Antichrist reigns, and the horns are
crowned: Therefore it cannot be the restoring again either of Emperors or
Heathenish Idolatry, but of that which succeeded these; otherwise there would
be no time for the seventh; or, two behoved to be together: but it is called a
healing in respect of the Idolatry that was wounded, the Empire being still
safe. This is healed not only by bringing-in Idolatry, and yet not the same,
but one exceeding like it; so that what was given to devils directly, is now
given mediately by Saints, Angels and Images to them, and all their
superstitious Ceremonies and Idolatrous Temples are professedly transferred
from one Idolatry to another. But secondly, also, by this Rome, the seat
(almost like to a widow before this) now received a Court, Popes, Cardinals,
and her solitariness was helped, and she looks out again as majestically and
commander-like by this head as by any other. That this is the healing here
understood, appears by the effects, 1. The admiration that then followed in
the world^ and the thanks they (in effect) gave the devil for this service, as
generally better content with this than with any other head that ever was
before.

The particular effect in this verse, is, All the world wondered after the
beast. It is more to wonder after than at the beast. Here begins the effects
of his enchantment on the world after this healing which was not before. 2.
This admiration after the beast, is more particularly set forth afterward: It
implies, 1. an unexpected amazement, as at the seeing of something they had
not seen or thought to see so soon: and certainly the wicked world could not
have expected again an Idolatrous head so soon. 2. It imports a sort of
Divine or Religious reverence or doting on the beast superstitiously; for, it
is after the beast: which is clear afterward, as holding out an estimation of
some Religious thing in this head (who is called Christ's vicar) more than in
any which went before; which cannot agree to a civil state. 3. It imports a
willingness or gladsomnesse in the doing of this, as affected or delighted
with it: It is otherwise expressed by enchanting the inhabitants of the earth;
men's wicked nature, that loves whoring from God, now welcometh exceedingly
this corrupt beast, and submits to him, and drinketh-in in a deluded way his
fornications willingly, where we have an emblame of man's nature. 2. The parties
admiring, are, all the world, that is, as large dominion and possibly more
under this head healed than ever any head had before him; It is all who are not
elected: whereby it is clear again, that this beast wondered-after is
Antichrist; and this admiration or worship, is more than civil: he has
exceeding many; yea, Emperors, Kings, and great men giving their power to him,
and that willingly, Chap. 17. which they never did to any other. In a word,
says he, when this head came up, this beast got more followers and other sort
of respect than ever before.

For clearing this exposition of the wound and healing, Consider, this wound
must be at the time of the Churches begun flight, which was contemporary with
the fall of Idolatrous Emperors: for, this healed head is contemporary with
the woman's flight, therefore this wound must be before, which can be no other
but that, though this healing immediately appeared not, as is said. 2.
Consider, that at that time five heads were past, the seventh to come, which
rises after the healing of this wounded head, and is the seventh, or papacy;
it is not wounded here, nor was it in being before these forty two months
began, and during that time it has power, and is not wounded: It must be then
the sixth of the Emperors that suffered at that time when the woman began to
flee. Now, there was then no wound in the temporal grandour, glory and state
of the Empire, it was as great under Constantine as ever (Therefore he is known
by that name Constantine the great) it must then be the change we expounded it
to be. 3. Add, if the papacyes rising to be the seventh head, be the healing of
this wound, Then must the wound be such a want or change as papacy supplieth;
But papacy heals this and is the seventh head. This beast which endures
forty two months and has power from the Dragon, heals and recovereth this
seat that was lost, and sits again in Rome, etc. and this is papacy, as is
proven and will ( Chap. 17.) more fully appear. Now, the thing which the devil
aims at by the papacyes settling at Rome, is the recovering of that worship,
which he lost; and by the Popes means again by Idols and Images the devil is
worshipped, Chap. 9.20. and here, v. 2. Ergo, the removing this Idolatrous
worship by public Authority, which was the Dragon's casting from Heaven, Chap.
12. is the wound here. Beside, temporal overrunning of the Empire by Goths,
Vandals, and such like, can neither be called one wound, because it was
frequent; nor attributed to this seventh head, because out of it the Popes
reaped still advantage; as also they suit not this time, nor was the Emperors
healed after these incursions, so as to have more following than before; and
the Emperors not being heads, after they became Christian (as will be clear,
Chap. 17.) and it not being they who are wondered at, as this head after its
healing is, It cannot therefore be applied to them but as is said.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 4. And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast, and
they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to
make war with him?

5. And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things, and
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.

6. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name,
and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

7. And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.

8. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not
written in the book of life of the Lamb, slain from the foundation of the world.


THe first part of this Chapter describes Antichrist under a secular notion of
civil power. It sets him out, first, in his rise, verse. 1, 2, 3. In three
things, 1. To what state he belongs, to wit, that of seven heads and ten
horns, that is, the Roman, verse. 1. 2. Of what nature he is; he is compounded
of monstrous qualities, verse. 2. 3. To what time or revolution of that Roman
state he belongs, to wit, that which after the wounded head was healed and
the horns had gotten Crowns, that is to say, after the civil Empire is weakened
and divided in sundry Kingdoms, and the Pope steppeth up to act them all.

2. His reign or the effects of his rise, after this head is sealed, are set
down, from verse. 4. forward, in four steps or effects, first, toward the
graceless world; he obtains much respect and applause from them, even in the
highest degree, so that he rules amongst them at his pleasure, verse. 4. The
second is the time of his continuance, verse. 5. The third contains his
blasphemy or doctrine toward God, verse. 6. The fourth and last, his
persecution against the Saints, or his practice toward them, verse. 7. and 8.
The universality of the subjection he gets, or of the power he has, is
restrained to the Reprobate world, as the proper object of his Kingdom, as it
is of the Dragons who gives him that power.

The first effect after his rising, ( verse. 4.) is set out in three steps,
expounding the wondering that was mentioned, verse. 3. 1. It is said they
worshipped the Dragon. 2. The Beast. 3. Their respect to the Beast, is set down
in a Question or two, expressing their admiration.

This worship is not such as is given to civil Emperors, but is some
religious, superstitious worship. 1. It is somewhat which is sinful to be
given, which mere civil worship is not: for, Christ, the Prophets and Apostles
do allow honor where it is due, as to great men, etc. 2. It is such worship,
as is, on the matter, worship to the devil, that is, not as directly intended
to him, but as all Idolatry and worshipping of Images is interpretatively
worshipping of devils, Chap. 9.20. it being not commanded of God, but
derogatory to him; so the worlds applauding and adoring this Antichrist will
be, on the matter, before God a worshipping of the devil, especially
considering that this Antichrist is peculiarly the devils lieutennant and
trusty servant: and therefore, what honor he gets, redoundeth to the honor
of him that commissionateth him; so this worship terminateth immediately on the
beast, as ye see in the end of the verse, who is like him? but mediately and
consequently on the devil, who gave him power. In a word, the world gave divine
honor to this beast, and in him to the devil that commissionated him. Now,
concerning that divine honor Popes get in their titles, by being accounted
gods on earth and able to forgive sins, being adored by kissing their feet and
by reverencing their words and decrees as infallible, even like Scriptures;
yea, esteeming the Scriptures (as Bail. Jesus. Catech. part. 1.) but, as Livius,
writings without their Authority, and so receiving them only as they are
ratified by them, etc. These are known things.

It may be questioned here, how it can be said, that the devil gave him power,
seeing he has no power to give, and seeing it is universally said, Romans 13. That
the powers that are, are of God? Answ. Certainly this power is by Gods secret
justice to punish the worlds ingratitude, 2 Thessalonians. 2. He sends this delusion
for a just end; yet it is said to be of the devil and not of God, because it is
not by His revealed approving will, but contrary to it. 1. In the nature of the
power, or the things wherein he takes power. 2. Of his way of coming to it. 3.
In his exercising of it: in all which he holds of the devil as his author,
and not of God, who has warranted no such thing in His Word.

However by this worshipping, it appears that this beast who is the object of
it, is more in the account of his worshippers than ordinary Monarchs. 2. That
he stands in a special relation to the devil, who is thus a sharer of his
honor, and so can be no other than the Antichrist.

The particular worship, is instanced in two questions, 1. Who is like the
beast? which sets out their thoughts of him as more than ordinary. It
looks like these questions that the true worshippers of the true God have of
Him, Who is like the Lord? etc. so there is a superstitious admiration wrought
through delusion in these false worshippers, as supposing Antichrist to have
some divine eminency and singularity in him, which has been verified in
reference to the Popes. 2. These two questions also hold out the ground and
height of their admiration, to wit, his dreadfulnesse and power. Therefore the
second question is, Who is able to make war with him? or, who can stand in
opposition to Him? It looks to His power and the consequents of it. This was
the worlds judgment of their Popes long, That they thought the greatest powers
could not make head against them, and indeed so it was; partly, by that
drunk-in delusion of his sanctity and Authority; partly, by his
Excommunications and Bulls, deposing Kings, loosing Subjects from their oaths,
giving away their Crowns, hounding out others on them; and all this to be
executed under pain of damnation: and partly, by his having all civil powers at
his devotion, as horns to push with where he pleased, and to set one against
another; he did what he pleased. The examples of the Popes proceedings against
the Emperors of the East, who were against Images, and against Emperors of
the West, giving their Crowns from them to others, which wrought such terror
upon all others, that there was much more fear to anger the Pope than ever
there was to anger any Monarch; yea, than there was to anger God, to such an
height came his impiety. Ma^k here the Lords censure of Popery in its full
extent, it is a worshipping of the devil; and this, in less or more, will be
His censure of all corrupt worship not warranted by Him.

The second step of the description of his dominion, is in its continuance,
verse. 5. What is spoken of his blasphemies, comes in verse. 6. He speaks
great things, in threatenings, promises and assertions of his own power. This
the devil puts him to; not by giving him power, But, 1. by making him take
this power to him, as though he might blaspheme without hazard, he having
liberty to say and do what he will. And, 2. By moving others to grant this to
him, as if he only were to be exempted, and this is meaned by power given him
to blaspheme: which is not simply to blaspheme as others do, but a liberty by
his office to do it without control, as one who legally and by right does what
he does: and this agrees well to the Pope, who pretends a power to do
whatever he does. This is a peculiar clause and article (as it were) in his
commission, and it alludeth to what is spoken of Antiochus, Dan. 7.25.

His time or continuance in this blasphemy, is, forty and two months: the
same with the Gentiles treading-under the holy City, Chap. 11.2.^ during which
time blasphemy prevails, and the Saints are overcome and he domineereth. By
the forty and two months are not to be understood so many natural days, but
(as was expounded) a long considerable time, probably counting a day for a
year. This only is marked here, to show it would not be a short storm, it
looked like a continuing one: and this expression, It was given him to
continue, though there be a limitation in it, yet its main purpose is to show
its long continuance. 2. To show it belonged to the same time of the Churches
low condition, Chap. 11. and 12. and that he is the beast spoken of, Chap. 11.
verse. 7. 3. To learn us where to fix this beasts first rise, or from what time
to deduce him; It is from the Churches fleeing or the Gentiles beginning to
tread under foot the holy City. 4. It shows also that this power of his, is
bounded, and though God give him way so long in His just permissive Providence,
yet it is but so long: His close trysteth precisly with the witnesses killing
and the putting off their sackcloth.

2. By the setting this time of forty two months, we would not conceive, 1.
That he was at an height in the first month or always alike; no, but as the
Churches declining grew, so grew his rise: Nor, 2. that at the end of forty
two months his power shall be utterly broken; no, for when he kills the
witnesses, then the vials are to be powered out, that piece and piece slowly
bring on his destruction. But this is meaned, that his Kingdom is on the
increasing hand till these months be past, what opposition comes to him he
will crush it; but after that, he will not be so, his power will be cliped, his
tyranny discovered, and his Authority so shaken and questioned, that it will
never be so universally after that accepted, or be admitted to the exercise of
it; for, as that term brings not the full outgate of the Church to an
height, but a beginning of it, even so here. Out of all this we may confirm
what we said of this beast and that wound and its healing, which must be before
these forty and two months, during which time he continues whole, and
persecuteth the Saints, even at the very close or last part thereof.

His blasphemy is more fully set down, verse. 6. in reference to three objects,
whom he takes a liberty to blaspheme, which, being in reference to God,
derogateth some way from His excellent holiness and pure sovereign Nature;
when applied to men or creatures, to blaspheme, is to speak ill of, to detract
from and to wrong them by our words, so to blaspheme God and the King, 1 Kings
21.10. and in the New Testament often, Col. 3.8. Tit. 3.2. or to make them
subservient to our blasphemy.

This blaphemy is three ways vented, 1. Against God: this he does by assuming
to himself and giving to Idols, Angels and Saints, what is due to God and His
Son Jesus Christ. What prerogative is more than to forgive sins, and to be
worshipped with religious worship? and this he takes to himself and gives to
others at his pleasure, making them the object of Adoration, Invocation, and so
of Faith; his Dispensations, Indulgences, etc. 2. It is against Gods
Tabernacle, that is, either the humane Nature of our Lord Jesus, called the
true Tabernacle, Heb. 9. wherein God dwells in a special manner, Ioh. 1. and
Col. 2.9. or His Church and Saints on Earth, which is called the Temple, Chap.
11. opposite to the outward Court, and is Gods Tabernacle with men, because in
them he dwells, and, as it were, sojourneth till He bring them to a settled
enjoying of Himself in His Temple in Heaven, which sometimes in Scripture is
opposed to the Tabernacle, as the triumphant Church is to the militant. Both
these the Pope blasphemeth; the first, by Masses, Hoafts, Adorations,
Transubstantiation, and such things as these, whereby our Lords humane Nature
is quite altered and blasphemed, as if it were there, or had a created being at
the pleasure of a wretched man. The second, the true Church and Saints are here
blasphemed, to wit, by curses, reproaches, excommunications, and devoting of
them to destruction, and proposing them as the vilest men and as the greatest
heretics in the world. Instances many are palpable. 3. He blasphemeth these
that dwell in Heaven, that is, Saints departed, and Angels, fathering many
mischievous things on them, abusing their name to Idol-worship and charms: is
there any thing more wronged and abused by them than Peter and Mary the blessed
Virgin? when many vile things are fathered on them and sought from them as if
they approved these things, Idols and Idolatrous Temples styled by them and
erected to them; and what greater wrong than this can be done to these Saints,
while as the Angel ( Rev. 19.) reproved John for it? These three, to wit, God,
His Church-militant and triumphant, the most excellent things in the world, he
wrongeth them all and in the highest degree; and to whom agrees this so well
as to the Pope? and all this he does not only in his own person, but, by
decrees ordains it as by law. In short, a^ Antiochus blasphemed all whom in
His practice he despised, and abused all, so shall he do and so has he long
done as if he professedly did blaspheme them.

The fourth part of the exercise of his power, is in persecution, verse. 7. It
was given to him, even as all the rest was given, to make war with the Saints
and to overcome them: here are his fightings with the remnant of the woman's
seed, Chap. 12.17. he raises the world against them, and over their bodies
they prevail. This war with the Saints takes in all violent Martyrdoms of
singular persons put to death for opposing this beasts usurpation, as were
(specially in the end of those months) very many in Italy, Germany, England,
etc. It takes in also the purposed wars that for many years to the effusion of
much blood were undertaken against the Waldenses and others that looked on the
Pope as Antichrist. Ten hundredth thousand men were slain (as is reported by
Per^nius apud Med.) in France, and this done by way of stated war, not by
pillagings, but by making use of strong Armies once intended against the
Sarracens, which by the Pope were diverted and employed against the Waldenses.
The history also of the Bohemian wars, after John Husse and Jerome of Prague
were burnt, against these who were called Hussits, which continued in great
eagerness for many years; The history of the poor people of Piedmont, Calabria
and Angrongue, and other places in Italy, persecuted by an Army under the Lord
of Trinity, the destruction of Merindoll, and many poor people about in
Provence, by the Archbishop of Aix, and the Lord of Opede President, beside the
many barbarous cruelties in Holland, Germany, France, etc. are evidences of
this war of the beast against the Saints, touched before, Chap. 11.7. which
blood, though immediately shed by civil men, yet principally flowed from, and
is to be charged on the whore, in whole skirts is found the blood of the
Prophets and Saints, Chap. 17.6. and 18.24.

The success is set down, he overcomes them, to wit, by spoiling them of
their liberty, life and temporal estate for a time; but they overcome him, by
adhering to Truth and refusing his corruptions, even at their lowest estate of
suffering, as it was, Chap. 1^. verse. 11.

After these characters of his dominion, his success, or the amplitude of his
dominion, is more particularly set out and repeated, in three things, 1. In its
extent, He had power over all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, that is, there was
none exempted from him, no Nation, Tongue, etc. who were Christian, that were
preserved from his corruptions, and many whole Nations carried away with it,
though not all of every Nation and Kindred were infected: In a word, it was
very broad, verse. 7. 2. It is set out in the degree of their submission, All
that dwell on the earth, they shall worship him, that is, be every way at his
devotion, and shall take orders from him, and be as slaves to him. It is a sort
of submission from some apprehension of some deity peculiar to this beast and
this state of it beyond all others, as is said. 3. Lest it should be thought
that all went wrong, and there were no Church, the Elect are excepted, and this
universality is restrained by this implied exception, All such as were written
in the Lambs book of life are preserved: These are the little Temple set by,
Chap. 11. and the same who were sealed, Chap. 7. and excepted from the hurt of
the fifth trumpet, Chap. 9.4. and the one hundred forty and four thousand,
which ( Chap. 14.) are standing as conquerours over the beast with the Lamb
upon mount Sion. Whereby it appears, 1. There will be some excepted in the
greatest tyranny of Antichrist. 2. That they are the same with the one hundred
forty and four thousand that were sealed, and consequently then this beast is
Antichrist, and this worship antichristianism; for, these Saints, or Elect, are
not kept or exempted from giving civil worship to temporal powers, or from
being overcome with this beast as to temporal hurt, but from worshipping of
him, which is the sinfulness of this plague. Therefore after it is said they
got the victory over him, Chap. 14. and 15. this also is to be understood of
full and final yielding to the Popes blasphemies; for, otherwise Elect souls
have sometimes been ensnared. In which respect here it is implied to be
impossible, that an Elect can worship him, whence plainly it follows, that no
native Pope-worshipper, owning him and the complete body of his doctrine, and
dying so, can be saved, except we would say one not elected may be saved; for,
clearly this is pointed at as inconsistent with election, and proper to the
Reprobate, Matt. 24.24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.

It is true, this assertion is not rigidly to be extended to all who in part
shall be guilty of Popery; Nor, 2. (as is said) to these who shall repent, but
where there is a full and final whoring with wondering after this beast: this
stands as a peremptory truth, because in the Spirits account this worshipping
of the beast, is blasphemy, and derogatory in a high degree to God. And, 2. his
manner of worship in its complete body, is Idolatry. And, 3. his intermixing of
Traditions, Satisfactions, merit of Works in Justification, etc. in his
doctrine, is a perverting of the right ways of the Lord, and a corrupting of
the pure waters, that who drinks thereof must die. Therefore we may
confidently assert it; and indeed seeing the Lord distinguishes His true Church
from Antichrist, and calls them Gentiles, Chap. 11.2. and such as are not
elected, Chap. 13.8. but are to be damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. and to drink of the
wine of the wrath of God without mixture for ever, Chap. 14.9, 10, 11. there is
no place left for disputing this: which is set down as a dread full sentence
for scaring all from worshipping of that beast or receiving of his mark. Popery
will be found no little crime before God, and to bring no little guilt and
hazard upon souls what ever men think of it.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 9. If any man have an ear, let him hear.

10. He that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity: He that kills
with the sword, must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the
faith of the Saints.

11. And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, and he had two
horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon.


THe Spirit, having given a dark description of Antichrist, before He proceed
to enlarge it in the following type, He does in these two verses, to wit, 9.
and 10. set down in plain words something necessary for the consolation of the
Saints. 1. He lays down that common and often repeated advertisement, He that
has ears, let him hear: by which, in this place, he sets out, 1. the
concernment of the knowledge of this mystery to Believers: and therefore we
would not think it unworthy the pains to search in it. 2. It holds out an
impossibility (save to these who have ears) to take it up and understand it,
Therefore it will need the more diligence to search it. 3. It imports a
deafness in many who want ears for such Truths, and therefore it is not to be
wondered although many Papists continue blind and do not discern this Truth.

Having premitted this general, He subjoyneth ( verse. 10.) a special
consolation, which may be a reason why people, in the flourishing estate of the
wicked, would be the more observant, because there was retribution coming on
the greatest and cruellest enemies of the Church, they being to be dealt with
as they dealt with others. He that leads into captivity -- he that kills,
shall be so met with: which judgment holds out, 1. the singular observing of
justice, meeting them in their own measure, Psalm. 137. ult. Isa. 33. 1, 2. 2. A
great change coming on the highest power, and so that there can be no stability
in greatness when this admired beast is captivated, as if he said, think not
this beasts standing will be eternal, he that leads captive some, banisheth
and kills others, the day comes when he shall be led in captivity: for, if
the general be true, that all that lead captive shall be led captive, then
this beast also shall be so dealt with, beside that it peculiarly relates to
him.

The consolation is expressly in these words, Here is the patience and the faith
of the Saints. Here, that is, in this thing, and on this promise, there is a
good ground for founding of both the patience and faith of the Saints. So that
here, says this much, that from this word they may patiently abide a whiles
suffering, and by Faith expect an end to it, and an overthrow, and turn upon
this powerful enemy that carries all now before him. Or, here, that is, in
this trial of Antichrists before the end come, is exercised the patience and
faith of the Saints; now they will have to do with faith and patience, now is
the time of their acting of it, till this word spoken (to give them an
encouragement) come to pass, to wit, that the two evils they suffered, killing
and captivity, shall be returned on their enemies heads: Gods promise is that
which keeps life in faith and patience and strengthens them, but still a
time interveeneth between the promise and the outgate for the exercise of both
these; and this is the end of continuing straits, else there should be little
use for these Graces which are well put together.

From the 11. verse. follows the second part of Antichrists description under
a different type, because his way, end and pretexts, are such as cannot
altogether by one beast be set out, It being no strange thing to set out our
Lord differently, sometimes as a Lion, and sometimes as a Lamb, as in the fifth
Chapter; So is his ape Antichrist under a twofold consideration described, as
was said at the entry to this Chapter. If it be asked, how it can be called
another beast, as different from the former? Answ. 1. It is another type,
describing the same power, as Grecia ( Dan. 7.) is described as a Leopard; and
( Dan. 8.) as an he goat, yet but the same power signified in its diverse
qualifications. 2. It may be called another beast, 1, Because it sets out
the same Antichrist, as in a different consideration, to wit, under the first
beast, he is considered as a temporal secular Monarch in a series with the
heads of the beast that went before, altogether constituting one beast and
power in a continued line in one seat; but under this beast, he is considered
as abstracted, and under this particular head, to wit, the last, and as
considered distinctly by it self and not complexly under the multiplicity of
heads as it was considered before, The Roman Monarchy being considered
absolutely in the first, but in some respect only under the last: In which
respect (according to the best Interpreters) the Kingdom of the Seleucides and
Lagades, though it be comprehended under the fourth beast, yet is there a
distinct consideration taken of Antiochus by himself, who was one of the horns
of that beast, Dan. 7. because Gods people specially suffered from him; and he
being in many things typical of Antichrist, it may thus be done with respect
to that also. 2. He is considered under the first type, as constituting one
body with the horns and making use of them; here as head to the Clergy and
making use of them: in the former he acts by a civil Power, warring against
the Saints and overcoming them. Here by spiritual weapons, as miracles,
excommunications, pretenses to Christ, (as we may hear) and therefore may be
considered as a different power, the things he does and the means he makes use
of being so different, one type will not fully describe him, Therefore this
seventh head, being in respect of his claim so different from the rest, ought
to have a consideration or type beyond them; In which sense, though he be the
seventh head, Chap. 17. yet is he also called the eighth upon this
consideration. 3. Under the first type, especially the matter of
Antichristianisme, or this Dominion or Kingdom it self, is set down; but under
the second, the persons exercising that Dominion, and that by a pretense to
Christ.

For the better understanding of this, consider three things, 1. That this
beast is not in time posterior to the first, as considering it under the last
head; for, he gives life to the first, has a hand in the healing of his
wound, and so in his rise, it must be at the beginning of the forty two
Months with the other. But this head, as abstractly considered, may be said to
be behind the first beast in his complex consideration with all his heads: 2.
As they agree in time, so they agree in design. This beasts design is to make
the first to be worshipped (which certainly shows they are one) but under
this vail of an Ecclesiastic power and interest, as is said, and in ordine ad
spiritualia, he drives his design of pursuing temporal greatness and
grandour. 3. The power is the same; for, ( verse. 12.) all the power or
commission of the first, is exercised by this, but variously vented, to wit,
formerly by a violent way, here spiritually under deceitful signs, yet for
the same end: whereby it appears, that the chief design of the spirit in
this last part of his description by this type, is to show, 1. upon what
account the world gave him such reverence. 2. by what midses he procured that
temporal greatness and respect; he deceived the world by signs, etc. as is
expressly set down, verse. 14.

In this description there are three parts. In the first, are set down the
characters and design of this beast. 2. his weapons or means, whereby he
prevailed to make his design effectual, from verse. 13. to 17. inclusive. 3.
he gives a character common to both these beasts, whereby it appears they
are one, verse. 18. From all, it will be evident that this second beast sets
out Antichrist as a false Prophet, as the first did as an usurping Tyrant.

There are four things marked in his description, verse. 11. and 12. 1. It is
described whence he rose, to wit, the earth: this does not necessarily infer a
different thing to be signified, as by comparing Dan. 7.2, 3. with verse. 17.
will appear; the same beasts rise both from the Sea and the Earth: and though
in that place the Sea be figuratively, and the Earth properly to be understood,
whereas both are figuratively here, yet it enervateth not the force of the
reason, because as there may be many diverse types, so diverse rises of these
types, as the Grecian Monarchy, compared to a Leopard, having his rise from
the Sea, Dan. 7. verse. 3, 6. is set forth by an he-goat having his rise from
the West. But it sets out, 1. an humane or earthly beginning, opposite to
divine; it is not from Gods warrant, but from beneath. 2. An extending of his
dominion to sea and land, as the Angel, ( Chap. 10.) set his feet on both, or,
both over secular Powers and Ecclesiastic, according to the two rises of the
several beasts. 3. A base beginning, yet rising withal slowly and insensibly
in respect of this spiritual power; whereas his temporal power grew most in
troubles and commotions, his spiritual did grow most in peace. 4. Because this
appearance like a lamb, is not so monstrous-like as the former (which came out
of the Sea, where great monsters do breed) but more came-like, from the earth.

The second thing he is described from, is his nature, in two similitudes, to
wit, of his horns and his speech: and this partial describing of him but in
few parts, and not in more, as the first beast was, shows that in all other
things he agrees and is the same with the former, as is particularly said of
his power, verse. 12. Generally, this resemblance holds him forth to have a
meek pretext and appearance, as hurtful to none by his power, more than a lamb
can be with his horns, but really to speak and to be far otherwise in deed, as
Christ speaks of false prophets in general, Matthew. 7. They come to you in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves; so to the chief false
prophet this does exceedingly well quadrate. More particularly, looking on this
similitude of the Lamb here to relate to Christ as certainly when he is said to
speak like a Dragon, it has respect to the Dragon formerly mentioned, Chap.
12. and his blasphemies (seeing otherwise Dragons do not properly speak) So
while he is said to have horns like a lamb, it holds out a pretense he makes
to Christ's power and to look very innocent-like, as his vicar on earth, having
all power to bind and loose for the good of souls, and so to do all in the
Lambs name, and to prosecute his designs by his means, to wit, miracles,
censures, excommunications, etc. This he is in show; but really come nearer to
the trial of him, he speaks as the Dragon, that is, his doctrine in general
is blasphemous and idolatrous as was the heathen Emperors. Where it is
observable he spoke not as the first beast, verse. 5. and 6. of this Chapter,
but as the Dragon, Chap. 12. there being an identity in these two beasts; and
he is likened to the Dragon, because none interveened; the first beast spoke
like him also. 2. His decrees were to the same purpose, commanding the
worshipping of Images, murdering of Saints, suppressing of Truths, etc. 3. His
manner is not meek like a lamb, but terrible with threatenings, in case all be
not obeyed that he commands. In a word, he appears one thing, and is indeed
fully another.

LECTURE IIII.
Verse. 12. And he exercises all the power of the first beast before him, and
causes the earth, and them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast,
whose deadly wound was healed.

13. And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from heaven on
the earth, in the sight of men,

14. And deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the means of those miracles
which he had power to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell
on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast which had the wound
by a sword, and did live.

15. And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image
of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the
image of the beast, should be killed.

16. And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bound,
to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads.

17. And that no man might buy or sell save he that had the mark, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name.


WE have heard two parts of this beasts description, to wit, concerning his
rise and nature, verse. 11. In the 12. verse. there are two other, touching his
practice and design. If it be asked, what power this beast has, or exercises,
who looks so lamb-like? It says, He exercises all the power of the first
beast: In a word, the same power formerly described, as agreeing to the former
type, is exercised by this beast under pretext of his respect to Christ as his
vicar and depute; he warreth with the Saints, makes blasphemous decrees, etc.
whereby a different power certainly is not described, but the way laid down how
that beast did attain to exercise so great power, so that the Pope is inferior
to no Emperor. This says, its under the notion of Christ's vicar and pretense
of Religion: which confirms what was said, that the first type describes
Antichrists power; this, the person exercising it and his manner of doing it.
There is more difficulty of interpreting these words before him, or, in his
sight, which imports a contemporarinesse of this beast with the former, but
not that they be different. It may be undestood then, 1. to imply a respect to
this end, to wit, temporal greatness, which this beast under this type
specially aimed at. So, before him, is as much as in his favors to usher him
in, as if he were the other beasts Harbinger, as it is said of John, Mark 1. I
send my messenger before thy face, etc. And thus by this shape and appearance
he makes way for the power formerly described. This agre^th well with the
scope following, to wit, the Pope his using this Ecclesiastic cloak for
attaining this temporal end.

In a word, that that power was exercised by the Pope under this pretext or
shape, to establish the secular power expressed in the former type. 2. It is
expounded by some, before him, that is, in the seat where the beast (complexly
taken) fate, to wit, at Rome.

The fourth part of the description clears this, to wit, that which holds
forth his great end and design in exercising that power; It is to cause the
earth, and them that dwell in it, to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed. By this first beast, is not understood simply the Roman
Empire, but as under the seventh head, to wit, the papacy, after the deadly
wound, which the sixth head got by Constantin's destroying Idolatry, was healed
by Papacy.

By earth and them that dwell therein, are meaned the generality and plurality
of the Christian world, especially the carnal multitude. By worshipping, is
meaned that adoration whereof we spoke, verse. 8. and by his causing them, etc.
is, imported both his end and effectualnesse in promoving it. In a word, he
seeks and endeavors by all means to keep up the authority and corrupt way
of the old heathenish Empire in his person, that it get no less reverence in
the world than any head that went before. And this which is in general here,
he more particularly prosecuteth in the verses following. Out of which is
confirmed, 1. That these two beasts are not, upon the matter and really
different, seeing this last always seeks the firsts honor; which, if they
were different, could not agree to the Pope or Antichrist, who prefers his
own credit and authority to any other. And, 2. it shows that the scope of
this type is especially to show how the Pope came to what he was described to
be in the former. So really the Popes gaining honor and worship to himself,
was, upon the matter, a gaining respect and honor to the beast, as it had
before his time; for though the object was somewhat altered, the series and
kind was materially the same.

The particular way how the Pope rose to this temporal height under a
Religious show, is set down in three steps, or a threefold influence he has,
1. on the world, to cause them make an Image, 2. on the Image, to make it be
respected. 3. on all men, by making them receive his mark. And the means how he
attained all these are set down, 1. By miracles and signs; he comes in on
folks estimation and deceives them, as if he were something, verse. 13. and 14.
2. He proposes the making of an Image to the former beast, that is, to clatch
up and set on foot again a Roman power somewhat like the former before the head
was wounded, though not the same, verse. 14. which by miracles he effects. 3.
He gives power to and animateth that beasts Image to do for it self and to
gain worship, ( verse. 15.) by its killng such as do it not. 4. By his engaging
all to worship that beast, and taking them in a special manner engaged to him
under highest certifications of not buying or selling or keeping common
commerce with them, verse. 16, 17. And he brings this to pass.

The miracles which are the first mean, are, 1. set down generally. 2.
instanced particularly. 3. the influence of them on the world to deceive them
(which is the shot of all) is set down. Generally, miracles are divided in true
and false, 1. True, are such as exceed natural or second causes, which were
proofs of our Lords Deity, and sometimes by the power of God are mediately
exercised by men. 2. False miracles, are not only such things as are mere
juglings (such as possibly were by the Magicians in Egypt) but such as though
they have some wonderment in them to men who know not the causes which produce
these effects, yet are really brought about by second means; such are spoken of
by Christ, Matthew. 25. and such the Apostle faith shall make Antichrist famous,
He shall come in the power and after the working of Satan, with signs, and
lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.^. Of this last sort are the Popes miracles; and it
suiteth well with Antichrist to be stored with miracles of this nature, such as
the papacy abounds with and glories in: and therefore none needs to
stumble to hear them mentioned.

The particular pitched on, is, He makes fire come down from Heaven. It is not
needful to stick to the letter here, the scope is clear, it is to show he
shall do great signs for confirming his doctrine and power, even as Elias did,
who twice made fire come down from heaven, 1 King. 18.38. 2 King. 1.10. So, as
it were, he shall not be behind him. That miracle of fire coming down, is
instanced, to show they shall be great. Beside, history makes it clear, that
often fiery visions have been made use of by the Popes for gaining their point,
as when Stephanus is going to seek help from Pipinus against Astu^phus King of
the Lombards, Anno 751. fiery balls are seen reeling and falling in amongst
them, which he interpretteth as holding forth their ruin; and Anno, 776. two
fiery target appear against the Saxons, when they are to fight against Charles
the great at Herburgh. Z^charias the Pope, in his march against Ravenna, has
igneas acies going before him, Cent. 9.301, etc. Or, it may be applied to the
fiery threatenings and curses by which they thundered and terrified men, and a
counterfeit assuming of Christ's Power and Authority, as the two witnesses were
really furnished therewith, Chap. 11.

The scope and effect, is, he deceives the world by these miracles: in a word,
he deludeth them to think him indeed more than ordinary: which, (2 Thessalonians. 2.)
is called to believe lies; and by these he confirms his doctrines and
mandats, and makes them pass is uncontroverted: and indeed all the Popish
miracles tend to confirm invocation of Saints or Angels, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, or some such thing, as witnesses Baronius his frequent mentioning
of miracles, for this end, to confute Heretics, etc. and further in the
Centuries, cap. de miraculis, etc. This agrees well to Antichrist in the
doctrine, and to the Pope in the fact: and under miracles and signs would be
understood all these stupendous things spoken of amongst the Papists, either
as done by the Pope himself, or by some of his vassals under him, yet so as the
authorizing of such things depends only on him.

We come to that wherein he deludeth, or deceives, the world, which he by his
miracles aims at; its saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they
should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did
live. Concerning this image, take these advertisements, 1. That it is no dead
Image, but an Empire, that can speak and can cause such as would not worship
it, be killed. 2. It is no different power from the two beasts formerly
described, but the same under a distinct consideration of its rising, or of its
appearing. This Image is the Pope under a civil notion, in which respect, he is
the Image of the former Empire and the effect of his lamb-like appearance: in
which respect, he is the efficient of this effect; for, this Image of the beast
gets the common worship of all the world with the former in all repetitions
afterward, Chap. 15.2. and 16.2. and Chap. 14.9. it is always one; the character
of the beast and his Image, the victory over the beast and his Image, are one;
the judgment on the worshippers of both is the same, which can be true of no
other but the Antichrist. 3. The reason why it is called here the Image, is to
hold forth the way and steps how the Pope came to an height in temporal things
by some resemblance to the old Empire. It is not every way the same with the
former under this head, yet very like. Therefore, in some respect, it is its
Image rather than it self; and that though both in its power and in its pretext
he says one thing, as if he were setting up Peter's throne, yet really he is
doing another, to wit, making an Image to the old Heathenish superstitious way
of worship that was under the former heads. Therefore it is said, he deceived
the world, that is, that he made them never acquaint with his design or
intention of his work, which was to erect former Idolatry in worship and
tyranny in his own person, but as if he minded the honor of Christ, Peter,
Saints, etc. and the furtherance of Religion: he brought the world to be
isntrumental in bringing about this design, which (when it was accomplished)
is the Image of the Heathenish Empire, for extent of dominion, manner of
worship, cruelty against the Saints, etc. And therefore when he is brought in (
v. 14.) saying, that they should make an image to the beast, this is to be
understood as the language of the design in it self, and not of his expression,
as is frequent in Scripture. In a word, by Image is understood the papacies
temporal power, which is indeed imperiall-like, and therefore so expressed by
the former type. So then, in this 14. verse. there is, 1. the design to make an
Image to the beast which was wounded, This is called an Image, because it was
in a great part like it, therefore represented as one Monarchy with it; yet not
every way the same, therefore set out by another type also, as is said. 2. His
manner of proceeding in this design, is, 1. in engageing the men of the world;
for, he could not without them effectuate it. 2. The way he engages them, it
is saying, or persuading; which is not to be meaned of express saying so, but
his miracles had such a language with them as to incline and persuade the
deluded world to be well content to further such a thing.

3. The success is hinted at in the last words, and it did live, so it will
read, and revixit, or vixit: not as if he were describing a present living
pattern according to which that Image was to be drawn, but either he speaks of
the beast as it lived before it received the wound, which did then live; or, as
it may be read, it was wounded, and it did live, to wit, after his pains taken
on the world to heal it, which is enlarged in the following verse, so that this
is set down here by way of anticipation as is usual. That this wound is said
to be by a sword, shows it is not a wound by a schism, but by violence as was
that in the sixth seal, Chap. 6.

He proceeds to show the third step how this Image was made to live, verse.
15. It is by this two horned beast the Antichrist, he has power to work a
threefold effect on this Image, that is, by the devils assisting him, (God in
secret justice permitting the world to be deluded) he is able to bring this
design about, and that little rude draught of the Image, which at first was but
dead and as it were in shape, he brought so on, till he at last made it look
like that beast which went before it.

The first effect he works on the Image, he makes it live: there was matter
for a time in the Roman Church sufficient to heal the wound which the former
head had gotten, but it wanted the form, which in time the Pope did give it by
his taking to him supreme power in Civil and Ecclesiastic things and imitating
heathenish superstitions in worship, so that which seemed to be dead before,
now stands up and appears. 2. He gives it power to speak, that is, he
furnishes pretexts to it for taking on and venting this power in its decrees,
threatenings, curses, etc. The third effect or part of the power committed to
him, which constituteth this Image, is, power to cause (for the Image gets
this power) that as many as will not worship it shall be killed: which
implies, 1. That this Image is worshipped and allowed to be so universally as
the beast was. 2. That this beast, or Image, will have worship under pain of
death, that is, where the supremacy of this Pope is denied, there is nothing
can keep from burning: It shall be capital, as heretical, and treasonable. 3.
This Image causes that they shall be killed, that is, by stirring up the
powers of the world, who are devoted to it, to suffer none to live under them
who did not acknowledge him. 4. It is said, this two horned beast gives that
power to the Image, because it is under the pretext of being vicars to Christ
that they take these things on them; and it is that pretext which gives them
so much weight amongst men in the world as to be so worshipped. They may thank
their counterfeiting Peter's succession for that. 5. He kills not, but
causes that they should be killed: this is their way, to deliver to civil
Magistrates as executers them whom they desire to be destroyed.

The last step of exercising his power, is, verse. 16, and 17. in his engaging
and marking all for himself as his proper vassals and slaves by three marks.
All which tend to show a special relation between him and them, and a peculiar
dependence of them on him. 1. There is a mark, such as men put on their beasts,
or merchants on their goods to make them known to be theirs. This mark is
specially urged by him and threatened with wrath from God, Chap. 14.9, 10. 2.
His name, or, the name of the beast which is broader: the meaning is, others
are like children who partake of their fathers name, or as the wife that
partaketh of the husbands name; so they partake of this beasts name. He is the
Pope and they Papists, glorying in that as his native brood, thinking more to
be called a Catholic Roman, or Papist, than a Christian or something like
this. 3. The number of his name, seems to be yet larger, as ye would say the
minimum quod sic: without which none can pass as his, so that if they have not
the mark, they must have the name, or, at least, the number of it: whereof more
hereafter. This effect is extended and particularized in two respects, 1. None
of any sort escapes, small or great, etc. 2. The part marked, is the right
hand and forehead, holding forth an obvious manner of avowing him and an active
engagement for him; It is said, Soldiers did wear marks on their right hands,
and servants in their foreheads, but Popes hold men engaged under both these
relations to them: (This, Mede upon the place, clears) by which characters we
are not to understand visible marks imprinted; but according to the scope, that
as our Lord has his seal on His, Chap. 7. so this beast, who imitateth Him,
has something peculiar as from himself which Christ instituted not, which he
will have on these who are his: and let it be observed, that both the beasts
and the Image comes under one beast here. 3. The certification whereby he
enforces this mark or subjection on men, it is by taking from them the common
privileges of conversing with others under these words, to buy or sell, that
looks either to Ecclesiastic or Civil communion; all that will not become
his, shall be excluded from both these: and if we look how far the Papists
extend the excommunication of the Popes in debarring men from these things, and
the use they make of their excommunications to force their obedience on many
Emperors and others, they will be found clearly applicable in this particular.

In a word, this beasts drift, is, to make up an Image to the head that is
wounded, and to establish such an Idolatrous grandour and government again. And
he brings it about by exercising his power, 1. On the men of the world, to
make them pliable to it, which he does by miracles and signs, verse. 13, 14.
under pretext of some divinity. 2. On the beasts Image, by helping on that
design in three steps, giving it life and putting it to act for its own worship
when once it was formed; for, the scope (reckoning still the intention of the
work) is to show this beasts design. Now if the beast and Image were different,
he would nor, yea could not procure universal worship to both and that by one
power, and if any of them were different from himself, he would not. 3. He
exercises his power by putting his mark on all, which he attaineth by
censures, lest they be shut out from common commerce or the advantages of his
soul-merchandice and mercats, as he prevailed in the former of procuring
worship to the Image for fear of death and killing.

For the confirming of what is said, we will find these things clear in the
matter of fact from story, 1. That what Rome wanted by the Emperors turning to
be Christians, or removing of their seat from it, it recovered by the Popes.
And, 2. that that recovery began immediately after Constantin's coming to the
Empire. 3. That the Popes used the same practices of blasphemy against God,
persecution against His Saints, and followed it by the same means of deposing
Emperors, assuming temporal power, and interdicting from fellowship and
commerce with others: and although these things be particularly marked in
particular Treatises and upon particular occasions, yet it may be observed here,

1. That Rome recovered and preserved dominion and grandour only by the Popes
means, witness, 1. that passage out of Steuchus, De donatione Constantini.
Evers^ imperio, nisi Deus restituisset pontificatum, futurum erat, ut Roma
nullo tempore excitata ac restituta, inhabitabilis posthac, foedissima boum
porcorumque fistura esset habitatio: at in pontifi^atu etsi non illa veteris
imperii magnitudo, species certe non dissimilis long^ renata est, qua gentes
omnes, haud secus ab ortu and occasu, Romanum pontificem venerantur, quam omnes
nationes olim Imperatoribus obtemperabant. Et paulo post, An ^^n omnia quae
Rome quondam pr^fanaerant, sacra effecta sunt, quemadmodum omnia templa deorum
facta sunt Ecclesia sanctorum? ritus item profani, coeparunt esse ritus sacri?
Nonne Pantheon, templum omnium idolorum, effectum est templum beatae virginis?
(secundum alios omnium divarum) Nonne in Vaticano templum Apollinis, ubi
condita erant corpora Apostolorum, conversum in Ecclesiam ipsorum Apostolorum?
ut superius demonstratum est, etc. That is to say, The Empire being overturned,
if God had not restored the pontificate (or papacy) it had come to pass, that
Rome at no time being raised up and restored, afterward being unhabitable, had
become a most vile stable of Cowes and Swine: But in the pontificate (or
papacy) although not that greatness of the ancient Empire, yet surely the
appearance of it not much unlike was brought forth again, whereby all Nations
from the East to the West do adore the Roman Pontife (or Pope) no otherwise
than of old all Nations did obey the Emperors. And a little after, are not all
things which at Rome of old were profane (or common) made holy, as all the
Temples of the gods were made Churches of Saints? also their profane rites
began to be holy rites? was not the Pantheon, that Temple of all Idols, made
the Temple of the blessed Virgin (according to others of all Saints) Was not
the Temple of Apollo in the Vaticane, where were buried the bodies of the
Apostles, turned into the Church of the Apostles themselves, as was
demonstrated above, etc. These are a Popish writers expressions, defending
Constantines donation: And, in this sense, it may well be called the Image of
the head that went before. Add to this some passages cited by Bellarmine, lib.
3. de Pont. cap. 21. The first out of Leo Magnus, Sermon. 1. de natali
Apostolorum. Per sacram D. Petri sedem, Caput orbis effecta, (Roma) latius
praesides religione divina, quam dominatione terrena: quamvis enim multis aucta
victoriis, Ius imperii tui, terra marique protuleris, minus tamen est, quod
tibi bellicus labor subdidit, quam quod pax Christiana subjecit. That is, By
the holy Sea of S. Peter, (O Rome) thou being made the head of the world,
command further by divine Religion, than earthly domination: for albeit,
being augmented by many victories, thou have extended the power of the Empire
both by Sea and Land, yet it is less, that which the labor of war has
subdued to thee, than that which Christian Peace has brought in subjection.
The other passage is out of Prosper. lib. de ingratis, cap. 2.

Seeds Roma Petri, quae pastoralis honoris
Facta caput mundo, quicquid non possidet armis,
Religione tenet. That is to say, Rome the Sea of Peter, which is made to the
world the head of pastoral honor, whatever it does not possess by arms, it
holds out by Religion. Also that passage, cited by Forbesse out of lib. 2. de
vocatione gentium, cap. 16. Roma per sacerdotii principatum amplior facta est
arce religionis, quam solio potestatis. That is, Rome through the dominion of
the priesthood (or papacy) is made larger by the castle of Religion, than by
the throne of power.

From which passages, it is clear, that Rome before the papacies height was
really short (as wounded) in respect of what formerly it was, and also that
what pomp Rome now enjoys, and what dominion it has, it has by virtue of
the Popes supremacy. Let us add further some passages more, 1. Out of Socrates,
lib. 7. cap. 11. who, speaking of the violence of Celestinus, who was Bishop of
Rome, says, that he, in exercising his power (as also the Bishops of
Alexandria) had gone, Iamdudum extra fines sacerdotii in principatum
saecularem, that is, long since without the bounds of the priestly office into
the secular dominion. And if it be true what is commonly asserted by Papists
concerning the donation of Constantine, whereby he gave Rome and the parts
about it to the Popes, to be possessed by them, as the patrimony of Peter; and
that therefore purposly he left Rome to the Pope upon that account, thinking it
fit, etc. Ideo autem par esse censulmus, ut nostrum imperium imperiique
potentiam in orientem transferemus, etc. quod ubi est principale sacerdotium
and caput Christianae religionis, datum a Rege coelorum, non est aequum ut
terrenus Imperator illic potestatem habeat. That is, Therefore we judged it fit
to translate our Empire and the power of it into the East, etc. because where
the chief priesthood (or Papacy) and the head of Christian Religion is
appointed to be by the King of Heaven, it is not right that an earthly Emperor
should there have power. Which donation is more largely set down by Balsamon,
page 88. and is generally owned by them with all the other contents thereof.

Agreeable to this it is which Baronius asserteth, Anno 312. number. 80. of
Constantine's giving the imperial palace to Melchiades the Bishop of Rome, and
what is afterward recorded by him to be conferred as pieces of dignity by that
same Emperor upon them, Anno, 324. number. 79. that Constantine would not suffer
the prime Priests of the Christians to be exceeded in glory by the heathen
Priests, who were ever adversaries to Christianity. And these privileges are
reckoned by him, thus, Haec erant privilegia quibus templorum sacerdotes a
majoribus traditis fruerentur: inter eos, eminebat sacrorum Rex, qui in
conviviis super omnes excubare solebat; erat and Pontifex maximus, arbiter
humanarum atque divinarum rerum omnium, quod breviter narratum habes ex Festo.
Quanta autem potestas in Augure, qui comitia irrita reddere and abdicare etiam
consules magistratu valeret, quae paulo ante recitavimus ex Cicerone,
declarant. Vetitum iis erat ( ait Plutarchus) equo vehi, sed uti carpento pro
amplissima dignitate soliti erant. Sacerdotum peculiaris mos ( quod affirmat
Tacitus) erat, carpento capitolium ingredi; sic and videas Romanos pontifices (
quod tradit Ammianus) per urbem carrucis vehi, procedunt (inquit) vehiculis
insedentes, circumspecte vestiti: sed and magna illa dignitas esse videbatur,
quod (ut idem ait) nunquam pileum, insigne flaminum, deponebant, cum ( ut idem
testatur Plutarchus) caeteri solebant occurrentibus caput detegere. Observat
hoc ipsum in hunc diem Romanus Pontifex. Refert idem etiam dialis flaminus
immunitabere cui res sacrae and maximae concreditae sint, etc. Rursum vero
deorum sacerdotes purpuram induebant, eandemque pretiosam, nempe, bis tinctam,
ut indicat Ciceronis locus ille, etc. Mos quoque erat, quum dedicaretur summus
Sacerdot, vitta and corona aurea caput ornari. That is to say, These are the
privileges which the Priests of the Temples did enjoy as being delivered unto
them from their forefathers: amongst them was eminent the King of their holy
things, who in their banquets used to watch over them all; and the chief Priest
was Umpire of divine and humane things, as ye have briefly related out of
Festus. And how great power was in their sooth-sayer, who could render even
their common Councels of none effect, and abdicate the Consuls from their
Magistracy, these things which we did a little before recite out of Cicero, do
declare. It was forbidden to them (says Plutarch) to use a horse, but they
were accustomed to use a chariot for their greater dignity. It was the proper
custom of the Priests to enter the Capitole (as Tacitus affirms) in a
chariot; So ye will see the Roman Priests (as relates Ammianus) to be carried
through the Town in Coaches, they go (says he) sitting in Coaches being
clothed very circumspectly: and that also seemed to be a great dignity, that
they never took off their cap, or bonnet, which was the ensign of the Priests,
when as (as the same Plutarch witnesses) all other used to uncover their head
to these they met. The Pope, or Roman Priest, observes the same until this
day. The same Author reports also this immunity of Jupiters Priest, that he
might not give an oath, because it was not suitable, that he should not be
trusted in smaller things, to whom the holy things and the greatest were
concredited, etc. But again, the Priests of the gods were clothed with purple,
and that very precious, to wit, twice dyed, as that place of Cicero shows,
etc. Also that was the custom, when the high Priest was dedicated, to have his
head adorned with a riband or lace, and a crown or garland of gold, etc.

In which words we have the derivation of much of the Roman or pontifical
pomp, to wit, the imitation of the heathenish high Priest: in which respect,
this same Author Baronius disputes much of their honor, Anno 312. number. 85.
and 98. as also gives that for the reason why the Christian Emperors did
still retain the title of Pontifex Maximus until the reign of the Emperor
Gratian: lest, says he, the people should have been stirred up against them,
if publicly so soon they had disowned their ancient Religion, which by that
title was still after a sort preserved in the Emperors. By which reason the
Author grants a great suitableness in that title to the old heathenish
Religion; and that therefore seeing Popery (by his confession) has both the
name and the thing, in a great part, from the heathenish idolatrous Priests, as
a copy casten in imitation of them, There must be here a great resemblance to
the former wounded head indeed. And if that be true which Bellar. asserteth, (
Lib. 1. de Conciliis and Ecclesia, cap. 19) as the reason why the Bishops of
Rome never kept personally the Councels while they were in the East. 1. That
it became not him who was the head to follow the Councels: And, 2. that he
eschewed to be present where the Emperor was, lest he should have seemed to
cede in place to him. This will show a very timely springing up of this
supremacy. And although some doubt may be made of some of these particulars in
matter of fact, and what was true of them, was not without a testimony against
them; yet their owning of and pleading for these things, do sufciently clear
the succession and resemblance of Popery to heathenish Idolatry, beside what is
elsewhere said of its blasphemy. Again, it is clear, if we will consider how
many Emperors and Kings have been trod upon by this Pope, and their Kingdoms
disposed of to others, not only neighboring Nations, but their own Subjects
loosed from all tie and obligation to them, and all commerce even of buying and
selling to be interdicted with these who acknowledge not the Pope: of which,
See Decretum Martini 5. in fine Concilii Constantinensis. Prohibetur iis qui
Romanam sedem non agnoscunt domici ilia tenere, larem fovere, contractus inire,
negotiationes and mercaturas quaslibet exercere, aut humanitatis solatia cum
Christi fidelibus habere. Et in Concil^o Laterano, sub Innocentio terti^. Si
dominus temporalis terram suam neglexerit purgare ab haretica pravitate,
excommunicationis vinculo innodotur, and summus Pontifex vasallos ab ejus
fidelitate denunciet absolutos, and terram exponat aliis occupandam. That is to
say, It is forbidden to these who acknowledge not the Roman Sea to keep houses,
kindle fire, make contracts, exercise whatsomever Negotiations or Merchandises,
or to have the comforts or refreshings of humanity with the faithful ones of
Christ. And in the Laterane Council, under Innocent the third. If a temporal
Lord neglect to purge his Country from Heretical wickedness, let him be
under the bond of Excommunication, and let the Pope declare his Subjects or
Vassals free from their fidelity, and set forth his Country or Land to be
occupied by others.

Hence it was made treason to have any commerce with the Lollards: And
according to these acts, the Pope excommunicated Henry the 8. and interdicted
all commerce with the English Nation, as it is emitted by Paulus tertius, Anno,
1538. and recorded in the History of the Council of Trent. Their bloody cruelty
against the Saints, with their success therein, is notour not only by the
writings of Historiographers, but is built on by themselves as a special
evidence of their Church, and is made the 15. Note of it by Bellar. de Notis
Ecclesiae, lib. 4. cap. 18. which being compared with the former Chapter, they
contain many great victories of old and late against the Albigenses and others,
opposers of the Pope; so as he concludes, that scarcely ever have these who
were called Heretics been Superior. Which indeed being looked upon, as during
Antichrists continuance of forty two months, it may be the fulfilling of what
is spoken, verse. 5. and 7. of this same Chapter: and what Bellar. says there
of the killing of 100,000. Waldenses at one time, and what Mede cites out of
Peronius, that the number of the slain exceeded in France 1,000,000. during
these wars, or any other story wherein they boast of the unhappy event that
followed the opposers of the Pope of Rome, and so cite many Emperors, both of
the East and West, overrun by him. It will tend to make up the proof of these
assertions, 1. That the Bishops of Rome assumed to themselves as absolute
Soveraignity over Kings and Kingdoms, as ever the former Emperors did over
Provinces. 2. That they wanted not witnesses against their usurpation, but that
in Gods secret Justice they had power given them for so many hundredth years
together to prevail over them, and with a high hand to massacre and undo them.
And, 3. That in every thing they have fulfilled in them the characters pointed
out in this beast.

Neither is it unobservable that Bellarmine attributes that greatness of the
Popes Dominion to the time preceding the Reformation, and so falls within
his forty two Months reign: for (says he) lib. 3. de Pontif. cap. 21. Nam ab
eo tempore, quo per vos Papa Antichristus esse coepit, non modo non crevit eius
Imperium, sed semper magis ac magis decrevit. Leonis Magni tempore, id est,
amnis centum quinquaginta antequam Antichristus vostra sementia nasceretur,
Papa Romanus pluribus gentibus praesidebat, quam sese Romani Imperii fines
extenderent, etc. Paulo post, Nostris vero temporibus, tam prospere illi omnia
successerunt, ut magnam Germania partem a^iserit, Suetiam, Gothiam, Norvegiam,
Daniam universam, bonam Anglia, Galliae, Helvetiae, Polonia, Bohemia ac
Pamoniae partem. Itaque si prospere ager^, nota est Antichristi; non Papa qui
tot Provinciis exutus est, sed Lutherus Antichristus merito dici potest. That
is to say, For from that time, when, as you will have it, the Pope began to be
Antichrist, not only his Empire did not grow, but always more and more it
decreased. In the time of Leo the Great, that is, one hundredth and fifty years
before Antichrist was brought forth, according to your opinion, the Pope of
Rome was over more Nations, than the bounds of the Roman Empire extended it self
unto. And a little after, But in our times all things succeed so prosperously
to him, that he lost a great part of Germany, Swethland, Gothland, Norway,
whole Denmark, a good part of England, Switzerland, Boheme, etc. Therefore if
prosperity be a note of Antichrist; not the Pope who is spoiled of so many
Provinces, but Luther deservedly may be called Antichrist. Which words, by
their own confession, bear out a great change upon their Popish Kingdom since
the beginning of the Reformation, and a remarkable decay thereof since the
expiring of the forty two months before frequently mentioned.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 18. Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding count the number
of the beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred
threescore and six.


HAving given more particular marks of Antichrist, he now bids them, as it
were, put them together and reckon. The sum of the verse is, in these four, 1.
There is an advertisement to put them to stand and pause before they pass
these descriptions; Here is wisdom, etc. 2. An exhortation to reckon, that it
may be known what that number is which the beast puts on his followers; Let
him that has, etc. 3. A motive, it may be understood and found out; for it is
the number, etc. a help to find it out by mentioning a particular number 666.
to show it is not every Heretic, but a chief one, who will have many things
compacted and bound up together, that is, Antichrist; or, it is not an
innumerable number, but may be understood and counted as clearly as 666. may.
So it is a confirmation of the former reason, or an instance for proof of it:
for, some number was meet to be named, seeing he had called it attainable, yet
not this very number it self, for then there needed no reckoning, and therefore
the wisdom required it to be employed in searching and applying the characters
past, and not the number following: and this looks liker the scope of that,
Here is wisdom, putting, the Reader to a pause, and to resume what is said
now, before he pass from the description of the beast to the condition of the
Church, which follows, Chap. 14. as, here is the patience of the Saints, etc.
relates to the words and matter set down immediately before. This is the sum
and scope.

This verse then is set down by the holy Ghost as an exercise for spiritual
wisdom to essay it self in. We cannot therefore pass it, though it has
tortured many in all ages to find it out: Before we come to reckon, we shall
permit, 1. a short exposition of the words. 2. Some general considerations.

1. The pause or advertisement, Here is wisdom, does imply a difficulty in the
matter, needing spiritual wisdom for finding it out, yet so as in it, wisdom
should have both an occasion and warrant for its exercise, and it is an
invitation to try, as in these parallel places, verse. 9. of this chap. verse.
13. chap. 14. and verse. 9. chap. 17.

Only this is to be adverted to, that when he says, Here is wisdom, the scope
is not only to relate to what follows, but also to cast an eye back on what
immediately preceeded, as containing the exercise of spiritual wisdom as well
as in what follows, and some way consists in knitting what preceedeth with
what follows, as the former cited places clear.

2. The exhortation, is, Let him that has understanding count the number of
the beast: Where we consider, 1. What is to be counted. 2. What it is to count
or number. 3. Who is this invited to it. By the beast here, no question, is
understood the beast formerly mentioned through the Chapter, and by the number
of the beast, that same which was formerly expressed by the number of his name:
called there the number of his name, because it is something like himself in
its nature. And this beast, as all the former, verse. 1. having a name of
blasphemy, the number of that name must relate to a number of such peculiar
blasphemies as differenceth this beast from all other Heretics, such
blasphemies as constituteth him Antichrist; and so the number of them must be
such a proportion as constituteth the receivers thereof members of that Kingdom
and Antichristian. It is here changed and called the number of the beast,
though it signify the same thing; partly, to show the coincidency of this name
with the beast, that it is proper and peculiar to him; and partly, because this
number is invented by him and imposed on them, as the character is called his
also. And therefore in the reckoning of this number, we are led rather to
search in the nature of the beast himself than to a more particular name,
because the thing to be reckoned, is here not called the number of his name,
but the number of the beast, because by describing his nature, it does
consequently point him out as by name.

To count here, is not then by Arithmetic to number out of a name, and to cast
up a sum by so many figures, but doctrinally and judiciously to weigh the
matter of that heresy or the nature of that beast: so the Lord is said to have
numbered Belshazzar, Dan. 5. and to have found him light. Because by this way
of putting particulars together, and considering them, when put together, the
judicious searchers will find him exactly out, whether he be agreeable or
disagreeable to the rule or character given, as Arithmeticians will do by their
reckonings. Of this sort of reckoning there are diverse examples in Scripture,
but of reckoning from the letters or figures of a name there is none. The first
implies a particular exact search, as if every thing in him were considered by
it self particularly, and put together again in whole, as Arithmeticians do in
their countings. This is confirmed by considering the qualification of him who
is invited to number, Let him that has understanding, that is, not
understanding in reckoning and Arithmetic, but in the discerning of the
spiritual truths of God, Dan. 12. and Micah 6.9. especially of the characters
of Antichrist formerly given, and of prudence to apply them where he shall
discern them to be. This says not that none other should count, the duty is
common, but it says few will take it to them and find it out, and that no
other will come speed but they that take the same balance of the Sanctuary and
spiritual wisdom to discern with; yet it is put to men's doors to essay this,
but with much deniednesse and humility.

3. The reason or motive added to stir up men to essay this search or
reckoning, is, for it is the number of a man. By the number of a man we cannot
understand such a number as is made up out of the numerall letters of a name;
we have no Scripture warranding that: beside, that would be little
encouragement to undertake this numbering, or little exercise for spiritual
wisdom: but, by the number of a man, we understand such a number as men do use,
or is made use of by them, and is attainable to be known by them, Isa. 8.1. the
writing pen of a man, that is, such as men use, and as men may understand; So,
Ezekiel. 24.17. the bread of a man, is bread made use of by them, and whereon they
usually live: and ( Chap. 21. of this Book) there is the measure of a man, that
is, such as men use to measure with: in this sense the number of a man, is that
which men use, and is obvious, if they have understanding to search it out: and
certainly there is great odds to say the number of a man indefinitly, and the
number of a man's name particularly. The first makes it common to all
spiritual men who may conceive it, as the exhortation implies; This
astricteth it to one particular man, as only agreeing to him. Thus the words
may be rendered, It is the number of man; for there is no article in the
original.

Or, by the number of a man, may be understood a number not having God but a
man for its Author, and not being approven of God but invented of man, what
ever there be pretended: thus there are in Scripture such phrases, the wisdom
of a man, the law of a man, the will of a man, in opposition to the Wisdom,
Will and Law of God, etc. Thus the reason runs, let spiritual wise men
consider her and reckon well, for it will be found that this beasts number or
doctrine is not of God, but of man, whatever be pretended, even as that statue
( Dan. 3.) might be called the Image of a man or of the King; not because it
represented him, but because it was instituted by him. Neither of these will be
disagreeable to the scope and truth.

4. The particular instance added, is, 666. We take this to signify some
indefinit number, that is, 1. great: and so the errors and blaspemies of
Antichrist, that he presses on his followers, are not of some few points, but
of very many. 2. That they are subtly compacted together, and have a
dependence on each other, as that number 666. is. 3. That although they be
compact and subtly interwoven, yet they may be searched out. It is not
impossible also that there might be some proverbial speech in that number,
seting out a great number: sure it is ordinary in writers to say six hundredth
more, when their meaning is many more: and hence some have entitled their books
De sexcentis erroribus pontificiis. However this number cannot be the
particular number which is to be understood as the result of the reckoning; for
then there needed no more counting, but it is a general instance for confirming
the former reason; it is such a number as 666. is, i. e. attainable by men's
industry: for, this number 666. is not to be gathered out of one word, but all
concerning Antichrist is to be put together, which in its sum and result will
amount to this great sum.

Secondly, The general considerations are, 1. The scope of this, is, by the
reckoning of the number to come to the knowledge of the person, power, state or
beast understood. Therefore the phrase is altered in this verse from the
former: there, it was the number of his name; here, it is the number of the
beast, because this being ^ightly counted and summed, it will be as easy to
know who this beast is, as if we had his name in particular: it must be
something then that differenceth him from others.

2. Yet the whole stresse of finding him out lies not on this name, but on his
name subjoyned to all the former characters, yea as a sum it must be drawn out
of them as a result from them put together.

3. It would seem, that as the mark, or character and name, does not point
literally at one particular mark or name; so neither does the number to a
literal way of numbering, or any definit certain number: for this name is in
the whores forehead, Chap. 17.5. which, as in the former verse, cannot properly
be understood: hence these phrases, number of his name, verse. 17. number of the
beast, verse. 18. the mark of his name, Chap. 14.11. a victory over the beast,
and the number of his name, Chap. 15.2. which are put indifferently, do import
such a name as does not so much consist in letters, as things and doctrines.

4. We will see these phrases put indifferently for one another, as the number
of the beast and the number of his name. 2. The mark of the beast, verse. 17.
and the mark of his name, Chap. 14. verse. 11. whereby apparently is holden
forth, that as the beast and his name are of one nature, so also are the mark
and number of the beast and of his name: and therefore what we find the one to
be, the other must be of that nature, although there may be different degrees;
and seeing the mark is something indigitating the interest of the beast in such
a person who has it, the number must be so also: for we conceive the number of
his name, or mark of his name, is all one upon the matter, but is called the
number of his name to show the numerousnesse of his errors; The mark of it
again, to show the nature of them, which is to make some impression on them
like him, as a seal leaves its likeness in the wax.

5. Whether this number does point at the beast, to wit, the Roman Empire as
taken complexly, or as considered under this seventh head by the former types,
it points at one thing, and demonstrateth the same power as is sure; yet
comparing it with the former verse, and the scope which is to describe
Antichrist, it agrees more properly to the seventh head as such a number which
relates to him; for, the mark is his, and so must the name and its number (as
all the former descriptions do) belong to him also.

To come nearer, let us consider shortly what is the mark and name and so the
number of the beast: It is certainly something not literally to be understood,
but what makes men in a special way to pass for this beasts followers, to
wit, Antichrists, and to be accounted his; for, it is he that makes them all
receive this mark.

This mark seems to be a peculiar thing agreeing especially to Clergy-orders,
and these who by oath are engaged to him, which is the most intimate sibnesse
between him and any possible (for, it is opposite to the mark and seal of our
Lord Jesus, whereby he sets apart some for himself, and having such a woe
peculiarly threatened against it, Chap. 14.9. and 11. and seeing it supposes
them to be specially employed for him as Soldiers under his colors, it may
well agree to them though not only) It may be the receiving and believing of
these trumperies, that he (that is, that beast) proposes; Not only having an
outward profession of them, but an inward affection to them, delighting in and
resting on that antichristian worship in its complex form and mould Therefore
it is called ( Chap. 14.11.) the mark of his name, that is, such a receiving of
the name as has an impression within and likeness to him.

2. By his name may be understood his doctrine and the public acknowledgement
of it, even as by the Name of God and Christ is understood the Truth of the
Gospel, because in these and by these He makes Himself known; and to make His
Name known, is to preach His Doctrine and Truth: and as the one hundred forty
and four thousand, their having His Name in their foreheads, supposes no
visible character there but a distinction in their way from others, and a
conformity to God in their walk, that who looks on them and will try their
way, it will be found they belong to God and profess His Truth; even so by the
opposition, we may gather that this name of the beast is his doctrine as
opposite unto Christ's, whereby he is to be known and discerned as by a name: by
his doctrine men may be fully persuaded of him, that it is he; and the taking
on his name, is the taking on the public profession of all these, and passing
in this beasts reckoning as one of his, and so to be esteemed of by all others.
In a word, it is a public avowing of the antichristian doctrine and partaking
of the name of blasphemy which is on him.

3. By the number of his name, must be understood something conform to that
which is the name, which being put together, makes it up as a sum drawn out of
a particular reckoning, or, as letters and syllables make up a word, thus the
number is in particular doctrines or errors, like so many distinct letters, the
name is like a word made up of these put together. This we take to be his
characteristicall tenants and doctrines laid together, that will amount to
evidence and prove so much as this, that whosoever maintain such doctrines, is
the Antichrist and beast here mentioned; But thus reckons wisdom, The Pope
and Papists maintain such doctrines. Ergo, etc. And by this means, as by so
many characters or letters, we come particularly to know him who is here
obscurely described: And therefore it is called the number of the beast as well
as of his name, because it is as well to find out the beast as to find out his
name, this name being rather to describe his nature and find out this party
than curiously to insist on a name, even as he is called ( Chap. 9. verse. 11.)
Apollyon and Abaddon, in respect of his nature and properties of tyranny
vented by him, this being the Spirits way to describe him by his nature rather
than by letters; and so is the whore, ( Chap. 17.) styled by a name, signifying
her nature, and gathered from her practice. In short, the thing we conceive
intended here, is, 1. to propose the special and peculiar doctrines and
tenants that agree to Antichrist, without which he will not acknowledge any for
his. 2. By wisdom to see where these are owned and by whom, and so to come to
apprehend that party as surely to be Antichrist, as if by name it were recorded.

If it be doubted what are the characteristicall doctrines or errors that serve
to point out Antichrist? Answ. 1. They must not only be different from the
Truth of Christ, but in a strain and series destructive to His Truth, and
inconsistent with the nature of His mediation, the end of His humiliation and
suffering, and Offices of King, Priest and Prophet. 2. They must be such as
have some pretense to Christ, and do wrong Him under a show of reverence given
to Him, and so differ from the former heads. 3. They must differ from the
tenants of other Heretics, not in grossness so much as in nature; for, all
are not the Antichrist, though they may be Antichrists. These particular
differencing characters we conceive are fully set out in the former part of the
Chapter, and he is to have not some but all (though it may be every person have
not all) yet may they in general be instanced in some few heads, as most
peculiarly agreeing to him and differencing him from others, as to consider the
errors, not as in one person, but as in a Body or monarchick Kingdom, in
respect, 1. of the complexnesse of his assumed power and Authority and his
bringing all things to a dependence on that, and drawing in all under that
head: not as an Haerosiarcha, (as other Heretics do make followers) but by
pleading for a settled power and continuance of it, and for a worship due to
him for his Authority: and upon this account, this assuming of power to himself
above all that is called God, and making all to worship him, and driving that
as the main thing with no less necessity to acknowledge him Christ's general
absolute Vicar, than to acknowledge Christ Himself. This, both in this Chap.
and Chap. 9. as also, 2 Thessalonians. 2. seems to be proper to the Antichrist. I
call this a special part or number of his name, because without this, none are
admitted to be accounted his: Hence some may be gross in many of his
superstitions and idolatries (as many Greeks) yet by their schism of disowning
him 700. years since, they are not under his number. Again, many Dominicans and
others, will maintain many orthodox points of Doctrine, yet so long as the
Popes Crown is not stricken at, his acknowledgement of them will not be denied.
A second is, his changing all Religion in Doctrine and Worship to an other
mould, different from the simplicity Christ left it in, a putting it in a more
external glorious and pompous state more heathen like; that is called the
making the Image of the first beast (in part) and the Gentiles treading under
foot the holy City, Chap. 11.2. 3. His doing all this by an usurped power and
illimited Authority, multiplying traditions, ceremonies, and changing worship
at his pleasure; which sign of proud self-exalting and walking by that
principle, seems very peculiar to him, as the strain of this Chap. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. shows. From these premises it may be solidly reckoned who is
Antichrist, and to whom this name belongs, thus,

That succession of persons, or that party, power or state in the world which
succeeds the Roman heathen Emperors in their seat at Rome, having no warrant
for their Authority from God, but from the devil, who came in piece and piece
after Idolatry was crushed to restore another sort of Idolatry in the place of
it, and by whom the wound Idolatrous Rome got was healed, after whom all the
world wondered, and whom they universally worshipped, willingly giving to him
more than humane reverence, who boasts of great power beyond any other in the
world, and with liberty encroacheth upon Gods prerogatives, and wrongeth His
Saints to His dishonor, whose rise begins at the Church fleeing to the
wilderness, and continues till the witnesses be killed, growing 1260. years,
who makes War for a long time against the Saints and overcomes and
persecuteth the Godly that acknowledge him not, and he, who in doing all this,
brings it about under pretext of a title to Christ, verse. 11. deluding the
world by false miracles for gaining his point, and, by Sentences and
Excommunications, presses all the world to be in dependence on him, and so
forth, as may be gathered from the former part of the Chapter. He (I say) to
whom all these agree, he is that Antichrist: for, this is a sure reckoning, Cui
competit definitio, ei competit definitum. But spiritual wisdom will find all
excellently well to agree to the Pope in his power, rise of it, exercise of it,
continuance of it, means by which he came by it, and cloak under which he hid
himself in coming to it, and in exercising of it: and therefore he is by this
reckoning the Antichrist.

There are two other ways of reckoning beside this, more common to Divines:
The one whereof, is, from the letters of a name (which in Greek and Hebrew are
numerals) to gather a name, including this number 666. in it. Some others
reckon it to a set year after John's writing the Apocalypse, as Daniel
describes Christ's coming by so many years or weeks before He came, so here
they make John to describe the time of Antichrists coming before he came. Of
these two ways which are followed by Learned men, we shall speak a word
afterward. It is considerable how ever we reckon it, that it still trysteth in
one Person or State, to wit, the Pope: yet we think the former way we settled
on safest. 1. as best agreeing to the scope, this being subjoyned at the back
of such a particular description of Antichrist: now reckon (says he) it is not
impossible to find it out. And, 2. It is likest true spiritual discerning
wisdom to gather from Doctrines rather than from letters, Divinity is more in
these than in the other. 3. It is most safe and convincing: for, one this way
may fix on the Antichrist, and by no numerall name can he without this; and be
his name what it will, if the thing be found, it evidenceth the thief who is to
be apprehended as guilty; and the succession of this power to the sixth head of
the wounded beast, and his getting the Dragons seat does more clearly point at
the state Civil he belongs unto, than any name, such as (...) can
convincingly do: beside, (...) will agree to heathen Rome or Christian, as well
as antichristian, and so can be no differencing name: and the words may be
taken, thus, Now ye have gotten some; yea, many general characters of the
Antichrist, any that has wisdom lay them together, and see whom ye will find
it to be, as the Lord, ( Dan. 5.26.) numbered Belshazzar, and found him light;
not from the letters of his name, but from his practices. 4. This way of
reckoning agrees better with the opposition that is made to the Elect, Chap.
14. who have their fathers name in their foreheads, which is certainly some
public profession or evidence of their adhering to him, being free from the
pollutions of Antichrist. And therefore, on the contrary, this of Antichrists
number, must be some deciphering of him in reference to his Doctrine, without
which none are accounted his: especially, considering verse. 2. Chap. 15. it is
something the Elect gets a victory over. Therefore it must be some
pollutting thing, which no national name is. Also this as the mark is upon
them that worship him rather than upon himself; yea, it is upon them all (for,
they must bear the name, or, its number, verse. 17.) and it is such a thing as
by birth they have not, yet by devoting themselves to him, may be attained; and
such a thing, as the having thereof, freeth them of his censures, and gives
them liberty to his Market, as the want thereof does make them obnoxious to his
censures, as is clear, verse. 17. and it must be some such thing as constituteth
them antichristian, and so consequently in him must be such a thing as
constituteth him Antichrist; or, contrarily, the name and number in him, is
somewhat essentially holding him out to be Antichrist (as our Lords essential
attributes are comprehended under His name, and understood by it) Therefore,
that name, or number, in them, must be such as constitutes them of that essence
and body with him; for, it is derived from him to them, as the name of the
Parent is to the Child, or, of the Husband to the Wife; and by that which is
derived, they become not only to be called his, but indeed to be his: it must
therefore be such a thing as deriveth with it his pollution and corruption to
them that receive it, and which does really difference and characterize his
followers ( Chap. 15.2.) from the followers of the Lamb, and does make them
obnoxious to Gods Judgment as guilty. All which do evidence, that by this name
and number of the beast, must be understood the things, Doctrines or practices
of antichristianity, and not any numerall name personal or National.

Irenaeus (much commended for the first reckoner of this number) after he has
touched some particular names especially that of (...), which he accounts
most probable, he makes a twofold general allusion in this number 666.
without astricting it to a definit number: the first, is, by comparing the
coming of the flood under Noah, which was in the 600. year of his age, with
that Image, Dan. 3. 60. cubits high and six broad: the 600. (says he,)
points out defection at a hight, as that of the Image points out Idolatry
in the highest degree. The second way he applies it, is by applying the first
six to the defection of the first age of the world, the second to the second
age, the third to the last age; and so to him these three, put together, do
hold forth apostasy, defection and Idolatry in the greatest hight as if all
trysted together, page 248. and 249. which says the reckoning of this number
by a general allusion, is no less ancient than by a particular definit number
of a particular name.

There is one thing yet to be cleared, without which all that is said seems
to be man^k, that is, what is the rise of mentioning this particular number
666. seeing that which is said could be clear without this? Or, what use can
there be in this particular number in reference to the exposition given?

For clearing this, that it may be applied as having reference to the former
general grounds, we may therefore consider this number 666. for application, 1.
As a definit number for an indefinit, as the Lambs number of 144000. is,
whereby is holden forth a great number, yet compactly joined and united
together. Thus the meaning is, his number is 666. that is, the characters that
he puts on them that he counts his, or the Doctrines he will have them to
profess, are not some few errors, as may be in some other Heretics, nor some
steps wrong here and there, but all that he counts his (whereby he may be
known) must take such a considerable number and compact body of errors, at
least, and profess them; which errors are in a certain method all casten
together, and linked through other with an orderly like dependence one upon an
other as that number 666. is; so as one thing being granted, many others will
follow; and their fundamental grounds are like the 600. that include the 60.
and 6. under them, that is, grant once the Pope to be the last Judge of
controversies, traditions unwritten to be necessary, and the Scripture to be
imperfect, the Pope to have Supreme power, etc. and what worlds of consequences
depend on these? Neither shall we for the time curiously enquire for more
particular reasons of this number, but shall acquiesce in and content our
selves with this general scope. We know Learned men have profitably taken much
pains in comparing this number, which is made up of multiplying sixes, with
that of 144000. Chap. 14. which is made up of multiplying twelves; yet
considering that the 144000. ( Chap. 14.) is of the followers of the Lamb, and
cannot be called the number of his name, and that this here must be understood
of Antichrists impression upon each one of his Kingdom, we cannot see how they
quadrat; and considering that there is very much subtility in it, and that the
other general way is more plain, and yet as sure, we conceive it needless to
insist on it, leaving liberty to any to follow it, or any other way whereby
they may be edified.

For further confirming this general application, take these considerations,
1. That this number 666. is something which he puts on his followers, and is
rather that by which they are known, than by which he is known, except as he
puts it on them. This is clear from verse. 17. he causes all men to receive
this number as well as his mark: and therefore as we seek the mark and name
rather among his followers than on himself (even as we do the Fathers name on
the forehead of His followers) so must we do this number, as it were the least
or easiest terms on which he will bargain for one to be privileged as one of
his. 2. Consider that it is called his number, not because his own name gives
the account of it in a sum by its letters, but the beasts number is his, as
before, the beasts mark, because he sets it on; or, the Image of the beast
was his, because he made it and was the author of it, as was cleared: So it is
his number, 1. Because particularly he condescendeth upon it, and will needs
have such a number for his number, else he will not bargain, as it were, like
the Apostles word, 1 Timothy 5.9. Let none be received into the number under sixty
years, as if one would count sixty the Apostles number in this respect, because
he will have none admitted under it. 2. It is his number, as having him for its
author and no other as opposite to Gods appointment. 3. Consider that the scope
and way of reckoning here seems, first, to propose this number 666. (whatever
it be which is intended by it) and then from it to conclude and gather who is
this beast: the name is drawn from the number, and by it, as it were, by his
name we come to know him, and the number is not drawn from the name: that
supposes we must first lay down the name and then reckon from it; this holds
out a reckoning from the number, to find out the beast, as by that which may be
soonest known to take up that which is more difficult: the other way supponeth
folks, first, to know the name, and out of it to draw the number; but the scope
is to lead us to find out the name by putting such numbers together. 4. Compare
this with Rev. 17.5. and 9. there there is the name of the great whore,
MYSTERY, BABYLON, which is called her name, because her nature and the nature
of the doctrines maintained by her, were such as held her sorth to be another
Babylon; and so here the name and number of it must be something suitable to
Antichrists nature: Again, verse. 9. here is wisdom, which is a pause putting on
to consider what follows, as in dependence on what went before, Therefore
must be something made up of both; and if this were to be reckoned numerically
by a literal name, what would that which preceedeth contribute to this? or,
where were the wisdom of comparing these together? Beside, we will not find in
Scripture any such reckoning laid upon letters or figures, although it be
ordinary to reckon that a name, which describes the nature and the essential
properties of the person or party to whom they agree. Therefore upon these
grounds we adhere to the former exposition as most safe.

If any should ask, why we are bidden rather reckon his number than his mark,
or name? Answ. 1. Because his number is more universal: all that has his mark
and name have his number, but all that have his number have not his mark and
name; and because by searching this, we come to know his name, this is the
right order of searching; yet if any think meeter to reckon from a name,
suppose (...) in Greek, or (...), which almost since John's days has been
followed, as appears by Irenaeus, who was hea^^^ of Polycarp, disciple of
John, vid. lib. 5. adversus haeres. Cap. 30. page 250. edit. Eras. Sed and
(...) nomen, habet 666. numerum; and valde verisimile est, quoniam novissimum
regnum hoc habet vocabulum, Latini enim sunt qui nunc regnant, sed non in hoc
nos gloriabimur, that is, The name Lateinos, has the number of six hundredth
sixty six, and it is very like, for the last Kingdom has that name, for they
are Latins who now reign, but we shall not glory in this. Yet, the wisdom of
God has ordered so, that the sum or result of both reckonings turn to one, and
points at the same Antichrist hinted before; for, both the forenamed words
completely exhibit that number 666. and point out the same party where the
doctrines rested before. Neither will this destroy, but confirm our former
exposition; for, this name is brought but as an accumulative argument and
evidence of the Antichrist, Thus, he that has all the characters of
Antichrists doctrine, and has a name, which in the numerall letters make up
666. he is Antichrist; But to the Pope, both these do agree: Only, as is
formerly hinted, there is this odds, The name will not prove Antichrist without
the other marks (for, it may agree to many) and the other marks will prove him
without the name, for they can agree to no other, and are proper to him quarto
modo.

Besides the former conclusion that this reckoning yields, to wit, that by
this beast is clearly pointed out the Pope, for out of this Chapter may be
reckoned a proposition, that who ever stands marked with these properties, is
the Antichrist; But the story and knowledge of the papacy, yields the
assumption, that it is the Pope to whom all these will agree, Ergo, etc.
Besides this, I say, these other conclusions may be drawn, 1. That the conceit
of a Danitish Antichrist invented by Papists to vindicate their Pope, is
foolish and vain. 2. That Mahomet is not the beast intended here. 3. That
Antichrist is no open professed enemy, but a false counterfeit pretended
friend. 4. That he is already come; and so must be the Pope.

1. To show the vanity of that fond Antichrist, which they say shall be a Jew,
one single person of the Tribe of Dan, from these two Scriptures, Genesis 49. v.
17. and Ier. 8. v. 16. exceedingly abused, which yet Bellar. dare not lay
weight on; and that he shall come three years and an half before the end of the
world, subdue all the world, making himself a Monarch of it, sit in Jerusalem,
be acknowledged by the Jews as their Messiah, build that Temple, do something
miraculous, giving life as to an Image, making fire come down from Heaven, etc.
and be destroyed by Christ's second coming, etc. after he has killed Enoch and
Elias, whom they call the witnesses, Chap. 11. We oppose to that conceit these
truths in this Chapter, 1. The time of Antichrists rise is immediately after
the sixth head of the Roman beast is wounded, to wit, when Heathen Emperors
are put from their throne: Ergo, it is long before the end of the world. 2. The
seat that Antichrist has to sit on, is the seat of the Dragon, to wit, that
seat where the devil by Roman Emperors sat and persecuted the Church before;
But that is not Jerusalem, but Rome. Ergo, etc. That therefore is a truth of
Chrysostoms, that he sits in the Temple of God, that is, not at Jerusalem,
but in the Church, pretending to have a prime place in it. 3. He is not one
single person, he is the seventh head of this beast; yea, he is a beast; But by
none of the former heads of the Roman Governors can be understood any single
person, but a series of Governors in one state; likewise by beasts, are
understood a series and not one single person, Dan. 7. Ergo Antichrist is no
single person. 4. His continuance is longer than forty and two noneths
literally taken: which may be thus made out, 1. If his rise to his height be so
slow and by so many degrees till he be up, and if his standing be so long as to
bring and hold all the world under (and that by a sort of willing subjection)
to fight with the Saints, and overcome them, and other such things as cannot be
done in such space; if also his decay and ruin be by a long tract of
judgments as is under the vials, Then he must be of larger standing than
forty and two months; But the former is true. Ergo, etc. 2. It is clear from
this, that it begins so soon as the Churches fleeing, which is about Ann.
300. and continues till the vials come, which comprehend the time of the six
trumpets, which certainly are more than forty and two months: for, the vials
do bring the first judgments on him. 3. If his time had been no longer than
forty and two months, it had been no great argument for Paul (2 Thessalonians. 2.) to
prove that the day of Judgment was not near, if forty and two months had
been the longest time of his reign; for, that was Paul's Argument, The man of
sin is not revealed, therefore it is not at hand, for, that could only have
proved it was not within three years and an half. 5. He is to be discovered
before the end: for, the first vial comes on them that have his mark; and (
Chap. 14.) they are threatened by public preaching with judgment before it
come.

2. For Mahomet, this clears him also not to be that (...), 1. This
Antichrist has horns like the lamb, sits in the Temple of God, looks like
Christ; but so is not Mahomet, who was never a Christian. 2. This Antichrist
sits at Rome, and by a new sort of Idolatry heals the wound the sixth head
had gotten, i.e. by worshipping Idols, Images, etc. But Mahomet abhors that,
and pretends to worship one God only. 3. This Antichrist does great signs and
wonders; But Mahomet claims to none and pretends no signs, but to cover
that, says, that Christ was sent with signs, and he with a sword. 4. This
Antichrist carries on and drives all his designs under a resemblance of
making use of Christ's power (as having horns like the lamb) and by a pretext of
and claim unto a vicarship and deputation from him, so does not Mahomet.

3. Hence also we may conclude, that Antichrist is no open opposer or denier of
Christ to be Christ, or one that calls himself Christ, but an intruder of
himself in what is Christ's due, to His prejudice: for, 1. he has horns like
the lamb, which imports a counterfeiting of him. 2. He has miracles, which
certainly are in imitation of the Apostles, who did them in the name of Christ.
3. He deceives the world, which cannot be done by a direct denying of Christ
to be Christ, or the Messiah in word, especially if his standing be for three
years and an half only. 4. He is called the false prophet, which implies him
not to have counterfeited himself to be Christ, but to have commission from
Him, which he has not. Beside, if Antichrists doctrine and profession were so
direct and gross, there needed not so many marks to know him, nor wisdom to
search him out, it could not but be palpable to all, who were the Antichrist.
Again, many in all ages opposed Christ's Person and Natures, and were indeed
Antichrists in a general notion, as Iobn says in his Epistles; yet were not
the Antichrist; yea, some have called themselves Christ, yet were not the
Antichrist. It can be therefore no differencing mark which agrees to more.
Beside, his apostasy being a mystery, and then working, it is not like to be
so palpable.

4. We conclude, that Antichrist is come and not to come, seeing the sixth head
is wounded, the woman has fled and her children taken up to Heaven: which was
after her freedom from Heathen persecution. Beside, either the Church has been
this long time, put under the Dragon, or flood, or this Antichrist; but not
under the former two. Therefore this time past has been antichristian, seeing
there is no intervall between these conditions of the Church. Again, if all
these characters be fulfilled, Then Antichrist must be already come; But the
former is truth, as has been seen in the exposition. Ergo, etc.

5. It remains therefore, as was formerly concluded, that the Pope is the
very Antichrist, and the papacy the very antichristian Kingdom here described.
Of these conclusions more may be seen, Chap. 17.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XIIII.
Verse. 1. ANd I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their
foreheads.

2. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their
^^ps:

3. And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four
beasts, and the elders, and no man could learn that ^ong, (...) the hundred and
forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.

4. These are they which were not defiled with women: for they are virgins:
these are they which follow the Lamb whither soever he goes: these were
redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb.

5. And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before
the throne of God.


THe former Chapter described Antichrist's rise and height. This Chapter
sets forth, in a little view, his ruin and the Churches recovery from his
tyranny, which is subjoyned, partly for clearing the Churches condition during
that tyranny, which is from the beginning, to verse. 6. partly, to show her
first struglings and contests with him, whereby he is discovered, and the
opposition by word tabled to verse. 13, or 14. partly, to give a little view of
carrying on this begun contest till Antichrist be ruined, unto the end of the
Chapter, under two types of an harvest and vintage, which are to be
accomplished. So the Chapter has these three parts, The 1. setting out the
Churches estate in a defending or defensive posture, relating to her low
condition past, and clearing that posture which she was in when Antichrist was
high. The other two do point her out in a fighting posture, 1. by words, 2. by
deeds: this is more fully set out under the vials, and is insert here to
comfort Gods people against that storm of Antichrist which was then to come.

For clearing of the exposition and application of this first part, we conceive
it relates unto the Church, before Antichrists ruin be sensibly begun, or, at
least, be any way carried on: for, 1. the number here are the same with Chap.
7. 144000. which number is sealed for the time of Antichrists trial; and after
that trial is past, an innumerable number does appear, verse. 9. of that Chap.
This first part belongs then to that state of the Church, while it consists
of the sealed number, Chap. 7. verse. 9. The two last parts of this Chapter do
belong to that of Chap. 7. which follows from verse. 9. to the end. 2. This is
further clear here by what follows, verse. 6, etc. The Gospel is then after
Antichrists discovery sent abroad through the world to increase the number of
the Lambs followers; But this follows and begins the second part of the
Chapter, verse. 6. Therefore this first part must preceed that time of the
Preaching of the Gospel whereby the Church is enlarged.

2. Although some way this does represent the Church in her night and
wildernesse-condition, yet we think it specially relates to her condition
immediately before the day break, and to that which is next the morning: For,
1. she is now visible, the Professors stand on mount Sion, they have their
Fathers name now visible in their profession, which ( Chap. 7.) when they were
first sealed, was not discernable, now it kytheth. 2. The whole sealed number
is now complete, and the one hundred forty and four thousand are together, and
they have songs; yea, a new song, which imports a great part of their strait
to be over: now she appears to be what she was before, though lurking and
unseen: and this probably may relate to the appearing of the Waldenses and
Bohemians, who belonged indeed to the suffering state of the Church before
Antichrists months expired; yet immediately before the Gospels spreading and
Reformations growth, they appeared with more public professing and owning of
the truth (as it were again in their foreheads) than had been many years
before, upon which followed a further spreading and growth of the light of the
Gospel.

This Church is described three ways by Iobn, First, as taken up by his sight,
verse. 1. Secondly, by his ear or hearing, by what he heard as well as by what
he saw, verse. 2.3. Thirdly, by reason, in describing the properties and
qualifications of these he had so discovered, he more fully holds forth what
they were, verse. 4, 5.

I looked (says Iobn) and lo. This is a preface, to difference this part of
the vision from the former, and to show some considerablenesse in the things
that were represented to him; and it contains the state of the Church then,
in these four, 1. They are described by their head, I looked, and lo a Lamb
stand, etc. By this Lamb, no question, is understood Christ, though the (...)
^e not prefixed: for, the word, his Father, points this Lamb to be the Son.
Our Lord is called a Lamb, partly for His meekness in bearing so long with His
enemies, partly to distinguish Him from and oppose Him to the two horned beast,
( Chap. 13.11.) that appeared like Him. Would Iobn say, I saw after this the
true Lamb, who is indeed the Lamb, as if for a time He had not been
discernable. And He is said to be on mount Sion, to express His care of His
Church, even then when the former beast took all on him in Christ's name: yet
this Lamb had not laid it by, nor committed it to him, but retained still His
watchful oversight of His Church, though for His own good reasons He delayed
the inflicting of vengeance on her enemies: in these respects He is said to be
standing, to express both His watchfulness and tenderness, Micah 5, 4. Act.
7.34. This shows the Church was not slighted by Christ, even under
Antichrist: He is there and standing there; as sitting does express His
dominion, this does His care.

2. The state of these Believers is set down in respect of the place where they
appear, it is on mount Sion, where our Lord stands and they with Him: by this
is meaned the Church, whereof mount Zion was a type, Psalm. 48. and Psalm. 125.
for strength, beauty and the fixing of the worship of God: their thus appearing
on mount Zion, is in opposition to their being hid in the Temple, Chap. 11.1.
They are now as it were drawing out; and Christ's appearing here, is His
appearing by some visible Ordinances and Worship amongst them: In a word, says
he, my eyes was taken off the enemies of the Church to behold her, and I saw
that Christ wanted not a Church, neither was the Church destitute of His care,
but both are represented here, though for a long time both were little seen.

3. They are set out in their number, to wit, 144000. relating to that, Chap.
7. First, to show they were just so many as were sealed, and none of these were
wanting, the effect had holden good on them all; and their sealing was not for
naught. Secondly, to show that the number kept clean after a strait, and that
decerned of God for that end, will be alike. Thirdly, to show that that time is
at a close now: for, the 144000. which were brought in successively, are now
completed: in all which, Gods faithfulness does kyth.

4. They have his fathers name written in their foreheads, that is, a
profession of Gods truth, as a seal bearing out to whom they belonged, they
thinking now no shame of owning Him. In a word, I saw that number bearing out
his mark and burn-iron on them, looking otherwise than all the rest of the
world that had a different name upon them: by which they are certainly opposed
to these, mentioned, Chap. 13.17, 18. Or, more plainly, this number, in this
posture waiting on the Lamb, is certainly opposed to the number that followed
the counterfeiting beast and received his name; Christ to Antichrist, His
followers to his worshippers. The name also is opposed, whereby it appears
there is some light to be gotten in clearing the one for clearing the other.
Secondly, This state of the Church is set out by what Iobn heard: as the first,
by his looking and seeing, sets them out in their appearance and profession;
So, 2. this of hearing, sets them out in their practice. The third sets
them out as they were indeed before God real Converts, Elected, Redeemed,
Called, Justified and Sanctified.

This practice that he heard, is in general, singing and praising, partly
following the allusion used in the dramatick form of this Book by interludes of
singing, etc. partly to show the heartsomnesse and real mirth of Christ's
followers, singing and glorifying Him in the fires, Isa. 24.15. partly, to
point out the cheerful effect and blessed change that was now coming and at
hand.

This singing and practice of theirs, is more particularly set forth in these
five, 1. the place from whence, from heaven, that is, the Church, as Chap. 4.
and 5. Or, it may be to set out the joy in heaven at the Church appearing again
on mount Sion. However these 144000. learned this song and joined in it:
possibly it is both, as in Chap. 5. 2. In its manner, it is a voice like
waters, thunders and harpings. Waters make a great noise, See Rev. 1.15. Ezekiel.
1. This shows the loudness of their cry, it was now heard, Rev. 19.6.
Thunderings show a vehemence and terriblenesse in the sound, or powerfulness,
as Psalm. 29. that shows goodwill in their crying. Harpings show cheerfulness
in the fingers and harmony in what was played or sung: all three put together,
they show a sound in the Church, which had the word of God both loud, powerful
and comfortable, and that these professors were not dumb and silent nor
jarring, but now they are both seen and heard, and it is pleasant both to see
and hear them.

Thirdly, In verse. 3. they are set out by the matter of their song, It is a new
song: now looking not to Christ to come, but as come, so differing from the old
song of the Fathers, See Chap. 5. New also in respect of a new reason and
matter by a new mercy, Psalm. 40.3. and so this may be new as looking to Christ's
care of them in their (almost now) bypast strait, so different from that, Chap.
5. which for opening the seals was sung. 4. This song is before the Throne,
Elders and beasts, that is, publicly, as these represent a public Church
state, as Chap. 4. Now it is in the Congregation, or before the Throne, etc.
that is, they made good music before God, and in the approbation of His
people, though the world understood it not and thought nothing of it. So these
are looked on as contra-distinguished from the world. They had the glad tidings
of the Gospel that made them merry, but the world was incapable of that joy. 5.
This song is described by this, that none in all the world that heard it, could
take it up, or join in it, but these redeemed ones: whereby it appears to be
yet a time of ignorance, when the Gospel was kept up from the world; and also
it holds forth, that it is a special privilege to understand the Gospel, and
that naturally men are incapable of it: in a word, it is this, the Church that
I saw was in this condition, that it was singing cheerfully and merrilly:
Antichrists persecution could not mar nor take their joy from them; that was
such a sung and mirth a^ was not carnal or natural, but spiritual, of a new
nature; and therefore they sing this song alone; none could sing nor perceive
nor understand that which comforted them, or kindly blessed God for it, but
such as had some experience of it; they had it given them to learn this
mystery, which none other had: and, as prophetical, it says, that though the
Church of Christ peeped out for a considerable time in the Waldenses here and
there, and that they suffered joyfully, (which indeed they did) yet few were
capable of that joy and did join with them. One thing is to be cleared, Whether
by these singers be understood these sealed ones, or others, distinct from
them? Answ. Whether we say the one or the other, it will be one thing: for, if
these first singers be distinct, yet these 144000. learn the song, and join
both in the matter of it and manner of singing: so in the use, it will be
applicable to the Church at that time. 2. Though it be understood of these
144000. yet may these phrases of singing before the Throne of God and the
Elders be well understood, either as their doing this publicly, as is said;
or, especially, as acceptable to God, as by these in Heaven: it may be also
that the Angels and Saints triumphant are brought in here singing, with whom
the 144000. sealed ones join and agree; yet the scope and connection with what
follows, will agree as well to understand it of the militant Church; and that
Angel mentioned verse. 6. called another, may be in reference to them and other
Ministers (for so these Angels following seem to be understood) as well as to
another Angel properly. 3. They are described by their special privileges,
properties or characters, in number five. The first is general and
comprehensive of all, as the ground and sum of them all, to wit, that they are
the redeemed of the Lord. 1. They are redeemed from the earth, that is, not
only bought by the blood of Christ, and so in that bargain of Redemption
differenced from others; (which shows it is no little thing to make that
difference) but also by effectual calling differenced from the profane earthly
multitude and redeemed from their vain conversation to serve the Lord in
holiness, 1 Pet. 1.18.

The second property is, verse. 4. they are not defiled with women, for they are
virgins. By virgins here are not understood such as have kept themselves from
all conjugall fellowship: for by these Virgins are understood all the true
Church under Antichrist; and will any say there were none Redeemed amongst all
the Married of that time? Beside, it is such a Virginity as is opposite to
defilement (which Marriage is not) yea, to the defilement mentioned here.
Neither, Secondly, by defilement here, is understood bodily fornication, (for
there may be many other lusts beside) but spiritual fornication, to wit,
Idolatry and superstition, and communicating with such worship: Which is clear,
1. From the opposition between defilement with women and virginity, as if there
were no midst or another lust, which is only truth in spiritual whoredoms and
virgin-chastity in being kept to Christ. 2. That which follows, is, they
follow the Lamb: it is such a defilement then as is opposite to spiritual
adhering to Christ. 3. The scope clears it, in that he is here describing
Christ's pure worshippers; it keeps the phrases of this Book, especially these
wherein Antichrist and his worship is set down: he is called the whore, Chap.
17. and it, whoring, and committing fornication with her, See verse. 8. of this
same Chap. Again, Christ is called a husband, and faithful adhering to Him is
called chastity, 2 Cor. 11.2. Faith engages, as by a marriage-knot and vow, to
be peculiar to Christ; Idolatry and superstitious worship sins against that
Covenant, prostituting men to some other thing in His room; and that is the
reason of this allusion, frequent in the Old Testament as in the New.

3. They follow the Lamb whithersoever be goes. This shows, 1. an adhering
to Christ on any terms, and in all trials, cost what it may, they follow
faithfully. 2. A painfulnesse in following through all duties, hazards, and
possibly places, that if he go to the wilderness they will go with Him,
alluding to that, Genesis 2. (in opposition to the former whoring) that a wife or
married party shall forsake all and cleave to her husband; so did these sealed
ones, constantly and solely adhere to Christ and follow Him as their Husband.
3. It imports, upon Christ's side, that He is tied to no place or particular
Church, as Rome, Constantinople or any other, but may transfer His Ordinances
and Candlestick where He pleases (for, the Lamb's presence here spoken of, is
His presence by Ordinances and Church Communion) else where, where He thinks
good; so it imports, upon the other side, the temper and inclination of these
Virgins, that they are addicted to no place particularly, bounding Christ or
seeking Him there, so that if he be not there, they will not go else where to
seek Him (as Antichrists fornicatours, in opposition to these, may be gathered
to do, who will not go out of Rome after him) nay, but they go with Him and
follow Him, weighing His presence not by places or external privileges, but
by the evidences thereof in His Ordinances; and where He sets up these,
there, wherever it be, they seek Him and acknowledge Him present.

The fourth property is also set down, verse. 4. These were redeemed from among
men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. This redemption points
at Gods wailing them out amongst others of that time, and the end and scope of
it, to wit, to be the first fruits unto him, alluding to that custom of the
Jews paying first fruits unto the Lord: whereby they are holden forth to be, 1.
as holy and set a part for that use and end, 2. as being the forerunner and
earnest of a coming greater harvest: in both which senses, it may be here. 1.
They were holy to God, when all the world was profane; so all Believers are
called first fruits unto God, Iam. 1.18. Ier. 2.3. Thus it is the privilege He
called them unto. 2. As these now appearing go before and foretell, as it were,
the great number and harvest that were coming, and to follow unto the Lord
throughout the earth, (See cap. 7.9.) even as the first fruits were an evidence
and pledge of an approaching harvest, so were these to God and the Lamb. And
thus their redeeming from amongst men, will be here their separating by
effectual calling, as that before, ( verse. 3.) is their general redemption.
The last property, is, verse. 5. In their mouth was found no guil: for they are
without fault before the Throne of God. The scope is this, to show their
sincerity in opposition to the hypocrisy of that time, 1. There is no guile in
their mouth, i.e. no dissembling or counterfeiting, as is said of Nathaneel:
They are all Nathaneels, Job. 1.47. and like that blessed man, Psalm. 3.22. In
whom there is no guile: they are as they profess, seriously adhering to God in
Christ, whose name they bear out in their profession, and are not counterfeit
Christians, as Antichrists followers are, to whom they are opposed: and in
which respect, they are said to be without fault, i.e. the faults these were
guilty of, as was said before. 2. This sincerity is proven; or, it is hinted
wherein it consists: for, says he, They are without fault before the Throne
of God. In a word, they are justified and absolved by God, and have His
testimony, and therefore they are sincere: which expression, before the Throne
of God, imports two things, 1. Sincerity, as it is opposed to men's judging,
who cannot see so far as God. 2. It looks to the ground of their acceptance,
which is not any righteousness of their own (for upon that account none living
will be justified in his sight, Psalm. 143.) but the righteousness of Christ,
that is the ground of their absolution before God. In a word, they were indeed
sincere and through Christ's blood washen and absolved, Chap. 7. verse. 14. By
all which it appears, they are really sanctified and justified who are meaned
here, seeing no hypocrite, never so well painted, can be without fault before
God.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 6. And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

7. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of
his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea
and the fountains of waters.


IN the preceding part of the Chapter there is a little hint given of the
estate of the Church, when Antichrist was at his height, she was in a defensive
posture.

In the second part of the Chapter, (from verse. 6. and forward) the state of
the Church is described after its beginning to be active and to come out of the
secret wilderness wherein she was hid, and it has two parts, to the end of
the Chapter. In the first, the Church is set out encountering with the attempts
of Antichrist in lighter skirmishes by the word, laboring to discover his
treachery and Idolatry, and so to bring men out of his snare: and this is done
by three several Angels, to the 13. verse. every one of them more clearly
speaking to the ruin of Antichrist, and threatening judgment on him and his
followers than the former. In the second part, from verse. 13. to the end, when
advertisement by the Word does not the business, the Lord comes in by deeds,
and falls about the perfecting of what was threatened by the former three
Angels: which is set down in two similitudes, whereby he finisheth the
execution of his wrath.

These three Angels come out after the darkness of Antichrist; to spread the
everlasting Gospel, and to preach the righteousness of Christ: for, the
sending of Ministers and the increasing of the Church go together and are
trysted together. The first, in the 6. and 7. verses, has this mainly in
commission, to allure souls from Antichrists flattery to the says and
obedience of Christ. The second, in the 8. verse. comes and foretells the
destruction of spiritual Babylon, or Rome; and because he would have them
certainly believing it, he speaks of it as a thing already done. The third,
in the 9, 10, and 11. verses, comes to denounce Gods fearful judgment
against Antichrist and all that should take his mark, that if they would not be
allured by the Gospel, they might be scared by the plagues and judgments that
were to come on him from following him. This is the sum of these three Angels
preaching. If it be asked, to what time this relates? though we will not be
peremptor to determine, yet we think it looks rather to the spreading of the
Gospel about, or in the days of Luther, than to any time before.

Reason 1. Because the state of the Church, before the rise of the Gospel, is
described before to be low, and this spreading of the Gospel succeeding to that
low estate, it must look to her flourishing condition.

Reas. 2. Because the universal extent of this first Angels commission, is
such that we cannot so well apply it to any other time before that; it is to
all Tongues and Kindreds, which only was fulfilled then, and is in opposition
to the former restraint.

Reas. 3. Because after the first Angels preaching the everlasting Gospel,
there is an immediate succession of one after another, still without
interruption carrying on this ruin: we take it therefore most probably to
relate to the spreading of the Gospel after Antichrists begun ruin: for, till
then, the Church was in the wilderness, and the witnesses are few and in
sackcloth.

In the first Angels preaching, we have these four, 1. The instrument, an
Angel. 2. The posture he is in, flieing in the midst of heaven. 3. His
business or work, to preach the everlasting Gospel to them that dwell on the
earth. 4. His message or the sum of his preaching, verse. 7. fear God, etc.

For the first, That the instrument is called an Angel, it is not properly to
be taken: for, the Angels are ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for
them that are heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. ult. but they have not the
everlasting Gospel to preach. This treasure is put in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, 2 Corinthians. 4.7. and he has given to us
the ministry of reconciliation, says the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 5.18. and it is
common to all Ministers to be called Angels, as Chap. 2. and 3. and Chap. 1.
verse. 20. of this same Book; so we take the word here to hold out the Lords
making use of a Ministry after the darkness of Antichrist, to spread the
Gospel: and the Ministers are called Angels, because they are Gods messengers,
entrusted by Him with a high and heavenly employment; and it is a title that
should put Ministers in mind of their duty, to do Gods will on earth as the
Angels do it in heaven, in a spiritual and heavenly way, cheerfully, willingly
and readily; and it should put people in mind of their duty, to take this word
off Ministers hands, as from Angels. 2. Angel here, in the singular number, is
not one Minister; for, in the lowest condition, the Church was in, as Chap. 11.
she had two witnesses, and she behoved to have more now when the Gospel is
rising and to be published abroad; but we are to take the word collectively:
and it is no extraordinary thing, when the Lord would speak of more Ministers
nor one, to speak of them as one; and it implies no singularity or superiority
in one over the rest, See Chap. 1. verse. 20.

For the second, the posture he is in, It is flieing through the midst of
heaven, as is spoken of another Angel, Chap. 8.13. The Lord is now to show that
He will not keep His Church and Gospel, as it were, hid in a corner, or in the
Temple, as Chap. 11. verse. 1. nor on mount Zion, though that be more public,
but He will send out His Ministers conspicuously, as it were, in the open view
of all, to preach His Gospel to all the world. And he is called another Angel,
as contradistinguished from that number of the true Church, mentioned in the
former part of the Chapter. The Lord having a new task and a new piece of work,
He provideth Himself of new Ministers, and, it may be, some out from among
Antichrists followers, and none of these who stood on mount Sion: of such did
the Lord make use in the beginning of the Reformation, to preach and to be
isntrumental for Him, who were not of the Waldenses or Albigenses, but drawn
from the midst of Popery.

For the third, His errand or work, is, to preach the everlasting Gospel to
them that dwell on the earth, and that to every Nation, and Kindred, and
Tongue, and People: wherein we have, 1. His work. 2. The object or extent of it.

1. His work, is, the preaching of the everlasting Gospel: we need not tell you
what the Gospel is, or what the word signifies, it is that that the Angel has
to the shepherds, Luke 2.10. good tidings of great joy; and it is called the
glad tidings of salvation, because it is eminently and excellently, beyond all
comparison, the gladest news that ever were made mention of to sinners: and the
word Gospel, is drawn from an old Saxon word, that signifies Gods-spell, such
a word to man as is the best word that ever was heard of; there is none to it:
And it is called everlasting, for these reasons, 1. From the rise of it, from
everlasting in Gods eternal plot and purpose. 2. From the effect, it brings
life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1.10. and 1 Pet. 1. ult. It is said the
word of the Lord endures for ever; the effect and efficacy of it never ends.
3. It is here called the everlasting Gospel, in opposition to the Papists
calumny, who enquire, where was our Church and Gospel before such a time? and
to charge the Gospel at its reviving, with novelty, because differing from
their traditions, which for a time had obscured it, as if it had been buried:
now what is preached, is the ancient everlasting Gospel, although it be of new
revived; and the Angel is here said to have the everlasting Gospel, according
to that word, 2 Cor. 5.18. He has given, or committed, to us the word of
reconciliation; He is made a steward of it, which designeth and denotateth an
office, he has not so given it to the community or multitude, but has
committed it to such and such Angels.

2. The object or extent of it, is generally, to all that dwell on the earth,
and to every Nation, Kindred, and Tongue, and People, as if he said, the Gospel
is not now to be sent to some few, as in the days of Antichrists prevailing,
but to be manifested to all sorts of People of whatsoever Kindred, Tongue or
Nation: And it is by virtue of this commission, that so many Nations and we at
this day enjoy this Gospel.

The fourth or last thing, is his message, or sum of his preaching, more
particularly set down, saying with a loud voice, implying great boldness to be
in these Ministers, as was in our first Reformers. His meaning is, they should
not by whispering do it, but with great authority and boldness should publish
the Gospel.

The preaching it self, has three heads, and a reason is annexed to persuade
unto the first two. The first, is, Fear God. The second, is, Give Him glory:
the reason annexed, for the hour of His judgment is come. And the third and
last head, is, And worship Him that made Heaven and Earth, etc. These three
look to the three great parts of Religion, opposite to the three faults that the
followers of Antichrist are given to. The first looks to the regulating of
men in their inward frame; the second in their Faith; the third in their
external worship.

1. Fear God. This regulateth our fear as to its object, to wit, God; which
supposes now, that many things have been feared by the world more than He:
also it shows, that outward service will not do it, there must be a right
principle within; and so it is opposite to profanity and hypocrisy, fear of men
and Antichrists cursings, which should from this forth be less feared.

2. Give Him glory. The giving of God glory is diverse ways taken, according
to His diverse Attributes; but we take it here to look mainly to the giving of
Him the glory of His Grace, in resting by Faith on Christ alone, as the only
Mediator and Savior, so renouncing all others, as it is said of Abraham, Romans
4.20. he was strong in Faith, giving glory to God; and Hos. 11.7. though they
called then to the most high, none at all would exalt Him, none would give Him
the glory of His Grace by believing: for, as the rejecting of the Gospel, is a
despising of God; so the receiving of the Gospel is a giving Him glory. Reason
1. Because the glory of Grace, is especially the glory which the Gospel holds
out. 2. Because this meets especially with Antichrists dishonouring of Him,
by giving the glory due to Him to other things, Saints, Angels and men's own
works, and in not resting on His Mediation, Intercession and Satisfaction
alone; and this comes nearest the scope.

The reason persuading to these two, for the hour of his judgment is come:
which being compared with a word, Acts 17.30. The times of this ignorance God
winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent, the force of the
argument is this, beware now of giving the glory of Gods Grace in a Mediator to
other things; for though God has spared men a while in the times of ignorance
and darkness, He will not do so now when the light is broken up, but will send
sudden judgments on the despisers of the Gospel; and many Churches that have
not made use of the Gospel, find this true this day. 2. It is called the hour
of His judgment, to teach us, that as God has a set time for all things, so
has He a peculiar time for judgment; and as for all sinners, so for these
that follow Antichrists way; and also that often the hour of preaching the
Gospel, has the hour of judgment waiting on it, if it be abused.

The third head of his preaching, is, And worship Him that made heaven and
earth. This looks to their external worship, as if he said, ye have been
worshipping stocks, idols and images of gold and silver, vanities that cannot
profit you, now beware of continuing any longer in that way, but worship the
alone living and true God, who is thus described, that He made heaven and earth
the sea and fountains of waters, even as the the Apostle speaks, Acts 14.15.
We preach to you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God,
which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all things that are therein, almost
in the same words: and this clears that these exhortations are set down in
opposition to the way they look before, while they were following Antichrist.

God is thus described here, 1. That they may see the vanity of worshipping any
other than God, and that they had just reason and cause of worshipping Him. 2.
To point out the obligation that lies on men to give Him the worship and glory
due unto Him; He made the heaven and the earth, therefore He is a glorious and
powerful God. All this preaching is by way of application, and practical,
because this is the scope of preaching, to put on to holiness and practice;
and this is the right manner, when simply and plainly it is pressed on the
conscience, without the curious conceity questions and useless cases used
under Antichrist.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 8. And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, that great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication.

9. And the third Angel followed them saying with a loud voice, If any man
worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand.

10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the
presence of the Lamb:

11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. And they
have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name.


CHrist has now begun to send out His light into the world, and though by many
it gets no good welcome, yet He goes on and sends out others to denounce
and foretell more clearly the ruin of that antichristian Kingdom, that
formerly had deluded the world. By this Angel, understand, as formerly,
Ministers stirred up after the first outbreaking of the Gospel, who,
(perceiving Romes perverse opposing of the preached Gospel, and seeing what
shaking Christ by the first beginnings had wrought on his Kingdom) the more
boldly and plainly foretell the ruin of that state now to be approaching.

The preaching of this Angel contains two things, 1. The denounciation of
Babylons judgment. 2. The cause of it. In the denounciation, Consider the
object threatened, Babylon. 2. The judgment, is fallen. 3. The manner of
expression, it is in the bypast time and doubled. By Babylon here, is
certainly understood some particular state, and the head of some such great
state as was opposite to the Church: for ( Chap. 18.) there are many of her
followers, who still regrate her fall. More particularly, we conceive it to be
understood of Rome, not so much the Town as its dominion, being now headed with
Antichrist, and, as it were, the head of this Empire: for it is the same,
called MYSTERY, BABYLON, Chap. 17.5. that is, mystically Babylon, as before,
Chap. 11. spiritually Sodom and Egypt. And to Rome only agrees the description
following. 1. The great city; so is Rome set out for its sovereignty, Chap. 17.
ult. Called Babylon by analogy, 1. It was the head City over that Empire,
which of old oppressed the people of God; So is this now. 2. That Empire was
not oppressing outwardly only, but idolatrous also and entising others to it,
as ( Dan. 3, etc.) may appear. 3. As in Babylon the people of God were kept
under, yet had a being amongst the Babylonians even at, Babylon, though not of
them; so was the true Church captivated by this Church of Rome, yet had some
being under and amongst them, though wanting outward beauty.

2. The judgment denounced on this antichristian state of Rome, is, It is
fallen, whereby two things are holden out, 1. That Babylon was no more surely
destroyed, than Rome should be finally and totally. 2. That it was now begun to
fall, and that it should never after this be in such a settled condition as it
was in before, but its fall was approaching, and this Gospel by the preaching
of the Angel, had discovered Romes nakedness and made her loathsome to the
intelligent, and the coming judgment under the typs of harvest and vintage,
should perfect it.

3. The manner of expressing this, is, as if it were already past, and it is
doubled: Both which tend, 1. to show the certainty of the thing spoken. 2. the
emminency and surprising celerity of it. And, 3. the concernment of it, to make
men take the more notice of it as a great thing, alluding also to the manner of
denouncing Gods judgment on old Babylon, Isa. 21. The cause of this sore
destruction on Babylon, is figuratively set down in the words following: in
short, it is because she allured souls of all sorts from Gods pure worship to
communicate in her superstitious and idolatries, which before the Lord is as
adultery and fornication spiritually in respect of its pollution and Covenant
breaking with God.

By this comparison, or allusion to the manner of vile strumpets, who entise to
filthiness, is holden out, 1. Romes censure, who as an harlot, had broken
Faith to Christ. 2. Her guilt in entising others; yea, many to that
superstitious way with her, and prevailing. 3. The more she entise to be her
followers, it is the greatter dittey; she made all nations to drink. 4. The
nature of men and of superstitious will worship, it makes them drunk and they
sweetly drink it as a cup of wine. 5. The effect of it, for as sweet as it is,
it is Wrath, 1. Because it deserves and procures wrath on her and all who
drink with her. 2. To be given up to drink this, is an effect of wrath and a
great plague of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. That Rome in its hierarchy and spiritual
dominion under the Pope, is this Babylon, will appear more, Chap. 17. and Chap.
18. where this same saying is repeated, but differently: here by way of
prediction upon the foreseen begun ruin of it, there, to wit, Chap. 18. after
its execution by pouring the fifth vial on the beasts seat, which is Rome.

The third Angel begins his preaching, verse. 9. and it is prosecuted, verse.
10. and 11. It is a conditional threatening of all Antichrists followers, if
they shall continue to worship him, after the former two Angels have preached.
There is a notable gradation in their preaching, not as if the first ceased to
preach, when the second begins, or so forth, (for, all of them preach
together) but that, first, God makes His Gospel shine, and reveals Truth
both to great and small, learned and unlearned; that is begun by the first
Angel. 2. When that gets little hearing, but great opposition, especially
from the great ones of the Popes Kingdom who are enraged at it, then the Lord
makes light, both in the clearness and force of it, to proceed further to
discover Rome to be Babylon, and to set His Ministers more directly against
that state, to batter it down and begin its ruin, and from His Word clearly to
foretell the complete destruction of it, and that their grandour and those
grandees in their pomp shall come down. 3. Because a superstitious respect to
that Sea was deeply rooted in the hearts of the plurality of people, the third
Angel is sent out not only to warn all her followers by that prediction, but to
withdraw them from that erroneous way under all highest pains, certifying them
that Popery will bring Gods everlasting curse on them, and that it stands
them on no less than the necessity of Salvation to quite it: by which Angel,
separation from Him is pressed, as it is, Chap. 18. come out of her, when the
same threatening is mentioned; so every one of these Preachers and preachings
infers the other well, and agrees to the Lords way of making His Truth to
break up in the event. 1. Luther began to preach against some errors, as humane
traditions, and to open the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, in
opposition to Indulgences, Purgatory, etc. at first, without thinking that Rome
was Babylon, or that there was a necessity of separating from it, but the
Gospel could not long be in the world but that must be clear like the light.
Then, 2. he grew in light and boldness, and others joined with him, as
Melancthon, Iustus Jonas, etc. and they came directly to speak of Rome as of
Babylon, and of the Pope as of Antichrist, and thereupon applied these and such
like plain passages, foretelling their ruin as of the special treacherous
enemies of Jesus Christ, who had so long deluded the world and abused the
Church.

Follows upon that, the third Angels preaching, who comes in with the
necessity of abstaining from His worship and fellowship under pain of
damnation; and the more the Pope fumed and persecuted, the more they preached
and cleared that strange truth in the world, that Popery was of it self
damnable, and that though God had a Church latent amongst them in the time of
darkness, yet now he would not have it so, and this Doctrine was much urged
against the Pseudo-nicodemites, to have the sinfulness of the Popish way born
in upon souls, not only that it was not good or so good as the other, but that
it was deadly and of a slaying and mortiferous power, and therefore the Godly
could not communicate with them in it without sin. This was the Reformers third
work. See Sleid. lib. 1. and 2. Calvin. opuscul. especially, class. 3. per
totam. Luther his work ascends by these steps, 1. In his Theses, given out,
Anno 1517. against Indulgences, and thereafter in their defense against
Sylvester, Eccius, Pererius and others, he shows these things profit not to
life, but Repentance and Faith resting only on Christ's merits and the mercy of
God alone, seeing no Saints merits are perfect. Anno 1519. Caralastadius
begins a dispute against the Pope at Lypsick, whither Eccius came and
provoked Luther to dispute, by maintaining the Popes absolute supremacy; which
Luther impugned: Melancthon also was with Luther at this dispute (but after, in
an Epistle to Leo 10. he excused it some way) yet Anno, 1520. he by a Book, de
captivitate Babylonica, publicly asserted and proved Rome to be Babylon, and
the Pope Antichrist. Sleid. lib. 2. page 23. Thereafter, Anno 1521. (when
Zuinglius had begun to preach boldly, the year before, at Tigurine in Helvetia)
Luther, with the whole College of Wittenberge, burnt the Books of his
adversaries (as they had done his before) appealing from the Pope to a Council,
earnestly exhorting to abstain communion with the Church of Rome, which
thereafter he has both in his Sermons and Writings confirmed. This was more
fully afterward jointly prosecuted by Melancthon, Calvine, Martyr and Bucer.
See Calv. contra Pseudonicodemitas.

So we take the scope of this Chapter generally to set forth, 1. Antichrists
fall, and the certainty of it. 2. The means by which it should be effectuated,
to wit, preaching and action; by preaching withdrawing many from him, by
judgment overthrowing the rest: which judgments are more particularly
described by the vials. 3. By what degrees or in what order it should be
carried on by these means, 1. Preachings and threatenings go before judgments:
And, 2. in preaching, the Truth of the Gospel is first preached, and then
judgments more peremptorily denounced, ut supra, 1. against the head, then
against the followers.

Now to come more particularly to this third Angel: he comes shortly on the
back of the former with a loud voice, which intimates much deadness amongst
the people that would not awake. 2. Much zeal, boldness and freeness in him
that preached, making out this Truth plainly that he was commissionated with.
It is in general a commination, yet set down conditionally, that it may be a
warning to make men flee that sin, that they may escape that judgment: and
because the Key of Doctrine in threatenings and promises, is not absolutely to
be applied by Ministers, (the conditions whereupon it goes being indiscernable
to them) and so it differs from the use-making of the Key of Discipline,
whereby absolutely we admit to or reject from Ordinances, because the rule of
it is conversant about external scandals and profession, which are
discernable. In short, as if he would say, follow not Popery longer: for if ye
so do, ye shall not escape the heavy judgment of Gods everlasting wrath, and
it will be the greater that ye have gotten warning.

In particular, it contains a description of a Papist, or one of Antichrists
followers, which is the object of this threatening, verse. 9. 2. It describes
their judgment, verse. 10, 11.

The description has two parts, 1. They are described by worshipping
Antichrist, which points at some inward impression. 2. By reserving his mark,
which supponeth some outward expression of their respect to him. 1. He says,
If any worship the beast and his image; because none shall be missed, if it
were but one that continues. By beast and image we are not to understand two
distinct things, as we show, Chap. 13. for, here they have the same common
worship, and their worshippers are of equal extent, and their judgment is the
same; and ( verse. 11.) when it is repeated, they are both spoken of as one, his
mark and his name, and not theirs; but by beast is more especially holden forth
the Pope, as the head of that antichristian estate, and, as it were, the
Author; and by Image is holden forth the complex body of the hierarchy,
doctrine and superstitions which he has framed, called his, because he
composed it and made it; called an image, because of its likeness to the old
Roman heathenish worship and tyranny over the Church. The worshipping of these
implies (as was said, Chap. 13.) more than a civil devotednesse to that Pope
as head, especially in his doctrine and worship.

The second part of the description, of receiving his mark in the forehead and
hand, was expounded, Chap. 13. and implies not only men's acknowledging the
Pope, but their yielding and submitting to him, and giving up themselves as
Soldiers or Servants to that antichristian state, adhering to that profession,
and by public evidences owning it without, as well as cleaving to it in
affection within. It is called here the mark of his name, which was before
called the number, to show that the number is something making his followers
discernable as well as the mark.

The judgment threatened follows, verse. 10. and 11. which is to be looked on
not only as he threatened them with hell; (for, that was common to such at all
times) but from the aggravations of it, it is clear he threateneth them with
more than an ordinary torment in hell; yea, more than these that lived in
darkness before this light shined unto them. The judgment is generally set
out in two similitudes, then aggravated by some circumstances. The same shall,
etc. that is, every one or any one that sins, follower or master. The first
similitude, is, He shall drink of the wine of the Wrath of God, powered out in
the cup of his indignation, etc. This similitude, is opposed to their sin,
verse. 8. Antichrist has a sinful cup, and they will drink it, God has a cup
of wrath or wine of wrath, not for refreshing, but that it makes madd, drunken
and loathsome, Psalm. 75.8. Isa. 51. ult. Ier. 25.15, 27. And this wine of His
wrath is powered out, to show the abundance of it: not in the cup of mercy; no,
but of His indignation: and when the wine is wrath, and the cup indignation, O
what a drink will that be, especially the wrath of an omnipotent just God^ Psalm
76.7. Psalm. 90.11. every word sets out its terriblenesse.

The second similitude, is, They shall be tormented with fire and brimstone:
whether there be material fire in hell or not, we need not dispute, it is here
to express the exquisitest and greatest torment that can be imagined from what
is used amongst men, possibly alluding to the destruction of Sodom, which God
destroyed by fire. Certainly that torment must hold out a great torment, yet
there are four aggravations added, 1. This wrath is unmixed, verse. 10. pure
wrath, O how terrible! when little sparks of wrath here mixed with many mercies
are so sore, what will it be when there will not be a drop of cold water gotten
to quench burning wrath? Luke 16.

The second aggravation, is, verse. 10. in the end, that is, before the Lamb and
His Angels: which implies, 1. They shall be tormented before Christ (as if he
took delight in it) whom now they despise, He will be master then, and shall
see them and not help them, but their torment shall be, as it were, a
satisfaction to Him and a trophee of His victory. See Luke 19.27. The Mediators
vengeance is sore, Isa. 61.2. 2. That there will be in them by this, a sense
both of their loss and of the sin that has procured it, to be a gnawing worm
within them; they shall not get leave to forget any of these, this presence
before Him being more in respect of their conscience and sense than of
nearness of place, which is not understood here.

The third aggravation is from the eternity of their torment, it has no end,
but that fire burns always: for, their eternal torment is but satispassio to
them, and never satisfactio to God: for, the smoke thereof ascends for ever
and ever, verse. 11. It was Spira's word, he would ear little for hell, if it
were for no longer than 20000. years, but when 20000. times 20000. years are
expired, it is but beginning.

4. It is aggreged from its want of intermissions: pains here are sometimes
less and more; but there there is no rest night nor day; it is there always at
the height of torment as the effect of Gods wrath; In which ye have a lively
description of hell. It must needs be a fearful thing to fall in the hands of
the living God.

If any ask, how that rigide executing of justice upon the damned in hell may
stand with the mercies of God, which are said to be over all His works, in a
general sense at least? Answ. That may be said, notwithstanding of this, in
these two respects, 1. Because that wrath which is inflicted upon the damned,
is not adequate to the Power of God: for, He is able to punish them yet more
terribly, even when their torment is at the highest. 2. Because even then they
deserve more, and it would be no imputation to Justice if they were more
intently plagued; for although their sins, as they are acts in them, be finit,
yet being considered with respect to the object God, against whom they are
committed, they are infinite ills; and therefore deserve infinite punishments,
and so in severity of Justice might be reached beyond what they are: this
expression, in its scope, here does hold forth hell to be insufferable to all,
but that there is a further and greater measure of wrath to be powered out upon
these who are guilty of the sin of Popery continued-in after the bringing of
the Gospel to light. Whence we may Observe, 1. What a horrible and dreadful
thing hell, and lying under the wrath of God for ever therein, is, that is so
described here. It must be a fearful thing to be for ever there. Many will
curse their own unbelief of this when the cup of the indignation of God, filled
with His wrath, shall be put in their hands to drink thereof for ever. 2. This
sin of Popery and worshipping of the beast must be most abominable, which has
this wrath threatened against it: it must be a desperate Religion that has
this condition for the expectation thereof. Let none think it a light sin,
which the Lord so peremptorily threatens: it is no little mercy that we are
fred therefrom, and there is need to be thankful for the light we have, and to
improve it well while we have it. 3. Abused light hasteneth, and heightneth
wrath: hell now becomes both more hott, and more inevitable than before this
light did break forth. The despising of the Gospel will make hell exceeding
insufferable, even beyond that of the despising of the Law, as Heb. 10.28, etc.
4. Mark the connection of these two cups, there is a cup of sin which she makes
others to drink of (its called the wine of the wrath of her fornication,
because in Gods justice men were plagued by being given up to that error)
whereupon follows, verse. 10. a cup of the wrath of God, and that without
mixture. Sin may be sweet for a time, but it draws on bitterness without
mixture; the cup that follows it, will better show the nature thereof.

Concerning the difficulty of Salvation under Popery.
THere is one thing asserted here, as also in the preceding Chapter, which
possibly may need clearing to some not acquainted with the nature and mysteries
of Popery: and that is, that the salvation of Papists, according to their
principles, seems hereby to be made impossible; it may be therefore worthy
the enquiring into, whether, or upon what grounds that may be made out? and if
that be understood of and extended unto all within that Church? or, whether,
and how difference may be made amongst these that bear that name? What may be
said of some, and how differently we ought to construct of many, we shall
afterward touch; but now for the main, our direct assertion is this, That a
Papist, as such, living and dying according to the complex principles of the
doctrine and worship that is followed in Popery, cannot be saved, nor expect
Justification before God. I say, a Papist, living and dying according to the
essential principles of Popery, which do especially relate to these three, 1.
To their giving to the Pope such ample authority, reverence, and adoration, as
they use to do. 2. To their way of carrying on the Justification and Salvation
of a sinner before God, as it is holden forth in their doctrine. 3. To their
manner of worship, that is, praying to Saints, worshipping of Images, sacrifice
of the Mass, and other such things, owned both by the doctrine, laws and
practice of that Church. We say, one living and dying devoted to these,
although neither scandalous in outward practices, nor defective in respect of
external painfulnesse; yet upon this account, as being a Papist, chargeable
with the three general heads foresaid, he cannot but be liable to Gods
judgment, and die without any solid hope of being saved by these principles.
The general, we conceive, is clear from what was said, Chap. 13. verse. 8. this
kind of worshipping the beast being held out as inconsistent with election,
which says that no Elect person can so live and die, and therefore none such
can be saved: here again, worshipping of the beast, and drinking of the cup of
Gods indignation for ever, are peremptorily put together. And all along this
Book, the beast with his followers, and great Babylon, are ever looked upon as
most hateful to God, till at last ( Chap. 19. and 20.) he and they are cast
into the lake together: and that is mentioned to be upon this very account of
their being stated by their doctrine, worship, and practices in opposition to
Christ, without respect to moral ills, common to them with others of the
world. This is also confirmed from 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. and 12. where this
deceivablenesse of Antichrists apostasy is bounded to them that perish, and
this is marked as the design of Gods justice therein, that all they may be
damned which receive not the love of the Truth: this then must be of it self
the very high way to damnation. And we cannot question the truth of this,
without the overturning of the direct scope and meaning of these Scriptures,
and the application of them, which is laid down all alongs in this Book.

If it be yet required, that further satisfaction be given as to the grounds
which render their salvation impossible. We do answer, that it arises from
these two, which do infa^ibly demonstrate the same. 1. This way of Popery, is
of it self exceeding sinful, and abominable before the Lord, and so does in
more than an ordinary manner make a person liable to His wrath. 2. As it is of
it self sinful; so it has no solid way laid down for removing of sin, but
does leave a man without any solid hope of relief from his original and
actual sins, beside that it incapacitateth him to look upon it self as
sinful, or, to seek for the right remedy thereof. And where these two are put
together, to wit, heinous sin, and no way to remove it, or any other, what can
be expected but inevitable ruin and condemnation? For where the disease is
deadly, and the cure naught, death must be certain. We shall therefore a little
make out both these assertions, from which the conclusion laid cannot but
follow.

1. We say, that the way of Popery in it self, and its complex nature, is most
hainously sinful, and does render the followers thereof exceedingly guilty
before God. Therefore we will find it charged with the most abominable
guiltinesses, that are elsewhere mentioned in Scripture, 1. There is in it the
guilt of Idolatry, and that of all sorts, 1. A worshipping of Angels (whereof
somewhat is spoken, Chap. 19.) the worshipping of Saints departed, and a giving
of divine honor to them, a worshipping of the Pope (spoken of Chap. 13. and
17.) by ascribing to him divine attributes, which he willingly receives, ( as
Thuan lib. 3. page 95. among others, does observe) a worshipping of the Cross,
or (...), worshipping of the Sacrament or (...), worshipping of Saints and
their relics, making Images of the holy Trinity and persons of the Godhead,
and many other kinds of Idolatry commit they, and that both against the first
and second command; and therefore are said ( Chap. 9. verse. 20.) to worship the
works of their hands, and devils, and idols of gold and silver, etc. of which
somewhat was spoken in that place.

The second sin charged upon them, is, blasphemy, a sin of the highest nature,
that is, either by detracting from the sovereign and absolute God that which is
due to Him, or attributing to Him what becomes not His Holiness, Mercy and
Soveraignity; or, by ascribing what is proper to Him to some creature: in all
which respects, Popery is a doctrine of blasphemy, as was hinted, Chap. 13.
and therefore this beast is said to be full of names of blasphemy, Chap. 17.3.

3. Defection and Apostasy from the received Truth, is a heinous sin; and this
is most essentially proper to Popery, Therefore is it (2 Thessalonians. 2.) denominate
by this, to be a falling away. When we call Popery an Apostasy, it is to be
understood as differing from any particular heresy, although these also be of
themselves damnable: for, this is a defection by a concurrence of many
heresies, corrupting the series of the truths of the Gospel; and therefore
cannot be but exceeding sinful and damnable, seeing God has so peremptorily
threatened adding unto, or taking from the Word, as it is Rev. 22.

4. It is in sum Antichristianity, or, the sin of Antichristianism, to be found
chargeable in the manner foresaid: and can there be any sin desperately
dangerous, if that be not? Which though it do not expressly thwart with Christ's
Natures and Person (which is not to be Antichrists error, as was observed,
Chap. 12. toward the close) yet does it exautorat Him, detract from His
Offices, and the effects thereof, and constantly, as such, does top with His
Church and People; and lay down a way of salvation and life upon these same
terms that it stood on in the Covenant of Works; and therefore in that
respect, it may well be said to deny that Christ came in the flesh, which is
the very spirit of Antichrist, which does necessarily follow from that
Doctrine. For, say they, 1. obedience to the commands and the merit of works,
is the only way to life still. 2. say they, That supposing the habits of Grace
to be infused, and men to perform these works in the strength thereof, they
could not but be acceptable to God, and enter the man into life, as being
meritorious thereof, although Christ had never come in the flesh. And, 3. they
say, That His becoming man, or His suffering so much upon supposition of the
former, was not necessary for the procuring of this Grace; yea, they deny de
facto, that Christ did suffer any thing of the curse inwardly in His soul on
the behalf of sinners. Now, all these being put together, do they not amount to
this in effect, that Christ's coming in the flesh is in vain or not true? But
this corrupt contrivance of their doctrine, will be more clear in the following
Assertion. To conclude this then, we only say, if Idolatry, Blasphemy,
Antichristianism, and Apostasy in the highest nature, be sinful and hateful
in the sight of God, Popery must be so: neither is it for naught that Scripture
does so paint out that sin by such heinous characters, but that He may imprint
the detestablenesse thereof upon hearts; beside the accessory guilt of murders,
thefts, persecutions, and other sins which are incident to that way, especially
to the leaders thereof, as was hinted, Chap. 9.20. But now we proceed to the
second thing laid down, to show that according to the Popish principles, a
sinner can never win to peace with God, and so cannot but perish: we shall
first show what is their doctrine concerning that, or, what is the way that
they lay down for the justifying of a sinner. 2. We shall show the
inconsistencie thereof with the way laid down in the Gospel, from which the
damnable absurdity of that doctrine, and truth of the former Assertion, will
evidently appear.

1. It is to be adverted, that though they use the title Justification, that
yet indeed they do deny it, and, upon the matter, acknowledge Sanctification
only: and so in this rather we are to enquire, if there be such a thing as
Justification, distinct from Sanctification, than how Justification is
perfected, their Justification being only an infusing of Grace, whereby he that
was a sinner becomes by a physical change, holy.

2. It is to be adverted, that they maintain a twofold Justification, one (as
they say) of the wicked, this they call the first Justification, when the first
Grace is given to one, who formerly was not gracious; the other is the
Justification of one already habitually gracious, this they call the second,
and is by augmentation and ^ncrease of the Grace given. The first Justification
they acknowledge is free, being only procured by the merit of Christ; and that
there can be no condign meriting of that, although by the right use of
free will, and the exercise of moral good works, it may be congruously (or, de
congruo) merited; so that one who does what in him lies by the help of common
Grace (which is named by them gratia auxilians, and in some sufficiency, at
least remotly, is given to all) they cannot but obtain it. This first
Justification they grant to be sufficient to children, who cannot merit, or one
that receives the Sacrament of Baptism, or penance, and does not outlive the
same, but die in instanti, (if that case can fall out) yet this they think
impossible, because at least, they have contrition and holiness in their vow,
and want not some desires of further, or, at least continuance in what they
have received, and in that respect do merit, as Suarez speaks, de gratia,
page 223. lib. 8. cap. 12.

The other Justification that is acquired by the performing of good Works, and
the merit that proceeds from them, they maintain to be simply necessary to
all that are at age, because, as that forecited Author says, lib. 12. cap. 28.
page 222. and 223. ipsa gloria secundum totum suum esse, and (ut ita dicam)
secundum substantiam suam, tanquam merces meritorum promittitur: and glory in
Gods way is laid down to be the reward of merit. And this supponeth a free
working to preceed it: this merit they maintain to be de condigno, or of
condignity, and that not from any imputation of Christ's merit to these works,
but from the nature and proportionatenesse of these works to the reward it
self. Hence it is, that some of them (to wit, Vasquez in 1.2. disp. 214. number.
43.) do deny that there is any respect or look had to Christ's merit at all: and
others who grant there is respect had to it, (so as to make them merit in a
more excellent way) yet say, that that proceeds not from any defect that is
in them, as if Christ's merit were to supply that; for, Adam before his fall,
and the Angels had true merit without Christ, much less secondly, as if they
did not merit of themselves properly, except by the virtue of Christ's merit:
for then, say they, that were not to ascribe the merit to our works, but to
Christ's; and that our works were only meritorious from that extrinsick ground,
and so God would not reward our works but Christ's, which would resolve in this,
that we would not merit Grace and Glory, but would get it by gift, which to
them is absurd, as is asserted by Suarez, lib. 12. cap. 18. and 19. page 484,
486, etc. at large: which is the joint opinion of Bellan^^^, and others of
them, Bellar. de justif. lib. 9. cap. 10.938. and of the Council of Trent,
Sess. 6. cap. 10, and 11. See also, lib. 5. de justif. cap. 16.109. yea, they
say that this merit does not proceed from respect to Gods promise only, as if
it did arise from that alone, without respect had to the intrinsic value of
these acts, because, say they, Gods rewarding of good works, is an act of
proper justice, and cannot but be done, and does only look to Gods Covenant and
Law, wherein he has appointed to accept these Works, as of themselves
meritorious of Glory, without respect to that extrinsick consideration:
therefore they disclaim the opinion of Status and Durand and the Nominals, that
found the merit of Works upon God's promise allanerly, as if they were not
meritorious without that, because that opinion will rather infer it to be a
free gift, which one may engage himself to give for a thing of little value,
and would not be proper justice, nor differ from that they call meritum de
congruo, which often is founded upon a promise. This condignity therefore is
grounded upon these two, 1. An intrinsic value in the works themselves, that
proceed from the gracious habit wherewith the worker is qualified. 2. An
appointment or condition of Gods, whereby he has promised such a reward, to
wit, glory to such works, as Suarez has it at large, lib. 12.480, 483, etc.
And Bellarmin lays down that, Matthew. 19. If thou will enter into life, keep
the commands, as the very form of the Covenant, and as the only way to life, de
justif. lib. 3. cap. 13. In which respect, sometimes they say Justification is
free, that is, in the first respect; sometimes by Works, that is, in the second
respect.

3. We would advert, that as they distinguish between the culpa, or blot of
sin, and the reatus, or guilt and punishment of sin, so do they affirm, that
the first may be removed by Justification, when the other, to wit, the
punishment, is to be satisfied for, at least in part by satisfaction to
Justice, where the sins have been committed by the free will of the person, to
wit, if he were adult, or at age (for, they acknowledge this not to be
necessary for infants, and original sin) See Suarez, lib. 7. page 128. Et
p^ena aliqua (as he says) non remittitur gratis, sed per condignam
satisfactionem. And therefore, gratis remittitur culpa, licet postea sit de
justitia satisfaciendum pro poena.

To lay down then their way, these things are supposed without controversy, 1.
That man naturally is obnoxious to Gods curse, and cannot save himself from it.
2. That before he can be admitted to happiness, he must be justified. 3. That
God is the efficient cause of this; and the principal worker, is also without
controversy. 4. That both infusion of Grace and remission of sin, do accompany
Justification, is denied by none. 5. That the ultimate or final end is the
glory of God, and, the salvation of the person justified is the subordinate, is
agreed unto by all. 6. That Christ's righteousness is the only meritorious
cause, is, in word, professed. 7. They acknowledge the necessity of Faith to
concur in it, as we do of good Works to follow after: hitherto there seems to
be no great absurdity, we had need therefore to consider it the more narrowly
in respect of three other causes added by them, to wit, the formal, material
and isntrumental causes, with the effects and consequents following thereon.
And we put the question thus, Wherewith may a sinner hazard to appear before
Gods justice, so as to expect Gods acceptance of him? This will draw the
question nearer, when a sinner is to choose what defense to take him to; or
whereupon to ground his plea before the Throne of God.

1. They answer roundly, that man is justified per solam gratiam inhaerentem,
tanquam per forman integram sine imputatione externae justitiae Christi, that
is, by inherent Grace alone, as the entire form of righteousness without any
imputation of Christ's Righteousness; and that this inherent righteousness
does confer this of it self, as Suarez lays it down, lib. 7. cap. 7. page 83.
in two corollaries expressly; although they differ amongst themselves, Some
making it habitual Grace only, as Bellarmin; some both habitual and actual,
as Suarez; yet, all agree, that it is inherent Grace which constituteth us just
before Gods Throne, therefore do they call it gratia gratum faciens.

2. This inherent Grace, they acknowledge to be infused by God without any
condign merit, and to imply these two, 1. Somewhat positive, to wit, the
bringing-in a new quality, or Grace in the soul, which is, as it were, a new
form to it. 2. Somewhat privative, that is, a purging, or cleansing of the
soul from the blot of sin, which necessarily follows upon the former, as two
contrary forms are inconsistent together. Thus they say, this Grace expels,
or excludes sin from the soul, as light does darkness, or heat coldness in
water when it is cal^fied. This to them, in effect, is the remission of the
fault which they account necessary to Justification, and so Gods justifying of
a sinner, is His infusing that first Grace into the soul, whereby necessarily
sin is really and actually removed (and not in opinion only, as they object, to
our not imputing thereof) Aquin. 1.2. quaest. 113. does include four things in
Justification, to wit, an act of free will tending to God, and another in
reference to sin, beside the former two.

3. They acknowledge Christ's Righteousness to be the only meritorious cause of
this first justification, because that cannot be merited either by Faith, Works
or any thing that preceedeth, page 127. that is, He procured the infusion of
this Grace.

4. The material cause of this Righteousness or Justification, they hold to
be the soul of man, which by the acts of its free will in Faith, Fear,
Contrition, Love, Prayer, and other dispositions, must necessarily concur for
disposing to the receiving of this Grace, and that as a cause without which it
is not attained; for, faith the forecited Author, lib. 12. page 504. cap. 24.
Faith, Contrition, and such dispositions are laid down, in Gods appointment to
be the condition of His infusing this Grace; and so man obtains this
Justification, when of his free will and otherwise, he is congruously disposed
to receive the same, and says he, page 524. God infuseth Grace with respect to
man's contrition, and idea infundit quia contritus, other ways not. Although
these dispositions be not de condigno meritorious of it, yet they are matter
whereby, or out of which it is brought forth, as a pre-existing material
cause; and in this, man's soul is not the subject capable only, (which we say)
but the material cause.

5. For the way how, or isntrumental cause by which this is applied, (because
this is so less necessary than other causes, for it cannot profit if it be not
applied) they maintain that to be done by the Sacraments of the Church,
(although some name the Word and Ministers also) these, according to their
grounds, confer this Grace ex ^pare operato^ or by the applying of them to
persons so disposed, especially Baptism and Penance (that is, the Priests
absolution after confession, which to them is a sacrament) this they say ex
Dei, ordinatione, attrito confert gratiam, page 68 and if there be no^ occasion
of the Sacrament, they may have it in their vow, and for be accepted without
it, page 225. Baptism, they say, conferreth it injusto; poenitentia contrito,
(...) just^^. Therefore are these two Sacraments simply necessary to them, the
first for original sin, the second for actual.

6. When one is thus justified by this first Justification, although the blot
of sin be removed, and the person be just and holy, there remains yet
satisfaction to be made for the removing of the punishment, at least in part,
and that, as some affirm, satisfaction condign, as Vasquez 3. part. disp. 1.
cap. 11. for which end they prescribe their Pilgrimages, Pennances, Fastings,
Vows, Alms, Dotations; and even Purgatory it self, and Soul masses come in
here for removing of the punishment and making the satisfaction to God for
their guilt. And because where there are many sins, it will draw to thousands
of years in Purgatory, for they prescribe sometimes, 5.7.10. or 20. years for
one sin, and they may be multiplied in one day, and so draw to a great length;
therefore it is to them, as Bellarmin calls it, a great difficulty what
comes of such whose satisfaction is not complete, as at the day of Judgment,
seeing it may draw 20000. years. He answers it either by the Popes indulging
of it, or by the greater intensnesse of suffering, whereby to 300. or 400.
years that may be contracted, De indulg. lib. 1. cap. 9. col. 1174.

7. Because heaven cannot be obtained, according to their principles, but by
merit, and that by their own proper merit, therefore even these who are
justified by this first Grace, must go about the works of holiness, as the
account upon which they must attain heaven, even as Adam was to have done for
life, if he had stood in his innocence; and in this respect, they say that
Christ merited to procure Gods promise to give life to our merits, and to
accept of them, not as if His merit concurred therein to make them meritorious,
but as an universal cause influencing them that they may merit in a more
excellent way, as Suarez speaks, page 488. Therefore he distinguish young
ones from others, because they are saved by Christ only; but says, that no
promise does hold forth the reward to any for Christ's merit, but for their own,
page 491. In which respect, to them Christ has merited a new Covenant of
Works, and strength of new to keep the same; and they are to stand and fall in
the obtaining of life promised, according to their own performing of the
condition of Works in the use of that first Grace, and all that a man has to
ground his expectation of obtaining heaven upon, is his conformity to this
supposed bargain, for which that place ( Mat. 19.) is made use of, If thou will
enter into life.

In the last place, because man can never be accounted perfectly righteous,
much less to merit any thing so long as he has sin dwelling in him, and his
actions be defiled with the same, Therefore lest their contrivance be marred
with this, they do account indwelling concupiscence not to be sin against the
moral Law, and many sins to be venial and not mortal, which therefore do not
hinder a persons merit or acceptance; nay, not their perfection and fulfilling
of the Law, which they suppose to be possible.

These are the grounds they lay for the throughing of their Justification, and
from these they draw several conclusions, that seem contrary, as that men may
merit increase and perseverance in Grace, and that ex condigno, that they may
come to a perfection of righteousness in respect of their inherent holiness
and fulfilling of the Law of God; that one may supererogate, and so that there
must be a storehouse of satisfactions; for, though they say one cannot merit
for another, yet there being a consideration of merit, and satisfaction both in
all their good Works, they may satisfy for another, when they do or suffer
more than might expiate their own guilt, which would therefore be useless if
it were not to be extended to other Saints, as Bellar. fears not to speak,
lib. 1. de indulgentiis, cap. 4. col. 1160. Upon this they found their
Indulgences and treasure of Saints merits, which the Pope by the fullness of
his power does apply to be imputed to these who want of their own, (yet this
way of imputation is always rejected by them in reference to our being justified
by the merits of Christ) They assert also (as they may well do) that this
Justification is uncertain to any, so that none can conclude, whether he be
really so, or not: yea, they say; that it may be lost, and one justified so
now, may through the want of good works or his sinfulness perish, or, if he be
again recovered, it must be by absolution and the sacrament of Penance,
wherein the first Justification is to be renewed, and Grace again to be
conferred. So that although he get the first Justification by Christ's merits
only, yet may that be fallen from, as Adam fell from his Covenant-state, if
that habitual Grace be not improven in the practice of holy duties.

This is a short view of their contrivance of the way of Justification, which
we have laid down out of themselves, and have cited Suarez most frequently,
because he pretends to a midway in these questions, wherein many of their
Schoolmen do run into extremes; and they want not great confusion, differences,
and contradictions among themselves in many of these tenets: so that it is no
marvel to find different expressions of their judgment in these things.

Let us now enquire, if according to the former grounds, a sinner, that is
pursued by the Law, may with confidence expect to be justified and absolved
before the Tribunal of Gods justice; and we confidently assert, that according
to these grounds no flesh living can be justified, which this one argument may
make out. No sinner can expect Justification or pardon of sin; but according to
the grounds and terms laid down in the Gospel; But this way is not such. Ergo,
etc. Or, That contrivance of Justification which does overturn almost fully,
most, if not all the Truths of the Gospel, and is utterly inconsistent with the
same, cannot be the way how a sinner may be justified; But this is such, etc.
For making out of this, we shall, first, propose some general considerations.
2. More particularly touch some inconsistencies of the same. 3. Remove some
objections. And, 4. resume the conclusion.

The first general we propose to be considered, is this, that the way which
God has laid down in the Gospel for attaining of life by Christ Jesus, does
formally differ from that way of attaining life that He propounded to Adam:
hence these two Covenants of Works and Grace and their conditions are
frequently and directly opposed in the Scripture, as being different and
opposite in respect of the account upon which men were to expect life; (See Romans
10.6, 7, etc. Gal. 3.) But this way laid down, is in matter and form the same
with the Covenant of Works in this respect, because it sounds a man's hope of
expecting life and heaven upon the merit of his own works and his observing of
the commands, which these their grounds do confirm. 1. That they do compare his
working and merit by it, to Adams before he fell, and supposes this to succeed
now in the room of that, as in the forecited Author, lib. 12. cap. 19. page
487, is clear. 2. That they state the terms of life in these words, If thou
would enter life, keep the commands, and cast the laborers to receive their
hire, Matthew. 20. And so from this they say, Christ's merits have procured the
Lords re-entring of a Covenant with us, wherein He promises happiness to out
working as the condition thereof, ibid. page 488. and says there is no promise
of the receptation of a sinner but upon this account. And, 3. that they say,
the way now to life has the same threatenings and promises that the first had,
and so they conclude, it is the same with it. And although they acknowledge
Christ to have merited this promise to be made, and this Grace to be given us
whereby we may keep it, yet does that infer no alteration of the way or terms
held out in that promise in respect of the condition thereof, although it show
a different ground upon which it is built, and from which it flows: If
therefore the Covenants differ, and a sinner cannot now obtain life upon that
same condition, and upon the same way that Adam did, (even though he be
habitually renewed) Then can he not come to obtain life in this way laid down.
But to say the former, were to continue the Covenant of Works, and exclude the
Covenant of Grace: This way therefore to life is utterly impossible.

2. If by the strain of the Gospel Christ Jesus be made all to us in respect of
our peace and happiness, and that immediately (that is, without the
interveening of any new merit occasioned by His merit) Then the former way
cannot be consistent with the Gospel, because immediately infused Grace is made
our formal Righteousness or first Justification; and our actual good works,
our merit or second Justification; and these two are inconsistent together;
for, Christ cannot immediately be our Righteousness, (as we stand before God)
and inherent Grace and good Works also be immediately the same: because
according to the first, if it be asked at the sinner, What is thy
righteousness by which immediately thou dare appear before God or expect
absolution and heaven from him? He is to answer, Christ and His satisfaction
offered to me in the Gospel and by Faith received, this is the defense I mind
to shelter my self with at the bar of His justice, and by which I expect to be
saved. According to the last he were to answer that former question, thus,
Inherent Grace is that which makes me acceptable to God, and my good works,
and their condign merit is that upon which I expect heaven according to His
promise made thereto. Which certainly would relish most uncomfortably to a
challenged sinner, and is contrary to the former. But the former is true, that
by the Gospel Christ Jesus is immediately made our Righteousness, by whose
merits we may have only confidence to appear before God, to expect remission
and salvation from Him according to that Scripture, 1 Corinthians. 1.30. He is made
to us of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, Col. 3.11.
Christ is all, which is expressly mentioned in opposition to circumcision and
uncircumcision, and every thing else, which are not admitted to be any thing to
the Believer in the former respects, but Christ alone, Phil. 3.8, 9.

3. Gods contrivance of the Gospel for the justifying of a sinner through
Christ Jesus, is clearly holden out to be by a judicial transferring of our
sins as a debt upon Christ the Cautioner, and of His Righteousness and merit
to us, to be imputed for our Justification before God, without any respect had
to our inherent holiness or good works, whether done before or after
Justification, as may appear from these two places, 2 Corinthians. 5.20. that
Christ is said to be made sin for us, that we may be made the Righteousness of
God through Him: where this is clear, that by the Covenant of Redemption we are
to be righteous by Christ, as Christ was sin for us; but Christ was made sin or
sentenced by Justice for it, not by any infusion of sinful habits (which were
blasphemous to think) but by having imputed to Him the guilt of our sin in
respect of the punishment thereof: It will follow therefore that He is our
Righteousness, or we are justified or made just by Him, by having His
Righteousness imputed to us, and accepted as performed in our name without
laying the weight upon any inherent qualification in us; and can there be a
more clear way to expound what this is to be made just by Christ, than by its
opposite, what it is to be made sin for us? The second place, is, Philip. 3.8,
9. where Paul is seeking to be in readiness for appearing before Gods
Tribunal, and he was one who wanted not inherent Grace or actual good Works,
and in a great measure, yet in reference to Gods acceptance he can rest no
where but in Christ, not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law,
but that Righteousness which is by Faith in Christ: where we have first Paul
looking on a Righteousness within him, which was his own, and that at the
highest pitch of it: (for, it respects any posterior time when he might be
called to a reckoning) this righteousness he disclaimeth as not being that
which would be accepted. 2. He looks to a Righteousness without him in
Christ Jesus, which he considers as being the only shelter even of a Believer
from the wrath of God; so that if the question be proposed to Paul, What will
thou choose to lippen unto? Where will thou choose to be found in the day of
Judgment? His answer would be, only in Christ. If it be asked; what this is?
he answers, it is to have His Righteousness in opposition to his own. If it
be again asked, How he comes by it? he shows by Faith in Christ he comes to
partake of His Righteousness, which he dare lippen more unto than to his own.
Whereby it appears that the Gospels way of justifying a sinner, is by
imputing of Christ's Righteousness, and by a sinners resting upon it. For, this
righteousness, is not that which is procured by Christ, and is inherently in
the Believer, but is that which is in Christ, and whereof the Believer
partaketh by hiding himself under it, and by his faith opposing it to Justice,
which can be done no other way than by imputation. Now there being nothing more
opposite to the imputation of Christ's Righteousness than the former Doctrine,
there can be nothing more opposite to the way of the Gospel: and so if it be
impossible to be justified without the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, it
is impossible to be justified by the way of the Papists.

4. The Scripture holds forth Gods way of reconciling sinners to Himself, to
be by way of Covenanting, as, Isa. 55.2, 3. wherein God offers, and the
hearer receives and closes with His offer, upon which follows Gods
acceptance of the person, as, Job. 1.12. Heb. 8. Ier. 31. and his being
reconciled to God. Hence there is so much spoken of Covenanting in Scripture,
that the whole Doctrine thereof bears that name of Covenant, or, Testament,
and one that closes with it cannot but be justified. Now, by this Doctrine of
Justification by inherent Grace, or merit of Works, there is no place left for
such Covenanting upon such terms; yea, they are inconsistent together.
Therefore this cannot be the way of making up the breach between God and a
sinner,

5. That Justification, which the Gospel speaks of, is that wherein Faith
has a peculiar causality beyond any other Grace, as that which does entitle a
sinner unto Pardon and Justification by the virtue of Christ's Righteousness,
which it does take hold of. Hence it is that so frequently in Scripture it is
called justification by faith, and that, as opposite to all other Graces in that
respect, the righteousness which is of faith, and such like. Now, the former
way is utterly inconsistent with this, Therefore cannot be the way to
Salvation. And considering, that Covenanting with God, imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, Justification by Faith, etc. are things so essential unto the
up-making of a sinners breach with God, and that yet all of them are so great
strangers, even in the very name to the Popish way of justification, and
materially inconsistent with the same, it cannot be of God.

More particularly, we will find it overturn, 1. the nature of Justification,
and at best it does put in Sanctification in the room thereof; and there is
never any distinct ground la^d, by which a sinner may come to receive a
sentence of absolution before God, but this, to wit, Justification, is lost by
the former Doctrine; and they acknowledge no such thing distinct from
Regeneration or Sanctification, as if no such act as Justification were
needful or mentioned in Scripture, as distinct from these; and, in effect, it
leaves a sinner to a way of Salvation that wants Justification in it: and
therefore cannot profit him. For by denying that which is the formal cause of
Justification, they deny it self, seeing that gives it a being.

2. It derogateth from the nature of Grace, and that in several respects. 1.
As to graces efficacy, that it hangs at man's free will. 2. As to its
Soveraignity, that it boundeth it to man's disposing of himself. 3. As to its
freedom, in that it appoints man's own satisfaction for the removing of
punishment, and his own merit for the obtaining of reward; and as to its
spiritual sublime way of working, making it carnally to be conferred ex opere
operato.

3. It enervateth the merit of Christ: For, at the best it attributes to that
only the restoring of a Covenant of Works, which may be entered, kept, and
broken according to men's working; and, as it were, the procuring to men a new
stock of habitual Grace, with which they are to trade, and procure their own
happiness by their after merit. In reference to which if they fail, Christ's
merit, and their habitual Grace will not profit them. Therefore the weight of
obtaining life is laid there. But the removing of the punishment, and the
obtaining of the reward, they ascribe to humane satisfaction and good Works,
and that by reason of their own intrinsic worth, without the imputation of
Christ's merit, except in respect of the general influence formerly alleged;
yea, they fear not to call Saints their Redeemers, in so far as by their works
of Supererogation they suppose them to have satisfied in some thing for them,
as Bellar. asserteth, lib. 1. de indulg. cap. 4. col. 1161. and at most they
are sanctified by Christ's merit, but after that they do for themselves.

4. It wrongeth the Lord Himself, 1. In His Grace, as has been said. 2. In His
Justice, as if He were to be satisfied by creatures satisfaction, and that in
such things as many men would not be pleased with; yea, they scare not to
affirm, that such holiness could not but have satisfied Him and merited,
although Christ had never suffered: which shows also how little they respect
Christ's merit, as the forcited Suarez, page 484. and 486. afterteth. 3. It
wrongeth His soveragnity, in that it tyeth Him in proper Justice to be man's
debtor, and that not by virtue of His promise only, but from the consideration
of the intrinsic value and merit of men's good works, that He were not just, if
He did not reward them.

5. It wrongeth Gods Covenant: for either it allows no Covenant at all, or
quite alters the nature and terms thereof, and turns it to Works, as has
been said. For it does still make the stipulation on man's part the same which
does constitute the form of the Covenant of Works, however one be enabled to
perform that stipulation, which certainly was by Grace, even to Adam.

6. It enervateth Faith, excluding altogether that Faith that receives Christ
and takes hold on Him, and closes with the Covenant of Grace, and leaves no
more to a Believer, but a naked assent to the Truth of God, which is in the
devils; and utterly secludeth Faith from any particularity of application in
the making of our peace with God in any respect.

7. It overturneth the Truth concerning man's natural estate, in giving him a
free will in reference to spiritual good, and that before the infusion of
Grace, and in making this acting of free will a necessary disposition to
Justification and a necessary condition of merit.

8. It corrupts the holy Law of God, 1. In its end, as if now it were to be
the condition of Gods Covenant upon which life is to be attained. 2. In its
meaning, as if it did not condem natural concupiscence; and many other things
are exempted by them from it, that they may make the fulfilling thereof
possible.

9. It denies the true nature of sin, and makes many things that are contrary
to the Law of God to be no sin; as by its excluding of the remainings of
original sin, and many others (by that fond distinction of venial and mortal
sins) from being accounted sins that make men liable to eternal wrath.

10. It overturneth the nature of the Sacraments, 1. In making these to be
Sacraments which are not, as Penance, Extreme unction, etc. 2. In attributing
other ends and another manner of attaining to these ends than agrees with the
Word, or can quiet a conscience in reference thereto, as the conferring of
Grace ex opere operato.

11. It does not leave Discipline undestroyed: for, it abuses the power of the
keys in this absolution, to make up a Sacrament and confer grace, and give
Indulgences, and suchlike, which no sober man will think a sufficient way for
founding of his peace, or to be a defense against a challenge in the day of
Judgment.

12. It does altogether overturn that consolation that God allows His people:
For, 1. there is great anxiety in the supposed way of attaining it. 2. No
certainty of having of it, and so it can yield comfort to none. 3. According
to their principles, it may be lost, and one that is justified to day, may be
in a stare of damnation tomorrow. 4. It makes their recovery difficult and
almost desperate: for, (as Bellar. in the forecited place asserteth) it may have
with it 20000. years continuance in purgatory. Of this uncomfortablnesse, and
of all this matter, more may be seen on Chap. 9. Lect. 1.

13. It excludes knowledge, and cries up ignorance; So that Bellar. lib. de
Iustific. does not fear to say, that Faith ought rather to be defined by
ignorance than knowledge, per ignorantiam potius quam per notitiam.

14. It overturneth and corrupts the nature of holiness and good works, and
all spiritual worship, putting in, I cannot tell what, will worship, external
rites, etc. in the place of all practice, mumbling and muttering unknown words
for prayer, afflicting of the body for mortification, and many such like things
have they.

These are but a part of the horrible absurdities of this way, and yet we
suppose are sufficient to demonstrate the truth of what we assert, to wit, that
this way is involved with many fundamental inconsistencies with the Truth and
way of the Gospel, and so cannot be a possible way of attaining Salvation; for,
it makes men to count many sins not to be sins, and so never to repent of
them: the sins that it discovers, it leads them not to the right
satisfaction, which only can be accepted for them, to wit, Christ's
Righteousness, but to their own inherent holiness and good works; yea, even
this they corrupt; and what they account saving Grace, as Faith, Repentance,
Humility and such like, are nothing less than such indeed before God.

If it be again further asked, what then are we to esteem of such as lived
under Popery, if all of them be excluded from the obtaining of salvation? We
answer with a fourfold distinction. 1. We would distinguish these who might
live under Popery, and yet be kept from the infection thereof and no way
belong to that body, from the native members thereof; of such we have spoken,
Chap. 11. and 12. to such the Lord speaks, Chap. 18. Come out of Babylon, my
people: such were rather captives under her tyranny, than subjects of her
Kingdom: of these there is no question, but as the Lord sealed them for Him.
self Chap. 7. so did He always singularly own them, and accept of them. 2. We
may distinguish Papists in these that are antichristian worshippers, and others
who are superstitious, and in some things are erroneous: We call them
antichristian, who receive the beasts mark and number, and give him worship in
more than an humane manner, ascribing to him a certain divinity, infallibility,
universal supremacy, and such like antichristian attributes; and who, 2.
receive his doctrine in the complex contrivance thereof, which is his number;
and, 3. who join in his worship wherein it is antichristian, as praying to
Saints, worshipping of Images, adoration of the Mass, and such like. These in
the former assertion we have excluded. Again, we call them superstitious
Papists, who might not altogether have kept a distance from that Church in
every thing, but many ways have been tainted with their superstitions yet so
as to be kept from an antichristian conjunction with that society or union
therewith in things that are plainly antichristian; but might be testifying
against such by some sincere zeal and pure light. Thus, 1. we suppose that many
did give some reverence to the Popes, who yet did utterly abhor their gross
usurpations and blasphemies, his assuming to himself what was proper to God and
Jesus Christ, and detest the base flatteries of others, that ascribed these to
him, as to be supreme head of all, and that both in Civil and Ecclesiastical
things, to be infallible, to be countable to none, to authorize traditions, and
such like; and might only give him some reverence, either from humane policy
and Ecclesiastic constitutions, such as was given to Archbishops, Patriarchs,
etc. or, they might esteem him (though erroneously and ignorantly) to be a
Church Officer, for meddling with things incumbent to Church Officers to meddle
in, without any opinion of his illimited or absolute power, even as men might
err in accounting Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, etc. of divine Authority,
although they might disclaim antichristian tyrannous usurpation and practices
in them, and seek only to have that power subservient to edification. 2.
Further in fundamental doctrines they may be pure, although not altogether
without errors, even as were many of the Fathers. 3. In worship they might join
many superstitious rites, as Crosses, Altars, Bowings, etc. yet abstain from
worshipping of Saints and Idols, and from accounting the Mass a propitiatory
sacrifice, although they might join in the Eucharist, and such like. Of such
sort were Gersom, Bernard, and some others in the midst of Popish darkness,
who were not altogether free of these superstitions, yet still did check the
Popish pride and usurpation, and bound their authority, and preserved the
doctrine of remission of sins through faith in Christ's Righteousness pure, and
pressed holiness in some spiritual manner, even in the midst of many
superstitions that abounded; and whereof they were not altogether free. We
suppose these last are no ways to be classed with the former, but might have
had access to Gods mercy through Christ Jesus: Because, 1. although they had
errors, yet were they not such as were inconsistent with sincerity and the
nature of the administration of Grace. And, 2. because they kept the way of
attaining pardon through Christ Jesus clear, which being followed by them in
their practice (as no doubt it was by many) might, through Gods gracious
dealing with them, make them acceptable before Him, so that their failings
being of infirmity and not of malice, might not be imputed to them; but they
accepted as penitents, being sincerely affected with what they conceived to
dishonor God, although they did not discern every thing that was sin against
Him.

Did. 3. We would distinguish Papists living so and dying so, from such as
though living so, might yet by Gods Grace have repentance conferred upon them
at their death. This has been found by experience, that many who have been
tenacious of the doctrines and superstitions of Popery in their life, have been
yet at their death brought to abhor them, and to betake them to the
Righteousness of Christ alone for their Justification. These, where that
Repentance and Faith were true (as no question often it was) are no ways to be
excluded, or accounted worshippers of the beast.

4. Distinguish times, some thing might through Gods Grace be more dispensed
with in these times of more universal darkness, than afterward in the
breaking out of light, and in Gods erecting a Standart for His Truth in the
earth, and bringing forth a visible Church State for His People to join in,
which formerly was not: hence communion in Church Fellowship with the Church of
Rome is much more dangerous now than formerly: which will appear, upon these
considerations, 1. Because the Lord does more peremptorily now threaten her and
her followers, and adds more severe certifications to the same, as we may see
in this place: now, this is proclaimed, If any man worship the beast, etc. the
same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God. And again, Chap. 18.4. 2.
Their stay now is more unexcusable, because the Lord has opened a door of
freedom, and they refuse it, even as the peoples stay in Babylon, while the
captivity lasted, was not imputed to them; yet, staying after the proclaimed
liberty, was detested, and having with it ingratitude against their Redeemer,
and despising of their Redemption offered, and a willing submission to that
bondage, contrary to the warnings and advertisements given them, and Gods call
to abandon the same. 3. After this also, things in the doctrine and worship of
the Church of Rome became more deadly; for, Babylon refused to be cured, and in
the Lords righteous judgment it came to pass that their doctrines became more
corrupt, that thereby He might punish their contempt of, and enmity at the
light which He had made to shine. Hence it is that the later Schoolmen,
especially the Jesuits, are more corrupt than the former, as may be marked in
the writings of diverse Schoolmen upon Thomas who do mutilate and corrupt many
things in him; so as they may agree with the late determinations of the Pope,
and the Council of Trent, and may be most opposite to those they call Heretics:
an instance whereof may be seen in Cajetan, in 3. Thoma qu. 48. art. 5. where
explaining that assertion of Thomas, that only Christ ought to be called our
Redeemer (which formerly we had Bellarmin contradicting) he lays down, for
the qualifying thereof, that bull of Leo the tenth concerning Indulgences and
the application of the Saints purchases to others which was sent to him when he
was his Legate in Germany, and forces such a sense upon Thomas as might agree
with it. Thus also (as we may see) was done in the Council of Trent, where ever
in all debates among Divines the most corrupt side was inclined to, and
concluded. 4. Remaining in Popery now has more contempt with it of Gods
calling, and has greater snares, as is said; and therefore has less ground
now either to expect preservation from sin or wrath, because Gods call
requires separation now more fully, and in a more distinct manner than
formerly He did, as, Revel. 18. Come out of her, my people, be not partakers of
her sin, lest ye partake of her plagues: which does hold forth a sp^ciall
hazard in reference both to sin and wrath, after the Lords making this to be
proclaimed more than formerly it was.

LECTURE IIII.
Verse. 12. Here is the patience of the Saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

13. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

14. And I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and upon the cloud one (at, like
unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp
sickle.

15. And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud voice to him
that sat on the cloud. Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come for
thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

16. And he that sat on the cloud, thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the
earth was reaped.

17. And another Angel came out of the Temple, which is in heaven, he also
having a sharp sickle.

18. And another Angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire, and
cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy
sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for her grapes
are fully ripe.

19. And the Angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine
of the earth, and cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of God.

20. And the wine press was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the
wine press, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs.


HAving showed the foretold threatened and begun ruin of Babylon in the former
part of the Chapter, before the Spirit describe the perfecting of that
judgment, He casteth-in two words needful for the strengthening of Gods
people: the first, is, verse. 12. and respects the former words, wherein
Babylons ruin was foretold; yet, for the time, Antichrist rages and the
Saints suffer. This verse comfort and encourages them against that
tentation, two ways, 1. By granting that indeed this would be an occasion to
exercise and try the Faith of Gods people and make it known (which an hard time
does best) whether they will keep the commands of God, in their practice making
conscience of these; and the faith of Jesus Christ, that is, it will discover
true Faith from counterfeit, and who are true Professors of that Faith that is
true; yet withal Gods people shall have no loss by it, it will be but
temporary, and here is their trial, that is Gods end to exercise. Grace and
duty are best tried and known in all ill time, a suffering time evidenceth
honesty more than prosperity; and suffering is Gods peoples ordinary lot,
whether Antichrist be falling or rising.

The second word cast in for comforting Gods people, is from the blessedness
of the dead (it may be especially of these that suffered under Antichrist) that
die well in that difficult time. The first consolation, is from the outgate God
shall give, when these trials shall be over and Antichrist ruined. The second,
from what might comfort them in hardest sufferings for the time: it is casten
in here before the sad things coming be set down, for two reasons, 1. To be a
warning of the high degree that these troubles would come unto, so that these
that were living should count the dead happy (that died well) who were freed
from these days. See Solomon, Eccles. 4.2. praising the dead more than the
living.

The second thing in the scope, is, to encourage and comfort the Godly that
took the right way of living, so as to die in the Lord; these troubles should
not mar their blessedness, but though the earth should triumph over them when
they were dead, as Chap. 11. yet even then they were and should be blessed, and
therefore needed not fear or faint under these trials which were coming.

There are four particulars in these words, 1. A preface, implying a
weightinesse in that which was to be delivered. 2. A plain maxim, Blessed,
etc. 3. A qualification not restricting that blessedness to such a time, but
showing that it is specially agreeable and applicable to it, from henceforth.
4. The reasons of this application, that they may rest.

The preface comes in by way of diversion, as if it were a singular thing,
thereby to make what is said the more remarkable. 1. It is not Iobns inventing,
he heard a voice. 2. It is no earthly voice, but a sentence from heaven, such
as should be respected. 3. What is said, is to be recorded as useful to Gods
people, Write, says he to Iobn, which, except it be some special Doctrine, is
not usually repeated.

The plain Doctrine or maxim that should be written in the hearts of all
Christians, is, Blessed are they that die in the Lord. By which words, three
things are holden forth, 1. An end common to all, which is death. 2. A
difference in dying, and that is to die in the Lord, which is peculiar to some,
and opposite to dying in our sins, Job. 3.24. as Christ says, that is, in
effect under the curse and unreconciled to God through Christ: So dying in Him,
is, to be found in Him by Faith, Philip. 3.9. 3. A great odds and difference of
the consequents of these diverse deaths; the one are blessed, that is, fully
happy, freed from all misery and enjoying fully, unchangeably and eternally
what may make them completely happy, even God Himself, Matthew. 5.8. Or, the
words contain a great end men naturally aim at, to wit, Blessedness; and, 2.
the compendious clear way of attaining it by dying in Christ: implying, 1. a
being in Him, 2 Corinthians. 5.17. which is to be a Believer by Faith united to
Him; 2. to live in Him, this is presupposed also (for, death follows life)
Gal. 2.24. that is, an exercising of Faith not only for attaining spiritual
life, but for the fruits and acts of it also, living like one in Christ, and by
virtue of that life bringing forth fruits, Job. 15.4. 3. To die then in Him, is
the adding to these faith, exercising itself on Christ in reference to death
when it comes, cheerfully, willingly, boldly and confidently in the Faith of
Gods promise committing it self to Him, 2 Timothy 1.12. as Stephen, Acts 7. and
carrying with it the sense of its own naughtiness, even to death,
notwithstanding whereof, it rests it self over upon His gracious promise;
and, like David, 2 Samuel 23.5. dies there contentedly; These are blessed. This
in general of dying in Him. If it be applied to such in particular, who,
suffering for Him, keep faith in Him to the end, it will suit with the scope,
as if he said, these that suffer for Christ rightly by persecution under
Antichrist (and thus to die for Him, is to die in Him) shall be blessed, as if
he had suffered under Heathens, although the world think there is a great
difference.

The third, is, the qualification added with its confirmation, yea, says the
Spirit, from henceforth, etc. which does not imply, that these who die in
Christ, are from the time of their death blessed, as freed from that fancied
Purgatory, and all labors, which certainly is Truth: otherwise neither could
they from the instant of their death be called Blessed, nor yet said to be at
rest from their labors. For, 1. the blessedness here is brought in as
something peculiarly encouraging the Godly against these coming trials. 2. The
word from henceforth ((...), from now) looks to the instant the prophecy
relates unto, as when Christ says, Matthew. 26. from henceforth I will not
drink of the fruit of the vine: it is, as if He had said, from this time forth;
so here, otherwise it would be from thenceforth, if it related to death simply:
beside, the connection here will not agree, that they may rest; it is not for
they shall rest: for, (...) is causally to be understood. If it be asked then,
what peculiar happiness or encouragement is holden out to the Godly under
Antichrists troubles now? Answ. 1. It strengthens them against the many
calumnies of persecuters, reckoning them not Martyrs, but ill doers: for now
they suffer from Christians, not from Heathens as Martyrs did formerly. The
Spirit says not only before this, but from henceforth shall they be fully
blessed that die in Christ, even under Popes as well as Heathen Emperors. 2.
They are now blessed, because freed from many great troubles, crosses and
tentations that were coming on the world for rejecting the Gospel now preached,
in which outward troubles the Godly living are involved, Isa. 57.1, 2. 3. Their
blessedness is the more now, because hell grows hoter, as verse. 9, 10. and
it is more mercy to be freed of it. 4. They have this use and advantage of
their pains, as to have peace and clearness at their death, no fear of
Purgatory; and clearness of salvation (now after the Popish uncertainty is
banished) gives them quiet, which is a great advantage in this time; yea,
whatever the world think of them who in zeal for Christ do suffer under
Antichrist, God will esteem and reward (of Grace) their suffering, Matthew. 5.16.
and take special notice of what testimony is given for Him.

The words, yea, says the Spirit, are to confirm this Truth to be divine,
because the world would not believe it.

The fourth thing confirms these reasons, to wit, why from henceforth they
are blessed, 1. They are freed from their labors, which is supposed in their
life they suffered. 2. Their works do follow them; for these labors they have
joy: These sufferings work to them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory; and there is a proportionablenesse in their glory to their suffering, 2 Corinthians. 4.17. suitable to it, though not deserved by it, Romans 8.17. Therefore
are these works said to follow in respect of the fruits of them, but not to go
before as causes to procure an entry. In a word, God remembereth, their good
works, and in heaven they have the fruits of them, Isa. 3.10.

Verse. 14. We come now to the last part of the Chapter, which sets forth
Gods executing His judgments against Antichrist and his kingdom in deeds, when
words do not the business. It is set out in two similitudes, one of an
harvest, whereby the world is compared to a field, the wicked to corn, and the
execution of judgment to reaping, like as in the other similitude of a
vintage; Both of them set out, 1. the multitude of wicked men that are like
fields of corn and clusters of grapes, good men like Berries here and there. 2.
A growth of sin and an height of ripeness that it comes unto, as corns at
harvest. 3. A readiness of judgment, and easiness of executing it, as with a
sickle: both which similitudes are borrowed from Joel 3.13. Put ye in the
sickle, for the harvest is ripe, come, get you down, for the press is full,
that is, for the wickedness is great: and ( Ier. 51.33.) the like is spoken of
Babylon.

For understanding of this obscure place (as soberly we ought to search in what
is apparently to come, for the most part, if not for all) we would consider and
observe these four things concerning it.

1. That both these similitudes hold forth wrath and sad judgments to come. 1.
Concerning the last it is certain: for, what is gathered, is cast in the
wine press of Gods wrath, and the similitudes are every way alike, harvest and
vintage; sharp sickles are the instruments, and they are both ripe. Beside,
these places, Joel 3.13. and Ier. 51.33. hold out an harvest of wrath when
wickedness is ripe: which similitudes may well be made use of here, when there
is clearly an allusion to Babylon: So they seem to be of one nature, though
different in degree. Again, the scope here clears it, for, it is the
fulfilling of these former threatenings of the preceding Angels, and the
summary expression of what follows in the vials, which are degrees of the
same judgment, which ascends from the less to the greater, as the
exposition will clear.

2. Consider, that though both hold out judgments, yet apparently different
judgments, not in kind, or object; But, 1. in degree, the vintage is a greater
judgment, as the close of all. 2. In time; as it is greater, so it is after,
as the vintage is after the harvest in the season of it. 3. It is like also
different in the instruments or inferior agents: therefore it is said, another
Angel. 4. The harvest is ripe, but the vintage is fully ripe; sin is at a
greater height. 5. The first instrument, is a sickle, verse. 15. but the second,
a sharp sickle, verse. 18. when the commission is given to thrust in.

3. Consider, that Antichrist and his kingdom is the object of both, 1. It is
the scope here: for it is Babylon and her worshippers who were threatened by
the former Angels. 2. When it is further explained and enquired into, it will
be found to be the same under the vials, Chap. 16. and Chap. 19. which is clear
to be on the beasts Kingdom.

4. To enquire more particularly, unto what particular judgments and times
they relate. In short, we conceive them to hint at the judgments under the
seventh trumpet, and enlarged under the vials, Chap. 16. yet more particularly
to hold out the last judgments on the beast and his kingdom, but not the last
on the world: for, 1. this judgment of the vintage seems to be the battle
of Armageddon, largely prosecuted, Chap. 19. verse. 10. as appears by verse.
15. of that Chapter: he has that for his name to tread the Winepresse of the
wrath of God; and His Armies followed Him for the executing of this same
judgment on the whore or beast. Now, this being a final judgment on the
beast, it can probably be no other so likely as this, where Christ does the
thing, from which He has that name, verse. 16. Chap. 19. yet this belongs to
the sixth vial, probably there being a large description of many things after
this, and a new battle of Gog and Magog, Chap. 20. verse. 8. and then the end
comes, verse. 9, 10. etc. 2. Then it will follow, that by the harvest is meaned
the judgment on the beasts seat under the fifth vial, that being the other
remarkable stroke on Antichrist (to wit, the first harvest) on his seat or
state; or, more generally, it may take in Gods first judgments on him which
yet do not destroy him: and so the vintage will be more universal on him and
his followers.

The scope and sum then will turn to this, 1. That when Antichrist grows
worse by the Word, the Lord will severely by judgments execute wrath on him
and his, and that certainly and fickerly. 2. To show by what method the Lord
will proceed, first, by lesser judgments, then by greater, He will make a full
end in due time when all is ripe, He will take them as they ripen. 3. By what
means, some executing, some praying, and Christ Himself overruling all.

We come to the words. The 1. judgment is set down, verse. 14, 15, and 16.
containing, 1. the person executing this judgment. 2. the incitment he has to
it, verse. 15.3. the execution, verse. 16.

The person is described in the 14. verse. beside a preface of Iobns, I looked,
and behold, which should make this to be observed. The person executing the
judgment is set out in four properties. If it be asked, who it is? For Answer,
We conceive Christ to be principally meaned here, yet so as inferior agents,
who are made use of by Him who is the principal, are not to be secluded. That
He is principally understood, will appear, 1. By comparing this treading with
that name Christ gets, Chap. 19.15. He treads who is the Lord of Lords. 2.
The properties agree well and only to Him principally, 1. He rides on a cloud
when He comes to judgment, Isa. 19.1. none has such a Throne as He, and He
is said to come in the clouds with Power and great Glory, Matthew. 25. It is
called a cloud and a white cloud, 1. To show Sovereignty and Glory in the
Judge. 2. Speediness and swiftness in coming to execute. 3. By whiteness is
meaned not only gloriousness but innocence and straightness of proceeding.
Second property, He is like the Son of man: by which Title Christ is described,
Chap. 1. verse. 13. and it can well agree to none other. Third property, He has
a golden crown on His head; signifying, 1. Authority, He is a crowned King and
that with a crown of gold, signifying stateliness, Psalm. 21. and prosperous
success in His undertakings and conquests. Fourth property, He has in his
hand a sharp sickle, that is, an instrument wherewith they used to reap, as we
mow hay with a sith. By this is set out Christ's readiness, furniture and power
to execute judgment on wicked men: as readily and easily as a man cutteth down
grass or corn with a sharp sickle, he will mow them down.

Yet though we look upon Christ as a principal agent, we do not exclude
inferior instruments. Hence the second Angel which comes out to the vintage,
is so described as the inferior agents are, yet in that Christ is chief, as is
said. Beside, ( Chap. 17.) it is said, God shall put it in the hearts of Kings
to execute judgment on the whore and hate her: and, it is like, Christ now
appearing with a crown as a King, may signify his usemaking of such, and so
appearing as King of Kings ( Chap. 19.) in this work.

2. The incitation that Christ gets to delay no longer, verse. 15. has these
two things, 1. the party urging. 2. the motives used to persuade Him. The party
is an Angel, and that out of the Temple: by an Angel, we understand, as
formerly, some Minister or Ministers, as mouths of Congregations, interposing
with Christ seriously to execute His wrath. This their prayer suiteth with the
Saints practice pointed at Chap. 16. See also, Ier. 33. It agrees well also
with the practice of Saints under Antichrist, and with the Lords way of
stirring up people to pray before he deliver fully, Dan. 9.23. for, this voice
being to Christ from an Angel that comes out of the Church (represented by the
Temple, because in it Ministers of old used there to serve) it must necessarily
be vented in praying and not in commanding. And the Angel must be no proper
Angel, but a figurative, as before. By his coming out of the Temple, also may
be holden forth, 1. their joint concurrence in that suit who were in the
Church. 2. A liberty that was now in professing such petitions, whereas before
they were shut up in the Temple, Chap. 11.1.

This Angels speech contains, 1. his suit, Thrust in thy sickle, delay no
longer. 2. The motives or reasons (for we ought to seek nothing especially of
this kind, but what is well grounded) are two in general, The time for thee to
reap is come; holding forth, 1. that there was time set to the judgment. 2.
When it is come, then it is time to pray, as Dan. 9.3. with 2. This word, the
time for thee, seems to point out one especially interested in this office,
which must be Christ. The 2. motive is more particular, confirming the former,
for the harvest of the earth is ripe. By harvest is understood in the Prophets,
especially speaking of Babylon, as was said, a full return of judgment, Ier.
51.33. By ripeness is understood a fullness and height of sin, Joel 3. so
together holding forth ripe sin and ready judgment; sin has its sowing and
growth and ripening, and so wrath answerable is treasured up till the harvest
time, as God said of the Amorites, Genesis 15. their cup was not full; and sin may
be long in ripening, for hundreds of years. There is a set time for mercy,
Psalm. 102. and a set time for judgment also. The meaning in short is,
Antichrists sin is become great, aggreged with many circumstances, as now
ripened; and when our Lord appeared as on His way to execute judgment, His
Church and People stepped in to beg that it might be so, which accordingly (
verse. 16.) is granted; and fields of wicked men are destroyed, possibly that
which Antichrist lived on; and the harvest he had in the earth by Gods
judgments was destroyed. However, what the Angel had to execute, is instantly
done upon that petition, and accordingly it follows, ( verse. 16.) in two
things, according to commission he puts in his sickle. Then the earth was
reaped, easily was the judgment executed which he intended: there is no more,
but it was reaped; when he begins, he makes an end.

Verse. 17. The second similitude follows of the vintage, which is both a
sorer degree of judgment and posteriour to the former; sin being now riper,
even fully ripe, These grapes of Sodom are cut down, gathered and cast into the
wine press of Gods wrath, it being usual to the Prophets to use this
similitude, Isa. 63.2, 3, 4.

It has also three parts. 1. The executioner is described, verse. 17. 2. His
incitment to proceed, verse. 18. 3. The execution. This executioner is an Angel,
yet diversely described from the former, and called another: yet comparing it
with Chap. 19.15. Christ must be understood as principal, but seeing He does
these works mediately (as in that same Chapter by Armies on horseback)
sometimes He is represented, because they act by Him; sometimes the types more
formally represent them who are agents, because he makes use of them: however
when He is represented, they are not secluded, and contra; He is not when the
types resemble them most; and the putting these two agents together, it shows
that though Christ (...) instruments, yet that Himself first appears, because
the work was great and the (...) weak; extraordinarily He begins, but when
the Church multiplieth, He (...) Him instruments out of her.

The instrument, or agent, is called an Angel (as these who power out the vials
are) yet we conceive them not to be understood as properly so; (seeing battles
and horses are not obscurely mentioned here, and ( Chap. 19.) to be made use of
in the execution of these plagues) but the manner of the expression of things
in this Book, is in the terms of heaven. It points at some fit ready
instrument Jesus Christ shall have to make use of when He shall have to do, one
or more to cut down and cast these grapes in the wine press; but ( Chap. 19.)
He treads it Himself. Two things are spoken concerning this Angel, 1. He came
out of the Temple which is in heaven, that is, some member or members of His
Church, here called heaven: for it was the wine of the earth, that is, of the
wicked, and not of the Church, which was to be gathered. 2. He is armed even
with a sharp sickle, (such as Christ had) to show it was that same power
whereby this instrument acted, the armor and strength was of the supreme
Agent. Hence, Chap. 19. (which we take to be the same judgment with this, and
ending Gods controversy on the beast) He as King rides foremost, and the
Armies of heaven follow Him to this battle: yet none have arms but He, and we
cannot conceive them acting but He is on their head. Hence we may think it the
less absurdity that the petition again for furtherance of the work is renewed
to this Angel, although it be not absurd to conceive this Angel to be a
Minister of the Gospel (as Levits served at the altar) giving direction to such
as Christ should choose to execute His judgments, as one of the beasts gives
the Angels the vials, Chap. 15.7. and so his power over the fire will be to be
understood, as Chap. 11. of the Witnesses their having power over fire and
diverse other plagues.

Verse. 18. The incitation is renewed: God will be called on in every step. In
which ye have, 1. The suitor described. 2. The suit and its reasons are set
down; both which differ from what is spoken of by the former intercessour,
verse. 15. the suitor is called an Angel, but has two peculiar properties, 1.
He comes forth from the altar, which imports some more retired, secret, holy
place than the Temple: we can expound it no otherwise than we did, Chap. 6.9,
10. in the fifth seal, to hold out heaven, ordinarily set out by the most holy.
2. He had power over the fire: not as one peculiarly separated to govern that
element, nor one commissionated to execute judgment himself by fire, properly
or figuratively to be understood; for then he needed not deal with him who is
properly commissionated for that end: and that Angel ( Chap. 16.) is called the
Angel of the waters; not as having a peculiar charge ordinarily of them or over
them, but as peculiarly commissionated in reference to them with his vial (yet
it is not properly to be understood of waters, as will appear) it holds out
then (to speak so) some contest and fight they had with fire, and that the fire
did not prevail over them, but they overcame it by the blood of the Lamb, Chap.
12.11. and by their faith and patience ( Heb. 11.) being invincibly armed
against all torments. In a word, we take it to be the reviving of the Martyrs
cry, which was against heathen persecuters, Chap. 6. Now, their number is
complete, and there is not that ground of suspending the judgment which was
given in that place. This comes to rememberance before God, who finds in her
the blood of all Prophets and Apostles, because they have served themselves
heirs to all; and this guilt has a loud cry before the Lord to procure the
hastening and closing of Antichrists judgment. So the first Angel sets out
the cry of all the Church Militant; the second more especially of sufferers
Triumphant. See Chap. 6. This Angels suit in two things differs from and
goes behind the former, 1. The suit is, thrust in thy sharp sickle, it was
simply sickle before: This is added to show a severity in this judgment, and a
holy pressing in this Angel beyond the former. 2. The grapes are said to be
fully ripe, so there needs no longer waiting. The harvest was ripe before,
now the grapes are fully ripe, for they have had more time. 2. They had more
means, and former lesser judgments were despised. 3. They have had more light
by what has past. 4. More wickedness has fallen in their hand
notwithstanding and out over the belly of that light, especially perfection:
and now the number of the Witnesses or Martyrs seems to be nigh complete, and
therefore the sin is riper now than it was, Chap. 6. or yet under the former
similitude. Thus, as it were, heaven and earth concur to pull down Antichrist.

The execution follows, verse. 19. and 20. in which the^ (...) are
considerable, 1. There is no longer delay, but judgment is immediately (...)
sin and a sinning people, hasten wrath. See Psalm. 119.126. It is time for thee,
(...) to work: for they make void thy Law. And no sooner is the execution begun
but in its due order and time it is finished. And the vine is gathered:
Judgment never misseth its end. 2. The vine is not only cut down and gathered,
but it is cast in the winepresse of Gods wrath, that is, brought or put in the
place where God executes His judgments on them, which as it is temporal, is
( Chap. 19) called Armageddon; and as it is eternal, its the lake, Chap.
19.20. which certainly is the last result. 3. This wine press is trod, verse.
20. (following the similitude) and it shows that Christ's wrath who is the
treader, shall pursue them terribly. 4. It is trodden without the city: It is
like so was their presses in their wineyards, for to be near them: It
signifies here, 1. a fit place, set apart for executing wrath on them. 2. a
shutting them out as polluted, from His Church here and heaven hereafter: so
the lake is opposed ( Chap. 20.) to entering into the holy Jerusalem; a
separating of them from His people in that judgment, that the City should have
no hurt by it.

5. The terriblnesse of the effect and judgment is described, in three things,
1. That blood came out: that shows that a proper judgment on men is to be
understood here. 2. It was to the horse-bridles, so very deep: which would be
compared with Chap. 19. 15, etc. where Christ there erodeth this press, and
His followers are mounted on horseback for pursuing this victory: the blood is
so deep on the fields, and the slaughter so great, that it choaketh up to the
horse-bridles of these who pursue. 3. This deepnesse of the blood its running,
was not a furlong or two, but 1600. furlongs, counting eight furlongs to a
mile. It is two hundred miles, a long way, a definit space for an indefinit,
but great, and setting out great slaughter of enemies, so that all the fowls
are invited to a feast, Chap. 19. In a word, it is a dreadful judgment on the
beast and his followers, most certainly to come.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. ANd I saw another sign in heaven, great and mavelous, seven Angels
having the seven last plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God.

2. And I saw as it were a sea of glass, mingled with fire, and them that had
gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and
over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of
God.

3. And they sung the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the
Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and
true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art
holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments
are made manifest.


AT the close of the 11. Chapter, when the seventh trumpet did sound, we told
you that the order and series of the story of the events would have required a
present entering into the particular description of the last woe, which here is
called the last plagues; but that it might be the clearer, the explicatory
prophecy and vision is cast in, Chap. 12, 13, and 14. as the first great sign
that was seen after the sounding of the seventh trumpet ^ and when that is
sufficiently done, he returns in the fifth vision, to set down the third and
last principal prophecy, which is (as the other two) set down in seven types,
and has its preparation, making way to it as they had. So it is formally in
the series knit to the 11. Chap. at the close, where the Temple is opened: then
follows thunders, generally intimating judgments: Now, it is set down what
judgments, and this vision declares these by bringing seven Angels out of the
Temple thus opened with wrath, which is the same hinted at there; and Chap. 14.
from verse. 15. See Chap. 11. verse. 15.

This principal prophecy is contained, Chap. 15. and 16. in the fifth vision
it has its preparation and execution. The preparation has three steps, 1.
more generally giving a little view and sum of it, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. of this
Chapter. 2. More particularly, describing its instruments and concomitants,
verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. The third is a plain giving of the word to these instruments
thus made ready, Chapter 16. verse. 1.

The more general proposition of this vision, is set down in two things; or,
is two ways expressed, first, verse. 1. that now John saw, after much delay,
these who had the last plagues to execute, making for it. The verse contains
three things, 1. John's designing this vision, to make men the more attentive,
I saw (says he) another sign, that is, somewhat appearing not accidentally, or
from natural causes, but purposly appointed to signify something: It is
another, that is, different both in type and signification from what was Chap.
12. 1. It is called great and mavelous, in respect of the events especially
which it foretells, to wit, Gods wrath upon the Beast and his kingdom, to
their very overturning and erecting of a Church and Kingdom unto Jesus Christ
on his ruins. Which, considering the beasts grandour in the world and the way
of Gods bringing that destruction about, will be a very wonderful thing. 2.
The thing is hinted at in general, seven Angels having the seven last plagues:
where is summed the last wrath and judgments of Antichrist; in that respect
they are called the last plagues. The instruments are Angels: it may be God
will make use of Angels, yet not only or immediately, Therefore by Angels may
be understood whomsoever God shall make Ministers of His wrath, probably
Members of His Church, as Kings ( Chap. 17.) that are made to hate the whore
and do his pleasure on her. See Chap. 14. verse. 13. and 19.14. They are seven,
to show different judgments or several degrees to be poured out.

The last thing in the verse, is the reason why they are called the last
plagues, because in them is filled up the wrath of God, that is, not only is
there wrath in them, but such wrath as will consummate what wrath here-away God
determines for the beast till he be cast into the lake; there will be no
judgment here, after these come, neither will there be place for them. These
plagues will make a full end.

Verse. 2. The second general way, whereby he gives a foretast of what these
vials bring, is a little hint at the flourishing and gladsome condition of the
Church, as well as of the hard things which were to come on her enemies: which
two ordinarily go together, and usually by anticipation are set down in a Song.
It is in allusion to Moses and Isreal's way of coming out of Egypt, who, when
they past the Sea, wherein their enemies were destroyed, did sing: so the
redeemed, when they shall be delivered out of spiritual Egypt, and be put on
the shore beyond their trials, they shall sing and have no less cause to sing,
and shall do it as surely as ever Moses did, Exodus 15. The one delivery shall
be as certain, great and welcome as the other. Particularly, in it consider, 1.
who do sing, they are they who have gotten the victory over the beast, and his
image, his mark and number: by these are understood not only such as were ever
kept from Antichrist his pollution, but all that shall be under the seventh
trumpet, as brought out from under that tyranny, as the allusion to the people
of Isreal's coming out of Egypt clears. They are thus described particularly,
to show they are such whom neither the Popes flatterers, nor terrors, nor
Church threatenings could prevail over; but through Grace they prevailed over
all, though for a time they fought.

These four things over which they get the victory, signify the same
corruption of Antichrist, that in no respect its deadly poison did stick to
them.

After he has described these singers by their victory, as fully renouncing
and abhorring Popery in all the branches of it, They are, Secondly, set out in
that postour they were in, They were standing on a sea of glass mingled with
fire. Three things are to be enquired here, 1. What this sea of glass is? 2.
What it is to stand on it? 3. What it is to be mingled with fire?

First, By this ^^a, or great vessel of glass, we show ( Chap. 4.) was
understood the efficacy of the blood of Jesus Christ, by which only His people
and their sacrifices can be washen and sanctified; and of this we gave the
reasons there, and here also it may be confirmed: For, first, this standing
upon the sea of glass denotes the excellency and firmness of the foundation
upon which they stand. 2. If we consider parallel places, it is in express
terms expounded, Chap. 7.14. when this same company and their victory are
described, this is given as the ground thereof, they are come out of great
tribulation, and have washen their robes and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb: so ( Chap. 12.11.) it is said, that they overcame by the blood of the
Lamb, etc. And this being marked as the ground which secureth these redeemed
ones, it must be for this purpose, to show that the way and manner of their
getting victory over the beast, and their security against him, did consist in
their fleeing to, and resting upon, Christ Jesus His satisfaction and
Righteousness, while the rest of the Antichristian world were blindfolded in
ignorance and error, going about to establish their own righteousness, as it
were, by the works of the Law. 3. It is confirmed from that, Chap. 4. where
this sea of glass is described to be before the Throne: which signifies their
abiding near unto God in these times of defections, when all generally went a
whoring from Him, wondering after the beast. Secondly, Standing upon this sea
of glass, does import, 1. A confidence in them, in their betaking them to that
shore, as it were; the Believer never halteth till he be on Christ, but is ever
fleeing toward Him, and then he stands. 2. It imports a confidence that
they have, as now defying Antichrist through the virtue of that blood, and an
exulting in God who had brought them to that land: and this has some allusion
to the peoples practice, Exodus 15. 3. It implies an efficacy and
vertuousnesse, to say so, in this sea of glass, that being for excellency like
glass, is yet able to support all the redeemed and to keep them from drowning.
Lastly, (which is clear from the scope) it imports their public owning of
the truth of God, which was contradicted and opposed by Antichrist and his
followers, whereas they had not appeared so openly to bear testimony to it
before. By this sea of glass cannot be understood the world: Because, 1. this
sea of glass is mentioned as that which supporteth them, and the basis upon
which they are builded, which will not agree to this uncertain world. 2. It is
spoken of as a piece of their adorning, and that which seperateth them from
Antichrist, and keeps them as contradistinct from his company, which will not
be so clear from the other interpretation. 3. This sea of glass, upon which
they stand, is said to be mingled with fire. By fire must be understood
somewhat suitable to this sea. Now, Chap. 4. where this sea is spoken of v. 6.
lamps of fire are spoken of as burning before the Throne, which are the seven
spirits of God: hence it will follow, that by fire here is understood a
sanctifying efficacy of the spirit of Jesus, which is often compared in
Scripture to fire, I will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. And so
this is the meaning, I saw the redeemed put beyond the difficulties of
Antichrist, and out of the hazard of his curse, by the virtue of Christ's blood
justifying them, and by the virtue of His spirit sanctifying them: and I saw
them publicly appearing, and confidently giving testimony to the truth, as not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; and this is added to distinguish these truly
redeemed from carnal and presumptuous hypocrites, who boast of faith and their
standing upon the sea of glass, but do evidence that that sea is not mingled
with fire and the spirit of Sanctification, and therefore is not that
foundation which will give them ground to tone their harps and sing before God:
further, it may signify Christ's making use of the cross to promove His
Peoples Sanctification, which is subordinate and subservient to the former.

In the last part of the Verse they are said to have the harps of God, while
they stand upon the sea of glass: this shows that the former ground must be
something which gives them very great cheerfulness, and agrees well with
their having palms in their hands, who are spoken of, Chap. 7.14. and are said
to have washen their clothes in the blood of the Lamb. And this phrase
imports, 1. that their harps were excellent; so the phrase in Scripture, is
often, when it would commend the excellency of things, to call them things of
God, that is, most excellent 2. It imports it to be of Gods giving, not a
harp put in their hand, or, a song put in their mouth by Antichrist or the
world, but by God Himself: and this is their advantage, that their songs and
mirth is communicate to them by God, and so cannot be interrupted by the world.

Then he comes, verse. 3. and 4. to describe the Song, 1. It is generally, the
song of Moses, that is, having the like occasion and subject which he had,
Exodus 15. 2. It is the song of the Lamb, that is, such a Song as Christ has
given the occasion of, the most cheerful Song He has put in our mouth that
ever was. His Song, first, because He, by furnishing the occasion, puts it
in our mouths, Psalm. 40.3. And secondly, by His Spirit He helps to sing it.
Thirdly, He is the great subject of it.

2. The matter of the Song, is more particularly set forth in it self, which
expresses three things, or three ways speaks to the scope, 1. By commending
these Works of Gods justice and Him the author. 2. By showing the glorious
effects of them. 3. The special cause having influence to produce these
effects: in all which there is a special likeness to their Song, Chap. 11. as
was noted there, 1. Gods works (that is, these specially that are hinted at in
this type of the vials) are called by them great and mavelous. 1. Great,
because no mean power could overturn such an established Kingdom so easily as
He did the beasts, that is indeed a great work. 2. Mavelous, breeding
admiration, even such as should make men and angels admire Gods Wisdom,
Patience, Power, Justice etc. that suffered this beast to thrive so long, and
now in his height takes such order with him. Therefore an epithete suitable to
this work is given to God, Lord God Almighty, because in this great work,
omnipotency manifests it self, and that it was done by Him who could do
whatsoever He pleases: So in this they ascribe the Power to God, and commend
His works. They add just and true are thy ways, two other epithetes. 1. Just,
for it was well deserved, there was no wrong done to the beast by any of these
vials. 2. True, i.e. conform in all things to Thy promises made to Thy people,
and threatenings against Thy enemies; It is not works in particular but ways
that are commended, that is, all the strain of Thy proceeding since the
beginning is just and true even as this; so they take occasion from the
particular, to bless God for all the way of His providence in all things: Thus
these who pray for Antichrists ruin, ( Chap. 14.) do now praise. The name they
ascribe to God is suitable, Thou King of Saints, who by Thy just way deserves
to be called so. He is King of Saints, 1. Because He loves holiness and these
that are so. 2. Because He defends them and opposes their enemies and the
enemies of holiness, as here He has made it appear; so that though He be King
over all the world, yet He has a special dominion over and singular care of
Saints, and these who are Godly ( Psalm. 4.) He sets them apart for Himself:
and this title has a kindly claim unto God in the bosom of it, as well as it
shows what a holy King He is, who in His Sovereignty will acknowledge no
proper subjects but Saints. Hence here He is King of Saints, whereas ( Ier.
10.7.) He is King of Nations: because there it is a fruit of common providence
that He is commended from, as the giving of rain; here it is a peculiar
appearing for, and owning of His Church, expressing not only power but
holiness in His way, and that in a special manner.

This commendation is amplified in the effects, verse. 4. setting out
wonderfully their heightening of these wonderful works of God in two
expressions, having every one of them their reasons.

First, Who will not, or, shall not fear thee? were Thou and Thy works well
known, are there any so brutish, or stupid, but they must needs praise and fear
Thee and glorify Thy Name and think much of Thee? they do not declare the
event, that every one ( de facto) shall do so; but ( de jure) they say there is
reason it should be so, and hope that now much more of this should be than ever
before. The reason is, for Thou only art holy, that is, Thou art essentially,
infinitely and unchangeably holy, which no creature is; and now by Thy owning of
Thy people, and executing judgment so justly, Thou declares Thy self to be
so, yea only so; None in all the world could have guided things in such a great
confusion so, and brought them to such an holy end, as we see now Thou have
done: before we were in hazard of mistaking Thee who art holy and true, Chap.
6. as if Thou had too long delayed it, yet now we see that in purest holiness
Thou have ordered all without any wrong.

The second expression amplifying the effect, is, All nations shall worship
before thee: the reason is, for thy judgments are made manifest: In a word,
this glorious work will make way for bringing in Nations to the Church, seeing
by this expression of Thy holiness Thou have manifested Thy self a just God,
and publicly made it appear Thou will be avenged upon Antichrist for all his
wrongs, which has been formerly obscured; but now by taking to Thee Thy great
Power, as Chap. 11. it is evident. And so from such manifestations of the
Holiness and Justice of God in His judgments, they argue to the greatness of
His praise and the enlargement of His Kingdom, which cannot but follow on such
rare works of Justice, seeing God is known by the judgments which He executes,
Psalm. 9.

In sum, the Song says, God wonderfully judges the whore, whereupon shall
follow enlargement, increase and joy to the Church, which shall be a ground to
them of rendering praise to this purpose (though not in these very words) to
God. Which Song would be considered in the matter of it, and in the manner,
wherein exceeding high and heavenly thoughts of God appear in a heart that
cannot satisfy it self in praising Him.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 5. And after that I looked, and behold, the Temple of the Tabernacle of
the testimony in heaven was opened:

6. And the seven Angels came out of the Temple, having the seven plagues,
clothed in pure and white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden
girdles.

7. And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven Angels, seven golden vials
full of the wrath of God, who lives for ever and ever.

8. And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his
power, and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues of
the seven Angels were fulfilled.


THis Chapter (as was said) contains the preparation to the prophecy of the
seven vials, whereby the last wrath of God is fulfilled on the beast and his
kingdom. The more general part of this, is past in the preceding verses:
These verses do more particularly set forth the preparation, in these four, 1.
in the rise of all, which is the Temples opening, or the change of the outward
face of the Church. 2. The description of the seven Angels that were
instruments, verse. 6. 3. The furnishing of them for their task and work. 4. A
concomitant going along with the execution of their judgment.

The first thing, is ( verse. 5.) the antecedent to all these plagues, which is
the rise of all, that is, the opening of the Temple. That this is antecedent,
appears by the context, where this opening is observed to clear what
follows concerning the Angels coming forth, as a prior step of the narration
in order before their coming forth.

For understanding of it, we would consider that there is an allusion (as Chap.
11. verse. ult.) to the Jewish Church, where in time of Idolatry and backsliding
the Temple was shut, as in Ahabs days; and in time of Reformation when all was
brought again to the rule, the Temple was opened and sanctified, the Sacrifices
put in order, and the Priests sanctified, as in Hezekiahs days. John's meaning
is, before this, the Temple was shut, Religion, in its outward splendour and
beauty, defaced by Antichrist; but now (as if he said) I saw a time of
Reformation, when superstition and Idolatry was banished, and Purity and Truth
preached in open view, as it was before Antichrist darkened their light. Thus,
as the Temple was that which most evidenced the state of the Jewish Church, and
the changes were most sensibly observed there; so (as many other things) that
is borrowed to set out the change in the Christian Church here. See more, Chap.
11. verse. 19. This step of preparation concerning the public breaking out of
the Truth, is observed for these reasons, 1. To show to what time these vials
belong, to wit, to the state of the Church after Antichrists treachery is
discovered, and God has made some light to break out in His Church, to wit, to
the last period. 2. To show the connection of these vials with, and their
dependence upon, the blowing of the seventh trumpet, Chap. 11. last verse. where
this same is mentioned: Now after a profitable digression, when he comes again
to the series of the prophecy, he begins (as it were) where he left, so to
carry it on from thence forward the more clearly.

The second thing will clear this, after this Temple is opened, and Religion in
heaven (that is, in the visible Church) is publicly professed, the Lord
brings out seven Angels out of the opened Temple. These are the instruments
of this wrath, mentioned, verse. 1. They are described by these things, 1. They
are called Angels: we think not properly, but figuratively, such as He had
fitted for this work and commissionated to execute it, whether Ministers or
Magistrates. Their getting their vials from one of the beasts, and their being
arrayed with girdles, seems to confirm this; and more especially, that they
were great civil men. 2. They are described from whence they came, They came
out of the Temple, that is, (as it appears) they shall be members of the
Church (now made patent) who are to be made use of in these judgments to
execute His wrath on the whore. 3. They are clothed with linen, either to show
the purity of their proceeding, or alluding to the Priests habit, Ezekiel. 44. as
that of golden girdles alludeth to the manner of Kings. So these are Kings and
Priests authorized and well furnished for such a work: all whom He employeth,
are fitted instruments for His work.

The third circumstance of their further preparation, is mentioned, verse. 7.
where two things are to be observed, 1. The instruments, or means of the
plagues which they had to execute them with, that is, vials full of wrath.
Vials ar great hollow vessels or cups, wide at the mouth: whereby is meaned, 1.
great wrath. 2. an easy and quiet way of pouring it forth without great noise,
possibly, having respect to the threatening, Chap. 14. where they are threatened
with the cup of Gods wrath. These are called golden vials, partly because
Justice in it self is precious, and it is an excellent dignity and honorable
to be made use of in its execution, especially as approved instruments; partly,
to show Gods pure proceeding without the least mixture of any passion.

2. These vials are given by one of the beasts: it is like the first beast (as
one day of the week, is the first day, Matthew. 28.) which ( Chap. 4.) is the
type of valiant, bold and zealous Ministers. They are said to give these Angels
these vials, when by and from Gods Word they clear that to be their duty, and
in Gods Authority calls them to it. By which it would seem that God would not
have Kings and Princes waiting for an extraordinary revelation and call to
awake to this judgment, but to acquiesce in ordinary Ministers, clearing His
Truth from His Word; and thus, though Ministers be not to execute wrath
actually and immediately by fighting, yet do they (as it were) blow the
trumpets, 2 Chronicles. 13. and so they set up and cast down Kings and Kingdoms,
Ier. 1. and their sword slays more than Hazaels. Thus it would seem, when
eminent men are converted and ingrafted in the Church, zealous Ministers do put
them in mind of this duty that God expects from the Kings of the earth; such
zealous men have been, and particularly were after the begun opening of the
Temple. God is said here to live for ever and ever; partly, to show that He is
reverently always to be spoken of; partly, to show what Master these Angels had,
and whose wrath they were executing: not their own, Therefore they should not
be in their zeal selfish and carnal, but it was Gods wrath and the wrath of
such a great God; and therefore they had need to be single and humble, as
others had reason to be afraid of such everlasting wrath. That denomination of
God, adds to the heightening of the wrath.

The fourth thing, which is the concomitant of these plagues, is verse. 8.
containing, 1. the concomitant it self. 2. its effect. The concomitant, is, the
Temple is filled with smoke: this alludeth to Gods way of old, making His
presence sensible by signs in the Tabernacle, when it was newly erected, as
Exodus 40. and in the Temple, when it was newly builded, as 2 King. 8.10, So
here, when the Gospel Church shall be of new recovered, Gods presence will be
as sensible and great in it, as it was of old, when Priests might not enter
into the Temple because of the glory of it. Sometimes also this appearance, is
a sign of anger, as Numb. 16. when He appeared to take vengeance on stubborn
offenders, and would admit of no intercession: These being not inconsistent,
but ordinarily conjoined, to wit, Gods presence, glorious and refreshing to His
own, and terrible and dreadful to His enemies, Isa. 66.5. we understand both
here: which agrees well with the words following, filled with smoke, from the
glory of God, that looks to His gracious appearing, and from His power that
holds Him forth terrible, as now appearing to exercise His power for comfort
to His people and terror to His enemies. And so the effect agrees to this,
There was no man that was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues
were fulfilled: which shows the degree or measure of that glory of Gods
appearing: It was extraordinary, as was in these times, Exodus 40. and 1 King.
8. before mentioned, it is not to be understood as if none now were in the
Temple (the Church has her own indwellers then) but that amongst them without,
against whom these plagues were directed, none of them, or few of them, got
Repentance to flee in for making peace with God in Christ. But these plagues,
being against obstinate contemners of the light of the Word, now such a
spiritual smoke of ignorance and hardness of heart was on them, and possibly
of darkness and contention in the Church, so that through Gods judgment on
them they fretted under these plagues and perished, but repented not, as we
will see particularly observed, Chap. 16. or, none could enter, etc. that is,
God would admit none to make intercession for preventing these plagues (as
Moses and the Priests in such cases entered the Tabernacle to intercede) until
the wrath threatened was executed: and so none could enter till then, will be
this, they could never enter for that purpose, as the word is taken, 2 Samuel 6.
verse. last.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. ANd I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven
Angels, Go your ways and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the
earth.

2. And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth, and there fell
a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and
upon them which worshipped his image.


IN this 16. Chapter is prosecuted the execution of these last plagues from
verse. 2. In the 1. verse. there is the last step of preparation for it, by
commissionating these Angels who were instruments presently to fall about it.
The voice seems to be Christ's, called a great voice out of the Temple:
partly, to show Authority in Him that calls; partly, to show His earnestness
in the thing He calls unto. Whether this be immediately from Christ, or
mediately by His Ministers in His Church, (which is most like) it is all one,
seeing it is Christ's Word and has his warrant. The commission is limited, to
pour them out on the earth, that is, such a part of the world as is
contradistinguished from the Church, which is called heaven; for, afterward
some are poured on the Sea, some in the Air, etc. for, though the antichristian
world be a complete world in it self; yet, being compared with the Church, it
is but the earth: Out of the Temple, because there of old God gave Oracles; it
is in allusion to that. Before we speak particularly of these vials, we shall
premit some general considerations useful for understanding of them, or some
general observations concerning them.

1. As all these vials speak wrath, and the last wrath, so do they all speak
wrath principally against the beast as the object of it, with his kingdom and
followers, as these who have his name, mark, character, etc. The first vial is
poured on the earth of that kingdom, and of the second, 5. and 7. it is clear;
His wrath is perfected against the whore by these, therefore that Song ( Chap.
18. and 19.) is as the result of these judgments; for, they are such
judgments as are not common to others, but peculiarly affect Him and His.
Therefore in the fourth vial, it is said, the men ((...)) particularly relating
to men mentioned before, to wit, these that were marked with his mark, which
will afterward be more clear: Yet let this have three caveats, 1. The Church
wants not her exercises, even in the time of these vials, as was clear from
Chap. 14.11. she has her enemies and battles there, but they all end in and
tend to her enlargement in the close. 2. Though they aim principally at
Antichrist as the chief enemy, yet other enemies do not escape unpunished, but
are made sharers in the judgment also, under them, especially in the 6. and 7.
vials, which are more general, as will appear, and take in more enemies. 3. It
is not to be understood, that they so carry on the beasts ruin, as that it is
always sensible; he still sighteth and may have his own seeming advantages to
harden him, as if he might recover, which yet shall never be, but by this God
has the more glory in renewing his battles against him, as He had against
^^^raoh by multiplying his judgments against him, unto which there is an
allusion here.

2. It would be Observed, that the kingdom of the beast, when it is spoken of
as the object of these judgments, is spoken of as a world having a Heaven,
Earth, Sea, Rivers, Sun, etc. as parts of it, even as it was observed before in
the destruction of the Heathen world in the sixth seal, Chap. 6. and of the
Christian world, Chap. 8. Which observation is useful, 1. To help us to find
out what thing in Popery, or, in that dominion, is meaned by some analogy from
Earth, Sea, etc. in the natural body and frame of the world, to such things
made use of in that antichristian world: which, in that respect, are Earth,
Sea, etc. to it. 2. It is useful, to let us see what weight Religion and its
change has upon a people; it makes it appear as another world, and therefore
the special changes, in all these three periods, are to be sought in the
change that is on the outward frame and face of Religion. 3. It is useful for
clearing one thing by another, as what was Sea in the Christian world, will
help to show what supplieth that room in the antichristian, etc.

3. Observe that in these vials, respect is sundry times had in the expression
of the effects to the plagues of Egypt, Exodus 6.7, 8. yet so that as Romish
Babylon, is spiritually called Egypt and Sodom, Chap. 11. So these effects, are
not literally, but spiritually to be understood, at least, in a great part.

4. Take this consideration also, that as Antichrist has a double notion and
consideration, Chap. 13. as Civil or Ecclesiastical; So these parts of him,
Rivers, Sun, etc. and the effects on them, may have that twofold consideration,
some of them on his temporal grandour bringing temporal plagues; some of them
on his Ecclesiastic frame, by spiritual judgments overturning that:
therefore is it that some of them are certainly spiritually, others literally,
(...), to be understood, some of them have respect to both as we will see.

5. Observe, that in the order of the pouring forth of these vials, there is a
special likeness and reference to that same order and method which was
followed in the trumpets, Chap. 8. The first vial is on the earth, as the first
trumpet, and so it is with the rest: but as the worlds are different, so are
the effects. This lets us see, First, that as we are to look on Antichrists
fall by the vials, so we are to look to his rise under the trumpets, seeing the
Spirit holds forth in these two, 1. a suitableness and equality in Gods
justice, bringing him down as he rose, 2. a spreading and counterfeiting nature
in his errors, making a whole body, as it were, a world, in opposition to
Christ's world before. Secondly, it helps, by comparing the trumpets and vials
together, to win at some clearness in the effects threatened. And, 3. that the
ruin is as certain as the rise of the beast; and is the three last woes in the
trumpets were greatest, so are the three last vials.

6. Consider the time to which these vials relate: and although it be not easy
or possible to determine the distance of time between them, or the precise
beginning of every one of them; yet may something be laid as certain for the
rise and close of this vision in generall^ which in short we take to be that
same of the seventh trumpets sounding, Chap. 11. after the begun change of
Reformation, especially when Reformation and Religion came to be established by
civil Authority, which will be about Anno 1560. as was then more fully cleared:
this is after the beasts kingdom is discovered and a change and decay in his
grandour begun. The pouring out of the seventh vial, clears that the close is
the consummating of Gods wrath, as their titles bear, Chap. 15. verse. 2. and so
ends with time.

7. Concerning the instruments, called Angels, Observe, That though one Angel
only be named to every one, yet it will not exclude more agents, but that God
though He make use of men, Ministers or Magistrates (both having hand therein,
Chap. 14. compared with 17.) yet He has it overruled by Angels, that it be
not disappointed, and that it should not fail.

8. Observe, That though there be order in the rise of these judgments, and
all are not poured out together; yet, as in the seals and trumpets, so here it
will not follow, that the former judgment is ended, before another come, but
that there is an order in rising: yet, the first and second plague, which are
the effects of the first two vials, they go along to the end, and have but
these new plagues superadded to them.

To come nearer, there are two things in all these vials observable, 1. The
object plagued, or that whereon the vial is poured; which is (...) it were) the
cause. 2. The effect following, to wit, the affecting or plaguing that object,
whether that be primary or secundary; for, one plague may have sundry effects
following upon or going along with one another. Concerning which take these
rules, 1. That the object denotes some special part of the antichristian
frame or fabric of his kingdom, complexly taken. The judgment is primarily
there; the effect again reflecteth on the persons who are supporters of that
Kingdom, and affects them, as the Earth, Sea, Sun, Seat, etc. is still
somewhat of that antichristian state, which, being affected, affects his
worshippers, as the bringing down of a house, hazardeth these that are in it;
or, somewhat wrong in a ship, these who sail in her.

2. That this thing plagued, or on which the vial is poured, cannot be any
thing merely active in this judgment, as for instance, by the Sun, under the
fourth vial, cannot be meaned here the Scriptures, because they, as such, are
not proper parts of the antichristian frame, but some other thing accounted
Scripture as to them: Nor does the affecting of the Scriptures, by any violent
handling of them, grieve them who are excessive in that: but it must be
something that can suffer by these vials, the suffering whereof may have such
suitable effects on the subjects of that Kingdom, as the rejecting of their
traditions may probably grieve the abettors of them.

3. In application either of the things plagued, or of their effects to
particulars, special respect would be had to these three or four things, 1. to
the analogy between such a thing (suppose the earth) in the natural world,
and what is called earth in this antichristian universe; that by the similitude
of the one to the other, somewhat may be gathered. 2. What is applied, would
suit well with the effect; for, one of them has influence on the other, and a
suitableness to the other, as such a cause may have upon such an effect. 3.
That there be an agreeance and resemblance with these same things mentioned
under the trumpets: the one (to wit, earth, here) being to this antichristian
world in place of that which was earth there to the Christian world. 4. Special
respect would be had to the story of events; (so far as they are already
fulfilled) for some length certainly they are fulfilled, that the application
may agree with the series of the event, which otherwise cannot be sure.

To come particularly then to the first vial, according to these rules the
object of that plague is the earth. 2. The effect is, a grievous and noisome
sore fell upon the men who had the beasts mark, and worshipped his image. By
the earth is understood that which is most firm (it is the most firm part of
the universe, Psalm. 104. the earth He established, etc.) and most essential
and necessary for entertaining of life. By the earth of the antichristian world
then, we understand such Doctrines as they lay for surest, and upon which all
the rest stand, and without which that building cannot stand and be a world,
such as it is, more than this world without the earth. Such is the Popes
Supremacy, absolute to dispose of all things as he pleases (and others
mentioned, Chap. 13. as characteristicall to him) Hence did we expound the
earth ( Chap. 8.) to be the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion.
The pouring the vial on this, is the discovering the unsoundnesse of such
grounds, the rejecting and abhorring them in practice, and men's betaking
themselves to more solid and better principles to walk by, especially when done
by publicly authorized preaching.

The effects suit with this. 1. These plagued are such as are inslaved to the
beast, and stood and fell with him in the largest extent of his tenants and
Doctrines. 2. The plague it self is a boil and sore, but such as is occasioned
by the former discovery, alluding to the plague, ( Exodus 9.8.11.) of boyls
especially on the Magicians. Hereby is holden out a plague, 1. painful; 2.
shameful and loathsome before others: by which may be understood that inward
envy and fretting, and outward contempt and shame that fell on all Antichrists
devouted slaves, when God brought to light the vanity, blasphemy, and
hypocrisy of their devised Religion, and tyranny, whereby the world had long
been deluded. They now come to be accounted as unsavory salt, and false
Teachers, who once swayed all. In sum, this says, that when the seventh Angel
shall sound, and God shall begin His quarrel with the beast, He shall at the
entry so discover and shake the prime foundations of that antichristian
Kingdom, that it shall procure much inward fretting and vexing grief (compared
to pricking in the reins, Psalm. 73.21.) to the prime supporters thereof, and
shall make them loathsome and abominable to the world, as were the Magicians
(opposers of Moses and of the peoples delivery from Egypt, and isntrumental in
hardening Pharaoh and the Egyptians) by the plague of boyls, Exodus 9.11. so as
they could not stand.

In the event, this is sure, 1. that the fundamentals of the popish Kingdom
were stricken at, such as the Popes Supremacy and absoluteness, the opinion of
indulgences, merits, soul-masses, purgatory, etc. which two, Erasmus (merrily)
said, were the two unpardonable faults of Luther, that he had meddled with the
Popes crown and the Monks bellies, meaning that they would never digest it, to
be touched in these, but it would gall them. 2. The contempt that followed upon
that discovery, and the vexation, anxiety, terror, trouble and grief that it
put that Roman Clergy unto, the events and story of these times do
sufficiently witness.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 3. And the second Angel poured out his vial upon the sea, and it became
as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the sea.

4. And the third Angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of
waters, and they became blood.

5. And I heard the Angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which
art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus:

6. For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink, for they are worthy.

7. And I heard another out of the altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true
and righteous are thy judgments.


THe Angels proceed to execute Gods judgment on the beast, and the second
pours out his vial on the sea, verse. 3. The effects are two, 1. It became as
the blood of a dead man. The second is a consequent of this, every living soul
died in it. There is in this certainly set forth a further degree of
Antichrists ruin, as the second trumpet held forth a further step of his
rising: in general, this extends the plague on Antichrist further, and
brings it to an higher degree; But more particularly, (as we conceive) is
holden out Gods plague upon the complex body of that Kingdom, as it is
antichristian, that is, both sea and land, especially their Ordinances,
Government, superstitious forms of Worship, Councels, Decrees, etc. whereby
much of their grandour stood: now these are set upon, and the abbacies,
traditions, indulgences, etc. whereby they subsisted, are in a great part
destroyed.

That by sea here must be understood something of this nature, will appear by
comparing verse. 17. and 13. of Chap. 18. together: for, this sea must be
suitable and serviceable to these who trade in it, and these again suitable to
their trade, which is the souls of men amongst other things, verse. 13. ibid.
and these certainly must be their Churchmen, therefore this sea they trade in,
must be their Ecclesiastic or Church constitutions, forms and ordinances of
sacraments, ceremonies, masses, traditions, etc. and especially what concerns
indulgences, pardons and purgatory, because in these their trade of souls is
especially driven: this answers somewhat to the second trumpet also, Chap. 8.

Gods plague upon these, makes them like the blood of a deadman, that is, (as
Chap. 8. verse. 8.) it became corrupt, and not only useless but deadly, so that
whosoever would now follow that way and drink of these Doctrines, it would kill
him. Which two effects hold out, 1. that, after Gods begun quarrelling with
Antichrist, he mendeth his superstitious worship nothing, but makes it worse,
so did the Council of Trent in many Articles both of faith and worship. 2.
That after Gods revealing and discovering the grossness of particular errors
by the former vial, he went on and discovered the rottenness of the complex
worship and Government of that Kingdom. 3. That by this discovery, especially
their Churchmen were pinched. 4. That this brought the antichristian state
lower and made many forsake these rotten waters that they could not live in
them, or if they stayed, they were now more deadly than before this discovery:
So by dying here may be understood their dying as to Antichrists state, that
is, ceasing to be of his Kingdom as formerly, as Chap. 8.4. so they die to him,
or, they are more hardened that stay and become more spiritually dead. Thus
this judgment either makes them leave him, or it makes their condition more
desperate: so that now, none continuing to live under the full profession of
Popery, can get heaven, as in the former darkness, in some respect, it was
possible: this by the Council of Trent and what followed upon it, we may
conceive it to have its fulfilling; so that now men can no more live in Popery
and own their tenants than fishes can do amongst blood; but every living soul
that quitteth not these Ordininances, shall perish, partly, because now they
are worse in themselves, partly, because the light having made the discovery, a
separation is called for.

The third vial follows, from verse. 4. to verse. 8. containing three things,
1. The object plagued, it is the rivers and fountains. 2. The effect, they are
turned to blood. 3. There is a double approbation of Gods Justice, or
congratulation added, whereby some things may be gathered, useful for
understanding this vial, which differs not only in its object, but in its
kind from the former. We may in this observe these three things, 1. That the
object is men; not Ordinances or Government in the abstract, but such as sh^d
blood and can drink blood. 2. What sort of men they are, to wit, guilty of the
blood of the Saints, executioners of that whore who is drunk with the blood of
Saints, Chap. 17. and in whose skirts it is found, Chap. 18.24. 3. What sort of
plague this is, bloodshed, literally so taken: so to drink blood, imports
they have shed blood, and are met in their own measure. Their blood is shed,
and that in abundance: and the just proportionablnesse betwixt their sin and
judgment here, imports this, especially if we consider that ( Chap.
13.9.10.) he that kills with the sword, must be killed by the sword, which i^
the threatening, whereof this is the accomplishment. And in this vial and the
former, there is an allusion to the plague of Egypt, when all was blood, and
the fishes died.

The object of this vial, is, fountains and rivers, to wit, such things as
furnish moisture and life to the antichristian world, as fountains and rivers
do in this. They must be something running to the former sea, and in opposition
to the truth of the Gospel, Chap. 8. yet so as it must be applied not of
things, but of persons who have shed blood, and whose blood is shed. By this
then, it would seem their orders and Clergy especially (and all others who are
prime instruments and supporters of that antichristian world) with their
Nurseries and Seminaries, whereby they have filled the world with corrupt
Teachers, must be understood. These are called wells by Pet. 2. Epist. 2.
(though without water, that is, refreshfull water) These run to and suit with
the sea of Ordinances formerly mentioned. These have furnished life to that
beast of a long time, men drinking at no other fountain or river, but the
Writings of some corrupt Schoolman, whose principles and assertions are often
more debated for than the Scriptures; and had it not been watered by these,
that world had run dry long since. These men's Doctrines shall not only by this
be vilipended, but the executers and followers of these principles (whereby
many Saints have smarted) shall be repayed: for persons eminently subservient
to Antichrist, and malicious against the Saints, must be understood here, as
their Ordinances were by the former.

The effect, is, these rivers became blood: not corrupt only (as in the former
vial) but they became bloody, that is, had their own blood given them to drink,
and were really made liable to such crosses and executions as formerly they had
made the Saints liable unto; so the words after expound it, and so the Church
in the second seal is described by a red horse. But lest Antichrists followers
should glory in suffering as in Martyrdoom, the congratulation is added, to
show that it was an effect of Justice on them: which is commended in a double
congratulation and approbation.

Verse. 5. The first approbation, is by the instrument of this plague, called
the Angel of the waters, because this was committed to him to plague these
rivers and fountains. There is here besides Gods title of eternity (or
holiness, as the last word of the three, in the Original, (...), has it) a
twofold commendation of Gods way in this, with the evidence of both, showing
that is done, and that distinctly upon grounds of knowledge (as men who speak
of such things should do:) and there is one from the altar, subscribing to this
judgment, which we take to be the same, Chap. 14.18. whereby we understand
that perfect harmony that is between them in heaven and these on earth, heaven
and earth, as it were, rejoicing together in the execution of this judgment,
as it is Chap. 18.

The first congratulation, or approbation, goes on two things, 1. Something in
God is commended. 2. There is an evidence and proof of that which is commended.

1. That commended, is Gods eternity and unchangeablnesse, it is the same with
His name JEHOVAH, these three syllabls making up this, which art, and wast, and
shall be; and it especially relates to Gods faithfulness, making out now His
promises to His people; and this attribute being the same with JEHOVAH, is here
observed as an evidence of Gods faithfulness when He is now known by that Name
as He was to Israel, Exodus 3. and that other pitched upon, is Gods justice, not
simply, but as proportioning suitable judgments to the party plagued.
Righteous art thou, O Lord: that commended, is, the Righteousness and Justice
of God; the ground of it, because thou have thus judged, or judged these
things, (...): there is a special justice observed in respect of the object
God has poured this vial on, as being very guilty. 2. The suitablnesse and
equality of the judgment is commended, They shed blood, verse. 6. and thou have
given them a meeting by shedding their blood. They made all the Saints a prey
and had such strict Laws against them, now Thou makes them a prey, according
to verse. 7. Chap. 13. by which we expound this drinking of blood, it being the
fulfilling of that threatening evidently. In a word, they are worthy to be so
dealt with, which not only looks to the justice of the plague simply, but to
its proportionablnesse to their sin especially (as was said) So it may well be
rendered Meet, for they were meet not only for wrath, but for this same very
wrath, as the people of God pray, Psalm. 137. and it is commanded, Rev. 18.6. it
being Gods justice to proportion as is meet, and therefore to give reward to
His Servants the Prophets out of meetnesse, and not out of merit, Chap. 11. and
so this word concludes no more but God has met these men that were prodigal
of the Saints blood in their own measure, though unquestionably this and much
more was deserved. It is written of Cyrus, who, thirsting still after more
Kingdoms, was at last defeated by the Masageta, and having his head cut off,
Tomiris the Queen did cast it in a vessel of blood, bidding him that never
would be satiated, drink his fill; such a meaning has the same phrase here.

The second congratulation, or approbation, is, verse. 7. and it is the
subscription of the Saints glorified in heaven to this Song, setting their seal
to the former approbation, Even so, Lord God Almighty, etc. observing, and, as
it were, preaching Gods Justice and Truth that appears now in these plagues.
This looks like the same, who ( Chap. 14.18.) put up their suit to God for
this judgment, now when it is come he acknowledges it, so that as both the
Church-militant and Triumphant longed and prayed for Babylons ruin: now when
it comes they are not idle spectators, but blesses Him for it. They prayed
then, they praise now: who do the former, shall have occasion of the latter,
and should improve the occasion of praise as well as of prayer. If by the first
be to be understood Christians active in the judgment, and by the second, some
suffering yet under Antichrist, it will be one thing, all sorts shall thus
bless God (even these that are but onlooke^s) though as yet they do not share
of the delivery in that measure. In sum it is, Lord, all that is said of Thy
judgment on thy enemies, and of Thy goodness to Thy people from the beginning
of the world, and particularly, all that is come, or to come on Antichrist, is
just and true, and there is no wrong done; thou have kept Thy threatenings to
him and Thy promises to Thy people.

If any ask, why this approbation, or these congratulations are marked at this
vial especially? Beside what was said in opening the meaning of the words, we
conceive these reasons may be given, 1. To show that the work is observable,
and should be observed as that which has much of Gods glory shining in it; and
so it tells how observant Gods people are and ought to be in observing His
judgments. 2. It is to show the greatness and gloriousness of the work of
executing judgment on Antichrist, as having much of Gods faithfulness and
justice shining in it, and of His love to His Church. 3. It is, that thereby
the stupidity and slownesse of men may be checked. Men are slow to put out
their hand against the whore: Therefore He would let them know how glorious a
work it is, that they may be stirred to be active in it when they are called to
it, and in the mean time may pray for it. 4. Because this was the special
thing foretold in the 13. and prayed for in the 14. Chapters: and they that
prayed for it formerly observe, and praise for it when it is fulfilled.
Watchfulness in difficulties will send us to prayer, and so should outgates
send us to praise.

Although we dare not be particular in the application of things, yet
considering some remarkable overthrows of many Papists (whereby their own blood
was given them to drink) in Holland, France, Germany, England, etc. in the
prosecuting of their designs that were a little after the Council of Trent, and
to the year, 1588. which formerly, when all things succeeded with them, they
used not to meet with; and considering the Laws and Acts that were made against
seminary Priests and saying of Mass, etc. that it should be death, we conceive
there is warrant to say, that in part this vial is fulfilled, and that there
is, in that respect, ground for the praise that is mentioned here.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 8. And the fourth Angel poured out his vial upon the Sun, and power was
given unto him to scorch men with fire.

9. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God,
which has power over these plagues: and they repented not, to give him glory.

10. And the fifth Angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast, and
his kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain,

11. And blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and their sores,
and repented not of their deeds.


ANtichrists begun ruin goes on as his rise did, and by the same degrees. The
fourth Angel ( verse. 8.) pours out his vial, and a further degree of
darkness comes on that kingdom, and anxiety upon his followers. The object of
this plague, is the Sun of Antichrists world, so that men were scorched with
fire, that is the proper work of this Angel: his power is by that plague of
affecting the Sun to scorch men, that is, the men mentioned, verse. 2. that have
the beasts mark: for they are (...) in the plural, and as relative to these
formerly mentioned. Then ( verse. 9.) follow three effects of this plague, 1.
pain, 2. blasphemy, 3. impenitencie.

This plague is declared, 1. in the object of it, the Sun, 2. in the nature of
it in general, He had power given him to scorch men with fire. 3. This is more
particularly cleared in the effects, verse. 9.

The Sun of the beasts kingdom, or world, we understand with a twofold respect,
1. to his Temporal state. 2. to his Ecclesiastic. 1. By Sun in the world, is
understood somewhat eminent, glorious and shining, so Chap. 6. as the heaven is
above the earth. Now, as the Sun is chief among the lights in that firmament,
so here must be understood some eminent chief light in that world, as great
ones, Kings and Princes, are glorious lights. It would seem the Emperor, as
chief among them who uphold most that whore, as her first born (so is he
called) The King of Spain and others may be meaned, it being the Sun that
gives light and also comfort and life to things here, as these temporal
Monarchs do to the Pope, especially the Emperor and King of Spain; or, it may
hold out the Lords withdrawing temporal powers from the beasts friendship, as
it is Chap. 17. and seeing they glory much in that, the making of such to hate
her, cannot but darken that kingdom and gall them much: and indeed as the Word
propagateth and defends Christ's Kingdom, so almost does external force of
inquisitions, and such like, uphold the Popish tyranny; and seeing these go
before the fifth vial, wherein Babylon is to be pulled down by some Kings, this
is not unlikely.

Looking again unto this beast as a whorish Church, by Sun we understand the
complex doctrine, rules and canons of the Church of Rome, or, what is to them
in place of the Scriptures, which we expounded to be that Sun in the fourth
trumpet, Chap. 8. though this be not the Sun simply, yet to them it is so, and
it is a Sun profitable to that kingdom, or heaven wherein it shines, that we
are to seek for here. This is done by Gods making the light of His Word to
shine more clearly and convincingly to discover the prophesies about
Antichrist, whereby his glory is stained, that darkness and ignorance which
they formerly called light, is abolished now in a great measure; and this
cannot but burn and scorch these men, as very fire, when light comes to an
height, while-as the very prophesying of two witnesses, Chap. 11. so tormented
them: for, the outbreaking of Gods light darkeneth their sun, as the rising of
their errors darkened His Sun, Chap. 8. but not in the same manner. The effects
will suit well with this also. Both, 1. the pain that men were scorched, that
is, by this Word convinced and shamed, and by the Gospels thriving (which they
could not impede) so fretted, as Isa. 26.11. The fire of enemies is their
envy, which as fire consumes them. This is a further addition unto and degree
of the first plague, verse. 2. both these applications may agree with the scope
and type, etc.

The second effect, is, They blasphemed God who had power over these plagues.
Where is, 1. Gods sovereignty in ordering all judgments, saying to one, go and
he goes, to another, do this and he does it, Matthew. 8. It is marked here to
aggrege their sin, which is the second thing, that they should have slighted
God and not humbled themselves before Him who smote them, Isa. 9. which was
their duty, but grew in blaspheming God, that makes their sin the greater. By
this blasphemy we would understand a more violent giddy following of their
blasphemous errors, and idolatrous ways, which they flee most unto in their
straits, to wrong God more publicly: as their blasphemy was marked in their
head, the beast, Chap. 13. thus light does them no good, as the third ^ffect
clears; They repented not to give God glory: Where is holden out, 1. the use
of a rod, repentance in taking with our sin and abandoning of it; 2. the way to
remove a rod, repentance and not running on in sin; 3. a great use of
repentance, or end of it, is, to give God glory when He smites. 1. This takes
with the justice of the stroke, Josh. 7. My son (says he to Achan) give God
glory. 2. It yields to Him as the greater, and will not contest. 3. It
glorifieth Him in accepting the chastisement and in bringing forth fruits
before others, as acknowledging its being overcome. Antichrists followers, even
by Gods judgments on him, will not be brought to repentance, so mad are they
on their idols and so drunk with his delusions.

This fourth vial is at most but in the pouring forth, and the fifth certainly
is to come, (yet is more plainly described than any of the former) and so we
are to walk the more warily in the opening of it, seeing events cannot afford
such help.

In the fifth plague, which is in the 10. and 11. Verses, There is the object
and the events. Here the object seems to be more clearly set down than
formerly. It is the throne or seat of the beast: partly, to show us it is
something of the beasts Kingdom, that is plagued before, though it be not so
plainly said the sun of the beast, as it is here the seat of the beast. 2.
partly, because at this fifth vials pouring out, things will be so clear, that
they will not be veiled with types; for, it brings a more sensible step of
his ruin, as the fifth trumpet did of his rise. This fifth vial foretells
the ruin of Rome, which will make Antichrist seek some other chair, or nest,
to sit in. The object, is, the seat of the beast. The effects are four, not
unsuitable to what went before; seeing there is a further plague on the beasts
Kingdom, there is also a further degree of pain and bitterness amongst his
followers.

The seat here, or throne, (as it is in the Original (...)) is the same which
was ( Chap. 13. verse. 2.) spoken of the seat or throne of the Dragon, to wit,
Rome. Rome was called the Dragons seat, or throne, because although his
dominion and authority did extend far, yet there he especially kept his court,
and from thence issued his commands. It is the most eminent part of his
kingdom, where his Majesty, as it were, does more manifest it self. And as Rome
was the Dragons throne, so will it be found to be Antichrists also: and
therefore the object of this plague. 1. Because the beast ( Chap. 13.) gets
the same throne which the Dragon had, and is to emit his bulls, mandats and
orders from it, over all his dominions. 2. Because it agrees well with the
scope and gradation of these vials, which bring ever the judgment nearer
Antichrist till it make him flee, as the vial following clears. 3. This is
clear from the explicatory prophecy of this same vial, Chap. 17. and 18. where
under the name of Babylon, the destruction of this seat is set down, as there
will be clear. 4. It agrees well also with the order of the trumpets: betwixt
which and the vials there is a likeness in method, as is said. By the fifth
trumpet, Antichrist comes to his throne to get some public footing; by the
fifth vial he is put from it: and supposing the Popish Kingdom to be the
antichristian Kingdom, and the Pope to be Antichrist, there is no question but
Rome is the throne, it being from the pretended infallibility and sanctity of
that Sea that they derive their state, he is now put from it. The first four
vials, as it were, took in the outwark, this fifth stormeth his castle and
overturneth it, which is more largely described, Chap. 18.

There are four effects, 1. His kingdom was full of darkness, when the
splendour of his throne is destroyed, which they thought impossible. Now, there
is confusion (by the influence of that stroke) on all his dominion: men think
less of it, and it is now, as it were, fully darkened and contemptible in a
greater degree than by any former vial: even as the fifth trumpet completed
the Churches darkness, which was but partial before it, yet is not this
kingdom fully destroyed, though darkened, but there is a Pope, and he has
followers still and instruments and agents to do for him now when he is weak.
The second effect, is, their pain, evidenced to be greater than before, in that
they, like distracted mad men, gnaw their tongues for pain, it troubles them
so to be disappointed in the opinion they had of Romes standing. 2. The
declining of their own grandour. And, 3. the enimity they had at the light they
oppose, tormenteth them to see it thrive. These are more fully in the
lamentation, Chap. 18. The third effect, they blaspheme against the God of
heaven, ut supra: possibly breaking out now in open rage, as if he made not
good his supposed promises to the Apostolic Sea, Christ's Vicar and Mother
Church. And therefore in this fury they run to any instrument for help, as
under the sixth trumpet, like that blasphemous saying, flectere si nequeo
superos, Acheronta movebo. Yet, 4. they amended nothing of their ill deeds that
brought on that wrath. Repentance is difficile, especially to these in this
delusion.

LECTURE IV.
Verse. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the
east might be prepared.


THis vial in its events being wholly to come, it is no marvel there be
difficulty in the understanding of it, seeing what is not past is not easy; yet
we have these two helps to understand it, 1. Concerning the time, this relates
to the state of the Church, succeeding Romes destruction: for as the first four
vials begin and carry on his judgment, by discovering his hypocritical way
and spreading the light of the Gospel, and by Armies and temporal judgments
taking vengeance on his Protectors, and dividing some (at least) of the western
Kings that once had given their power to him, from him to be turned to hate
him, Chap. 17. so the fifth vial lights on his seat, and he is made to quit
his inexpugnable throne, and to flee elsewhere for shelter.

This sixth vial holds forth God still pursuing him; and as that beast uses
new endeavors to strengthen himself by leagues with new friends, so God
stirs up new enemies against him, the Jews are called, and God takes
vengeance on all his supporters, when he has suffered them for a time to
countenance that banished Antichrist, he and they are both taken and cast into
the pit, so that as the fifth vial puts him from Rome, that it is not
thereafter his seat, though there be a Pope: This sixth puts an end to
Popes, that there is none after that, as Chap. 19. appears: and then the
seventh vial brings an end to all Christ's enemies universally, and especially
upon any adherents or favorers that this beast shall have after that; for, it
appears, that even when there shall be no visible Pope, yet some shall
continue so drunk with his wine as to be doting after him and lamenting his
destruction, even to the end, who then shall be remembered when great Babylon
shall get her last sentence.

A second help for clearing this, is, by comparing it with the 19. Chapter,
which is the more clear and full explication of this: for, 1. that follows
the 18. Chapter which directly clears the fifth vial, and so in order the
exposition of this sixth follows, Chap. 19. 2. Here a gathering and battle
is spoken of, but the event is not set down till Chap. 19. when the contrary
party against this gathering is expressed, and that it is the same gathering,
appears, that it is here the day of God, there, the supper of the great King,
denoting one singular and eminent overthrow of Gods enemies. 3. also that the
enemies destroyed there, are the same mentioned here, to wit, Kings and their
Armies, the beast and false Prophet (who are mentioned under the same names in
both places, to show the reference of the one to the other) and therefore
comparing the events with the 19. Chapter, it appears that the first four
Verses contain a desirable event having an accession to the Church in it,
answerable to which is the praise in the beginning of Chap. 19. the other
expresses a special design of the beast, which God disappointeth, Chap. 19.
last part. Who these Kings of the East are, by which such an accession is made,
and ground of joy given to the Church, will appear afterward.

In the words we have, 1. the object of this plague, the great river Euphrates.
2. The effects are more summarily and generally set down in two, 1. the effect;
And 2. the end or use of it, verse. 12. Then more particularly, from verse. 13.
to 17. In a word, there are three notable events holden forth here, 1. the Jews
conversion under that expression, The preparing of the way of the Kings of the
East, 2. the diminishing of the Turks greatness, by drying up Euphrates. 3.
the last expedition of the beast for support of his tottering Kingdom in the
rest of the words, with its event, Chap. 19. This last expedition is either
occasioned by the Jews conversion, who, taking him to be Antichrist, join with
his opposers, whereby he is put to see for new friends. Or, these words may
more fully explicate what by anticipation was set down before, namely, how this
river of Euphrates was dried, to wit, Antichrist being put from Rome by the
Western Kings, who now hate him, he has recourse to the Turk, and possibly by
alluring him from what prejudice he may suffer from the Jews rising and
greatness, he gets him engaged to concur with him, and many others also, on
whom God takes vengeance when they are gathered together, that what concerns
the Jews be not impeded.

The object, is, the great river Euphrates: which is great; and because of
that, it is often called ((...)) in Scripture the river simply. Of this
Euphrates we heard, chap. 9. It runs through Mesopotamia by or through
Babylon, it divided Solomon's Kingdom from Syria, and was a great strength to
Babylon; and when the Jews were carried captive, they were carried beyond the
river, that is, Euphrates; therefore it stands now in the way of their
returning: this here is an impediment of their entry to the Church and of their
access to help down with Babylon; and as once Jordan was dried to make way for
them, so that impediment is to be removed (as if it were by the drying of a
river) out of their way. To take Euphrates literally here, will not suit much
with the Analogy used in the rest of the vials, nor with the scope here (that
river stands little in the way of the Jews conversion, and the drying of it
will be little useful to the Church) it must then be figuratively understood.
By waters ordinarily in Scripture are understood much people, and by Euphrates
in particular, these people that dwelt about it, as Isa. 8.7. the King of
Assyria and his Army are called the waters of the river, that is, of Euphrates,
because they dwelt about it. By the same reason then, Euphrates here must be
understood the people for the time inhabiting there: and because not only in
verity of the thing, the Turks now possess that part of the world, but also (
Chap. 9.14, etc. of this Book) these same people were marked as bound about
that river; and the loosing of them, noted, as it were, the overflowing of that
peoples Dominion like a flood from these parts. So there is no people that can
be so reasonably understood here as the Turks, who were also understood there,
Chap. 9.14. And this sixth vial, mentioning that river, has a special
relation to the sixth trumpet, where it was mentioned before; for so the
agreement betwixt the trumpets and the vials requires. Beside, Euphrates was
both the border of the Roman Empire, and also of David's Kingdom, though of, and
within neither, but rather an impediment to both, so it would seem that no
people within the Empire or Church are meaned, though such enemies as border
with both may be understood.

The effect, is, the waters thereof were dried up, that is, as their Dominion
increased by their overflowing under the sixth trumpet, so now they decay and
diminish, and their Empire is abridged, by what mean, the Lord knows: But
these who before seemed a great river that none could pass, now people may
cross it, they are brought low; for, if overflowing signify victory, as Isai.
8.7. then drying up must signify diminishing, as is said.

The second part of the event sets forth the end of this, to wit, that the
way of the Kings of the East might be prepared: where we are to enquire, 1.
what these Kings are? 2. what this is, to prepare their way? 3. how the
diminishing of the Turkish power does it?

By these kings in the East, we understand the Jews, who, being converted unto
the faith of Christ, are not only Kings, as all other Christians are, Chap.
1.7. but it seems that especially they, when the Scripture speaks of their
conversion, are called Kings. If we will compare verse. 21, 22, and 23. of Isa.
24. we will find these things clear. 1. That when Israel is to be chastened,
and thereafter restored, they are called Kings, Verse. 21. for, it is they that
are after many days visited, and that is the Jews; for no other people are
capable of the comfort intended in the promise, (as Calvin in locum asserteth)
for it supposes them once to have been Gods people. And, 2. for a long time to
have been forgotten; and what is added of Gods reigning in Sion before his
ancients, confirms this also. 2. It is clear that that visitation seems to
relate to their last calling; for it is after many days, while the whole face
of their land is overrun. 2. The erecting again of Christ's Kingdom amongst them
in so glorious a reign, looks to that time when it shall be most glorious,
and so at their conversion, though in some part it may be fulfilled already
under the Gospel (as all do grant) yet its higher degree of the Jews
re-ingrafting follows: and why may not that ancient privileged people get
names, importing a singular respect to them, especially considering that God
may at their conversion furnish them generally with such spiritual and royal
induements, that the feeble amongst them may be as David, and give also unto
them a large outward Dominion? Zech. 12.

They are called Kings of the East, 1. because in respect of the part of the
world we live in, who before them enjoy the Gospel; they are East to us, and so
they are distinguished from the native Western Kingdoms and Kings, made also
now to hate the whore. 2. Because many of them living there (it is like since
the first captivity, and last dispersion) when they may be made to join against
Antichrist in the West, (which makes him so afraid) their expedition will look
as coming from the East, and so the Turks will be in their way, as Euphrates
was in Cyrus way, impeding the intaking of Babylon, till it was dried; so this
of mystical Babylon. 3. Because possibly (if not probably) after the Turks
destruction, God may give them great possessions and Dominions in the East, and
make them much isntrumental for spreading of the Gospel to other Kings in
these parts: besides, ordinarily any rise of light to the Church and of Christ's
coming, is spoken as from the East, so Chap. 7.2. and Mat. 24. it is like
lightning, as it were, a new day or morning breaking up in the Church.

2. For the next thing, what this way of the Jews is? It seems to be one or
all of these three, 1. It is to the Church. 2. to help down the Pope. 3. to
their own possession. The Turks standing marreth all, and his removing will
further all these.

To clear it, That their way may be prepared takes in this general, the
removing of any thing which may hinder them in their way toward the Church, or
in the former expeditions: For, 1. not only are they to be looked on here as
coming to the true Church, now separated from Antichrist; but, 2. as concurring
to have a main hand in his overthrow. Hence he is so afraid at their
conversion, (for it seems, that now all true converts are to be employed in
ruining him) and he has an Hebrew name Abaddon, to show their abhorrency of
him as others do, and the place of his ruin, and the praise for the same, is
in Hebrew, Chap. 19. pointing at a special hand which they are to have in his
last overthrow. And in reference to these two ends of the Jews conversion, to
wit, of joining to the Church, and of going against Antichrist, there is to
them a twofold let in their way (to forbear now their going to their own land)
there is a great stumbling from the superstitious worship of Papists, who are
called Christians, and a stumbling at the long prevailing of the enemy of
Christians, the Turk, wondering, that if Christ be God, how He suffers such
blasphemy and blasphemers.

The first, in a great part is removed by Gods judgment on the Pope, and Rome
in the fifth vial. The second is to be removed now by this, that no stumbling
or let remain? for though they would do something, and possibly, now having
the Pope discovered to them, their zeal is more hot against him than others,
(because by his means they have been much hardened) yet the Turk becoming their
enemy, and being engaged to that whores support, they are impeded while the
Turkish Empire stands. This vial removes that impediment, his power is
weakened, whether by themselves or by others, or by drawing of many to
Christianity from him, we are not to determine; but access is given to them
both to pull Antichrist down, and probably to win to their own possession by
his ruin. And this leads to the third thing proposed, to wit, how the ruin
of the Turks, or their weakening, may be called the preparing of their way.
Which is clear. 1. whether we look to the Jews conversion, it strengthens them
that Christ is God, and gives them hopes of coming home: on which they lay
great weight. Or, 2. whether we look to their undertaking against Antichrist.
Or, 3. their return to their own land: all which three, as we said, seem to be
pointed at here. The standing of the Turk obstructeth all, these three and the
overturning of him, will strengthen all, and give them liberty without fear in
the professing of Christ.

For further clearing of this, That these two events, to wit, the Jews
conversion, and the Turks downfall, are prophesied of here, we shall confirm
both severally from these reasons.

That the Jews conversion must be understood here, appears: for, 1. It is
certain their conversion in the last days is spoken of and to be expected, and
it can suit with no time better than of this sixth vial, which is after the
Popes overthrow in respect of his seat at Rome, and before the seventh vial,
which brings the end. Neither is it like that so great and concerning a
business of the Church would be omitted in this prophecy; and it can be
brought in no where so clearly, that of the Jews mentioned, Chap. 7. being
nothing to this purpose, as was said there. 2. The Prophets seem to foretell
their restoring in these same terms, See, Isa. 11.15. and 16. which Chapter
speaks of the days of the Gospel, and the Jews restoring, suiting with that
time, as cannot be denied.

The expressions in sum are, that as God, when He brought them out of Egypt,
dried up the sea and Jordan, so when He brings them from Assyria (which was
beyond this Euphrates from Judea) He shall smite that river, and the removing
of all impediments is set out under that expression. Neither is it for naught
that drying of waters is a peculiar mercy shown to Israel in their first
deliverances, and that allusion is made to that in their following restitution,
to be a confirmation to their faith therein, as Isa. 44.27. Thus says the Lord
that dries up the rivers, and says to the deep, be dry, etc. when yet no
particular river was to be dried up, but thereby to mind them of what He had
done.

3. If we look further to the explication of this, Chap. 19. there is much joy
in the Church, praising God that He reigns, and that in an eminent way, that
His Wife has made her self ready, and the marriage is come, etc. And can these
agree so well to any event, as to the conversion of the Jews, which ( Romans 11.)
shall be as a resurrection from the dead? Or, can the joy be so great, or the
Marriage be made ready without them? especially considering if now they be not
amongst Christ's friends, when, in the words following, He is on His march
against all His enemies; and could the Church of the Gentiles be merry if the
Jews were amongst these enemies? But from Chap. 19. it is clear, that there is
here a notable and singular accession to the Church; and what one can have
these effects so as this?

4. It is not unworthy the observing, that here so many Hebrew expressions and
phrases are used, and not so any where else: which seems to plead a special
interest that the Hebrews have in the event of this vial. 1. The place is named
in the Hebrew Tongue Armageddon: Why? Hebrews are there to put on that name, as
their custom was to name places from events. 2. The praise is in Hebrew ( Chap.
19.) Alleluja, used frequently in the Psalms, and not mentioned in any other
song in this Book though they be frequent, because there was no considerable
Hebrew praisers before this: These brought in, are called the Lambs wife, as in
a Covenant relation, even before she be made ready; which agrees to none, but
to that ancient married people, unto which Covenant God has respect, even in
their last calling.

If it be asked, What we understand by their restoration, or conversion, if
merely a calling to the faith of Christ, where ever they shall dwell dispersed
up and down amongst other people, or, with it, a restoring of them to their
former land and inheritance to serve God there, not in a typical or
ceremonial way, but as an eminent, Gospel National Church? Albeit we cannot
take on us peremptorily to determine, we say, 1. that although the first be
true, yet dare we not say that it is merely and only to the faith of Christ, so
as to exclude the other of possessing them in their own land, and that not only
for the respect we have to the most able Commentators on this Scripture, and
others of the Prophets, but for the reasons especially which may be alleged
for it, which we draw to three heads: the first are the Scriptures and
promises, speaking to the restoring not only of Judah, but also of Israel to
return to serve God in their own land in one, Ezekiel. 37.20, 21, etc. of Gods
promising to bless it to them after its long ba^rennesse and their being
ejected out of it, Psalm. 67.7. See, Ier. 3.18. Ezekiel. 34.13. and 36.24. and
37.14. and 39.28. which places, as to Israel and their return with Judah,
cannot be laid to be fulfilled, Isa. 11.12 from verse. 10. That place ( Amos 9.
verse. 11, 12.14, 15.) seems convincing to this purpose, as b^longing to them
in the days of the Gospel, and yet cannot be said to be fulfilled, especially
in respect of what is in the last Verse. And certainly some words of Christ's,
Matthew. 23. Luke 21.24. limiting their outward desolation and the desolation of
their houses and land to the t^me they should say, Hosanna to Him and
acknowledge Him, and to the time of the fullness of the Gentiles, do also speak
for this. Add to them Paul, speaking of their restitution, as to a National
state, and of all Israel to be grafted in, as they were broken off, which
cannot be so well without an outward National civil State, which confirms
the former, Romans 11.

A second sort of proof is, the reasons that plead for this; and in effect what
reasons do plead for the Jews conversion, do in some degree plead for a
temporal restitution, as, 1. Gods electing them to be His people, and making
an everlasting Covenant with them, the promise of their dwelling for ever in
that land, which peculiarly was given to that race (in a more special manner
and by more singular rights and titles than any other in the world) are
comprehended in that Covenant: and if any say, that that is not a saving
promise or absolute; so neither was His promise of continuing them a visible
Church, or His people, absolute, as the events of both al^ke do clear; yet is
weight laid on His Covenant with their fathers, thus far as to make them again
His people, and why not in this p^rticular also? for it is not simply that He
Cov^nanted with them in a Covenant of Grace (for, so He has done with many
others) but in a Covenant with special promises and grounds that makes it a
singular tie in these things, beyond what others have: See Romans 11.28.
Considering especially, that so Gods glory will the more shine in His
faithfulness and goodness in the remembrance of His people and Covenant: that
work will be the more observable to all Nations, and their incoming, which is a
^peciall evidence of Gods faithfulness, and a great promise made to the
Church, will certainly bring forth the ends of it more observably thus, both as
they relate to God and His h^nour, the Churches splendor and others
edification, or their own consolation, Neither can that promise made to Israel
(Deuteronomy. 30 2, 3, 4, etc. that when ever they should repent, the Lord would
gather them from the Nations whether they were scattered, and return them to
their own land) be thought void and null after Christ's coming, especially
considering the general repentance and mourning, which is to accompany their
conversion. Therefore it would seem by that promise they may expect their own
land, it being a part of Gods engagement to the natural seed of Abraham.

A third sort of proof, is, the concurrence of Gods Providence hitherto seeming
to confirm this; for, beside that they are still, where they live, a distinct
people by themselves unmixed with other races (which seems to hold forth Gods
will, that they should be so, and if they were converted, so as to live among
other Christians, they might ingrosse in that Nation they live amongst, and the
name of that Nation evanish) but that keeps what befalls them remarkable:
as also, that although some expedition, yet, as it is reported, few or none of
them are possessors of lands any where, to be a retardment unto them.
Considering also, that God has reserved that Land unpossessed by any
Christian, but such men as he minds to destroy, and to void it of for them:
and considering also that the conversion of the Jews and the destruction of
these that possess now their Land, are trysted together at one time, Can any
think that for naught? or, now when the Turks shall be expelled in this
general battle at Armageddon, and that Land left void, and the Jews new
converted, having hand in their overthrow, Will any offer to come between them
and that possession? especially, considering that at such a time there will be
(probably) a general zeal more than ordinary for the Churches propagation,
rather than for particular dominion: certainly their title to that Land, will
appear more sacred than what any other people can claim to any Land or it, and
who will impede it? and it is observable that who ever possess that land, it is
still in Scripture accounted as belonging to the Jews, and will that right be
to no purpose? 2. We say to that question, whatever may be doubted of their
restoring to their Land, yet that they shall be brought to a visible
Church State. 1. Not only in particular persons here and there in
Congregations; but that multitudes; yea, the whole body of them, shall be
brought, in a common way with the Gentiles, to profess Christ, which cannot be
denied, as Romans 11. is clear, and that will be enough to satisfy us in this
Text, though indeed this will stand also well with the former, and some way
infer it.

The other thing to be cleared, was, that the Turks overthrow one way or other
is meaned by the drying up of that river Euphrates: which, beside what is said,
is confirmed, 1. from the end wherefore it is dried up, to wit, the Jews
restoring: and however we take their restoring (as is said) nothing more
hinders it than the Turks standing, (the Pope being now down) especially if
the restoring them to their own Land be understood: that cannot be without this
preceding furtherance and the removing of this impediment out of their way. 2.
The fullness of the Gentiles goes along with, if it do not preceed, the Jews
calling; and can that fullness be and the Turks possess so many Nations, where
the Gentiles had Churches, and where there is so much joy in the Church, Chap.
19. and so much wrath generally on Christ's enemies in the end thereof? It
cannot be thought that either of these can be, and the Turks be free. 3. It
follows natively by comparing the order and method of the vials with the
trumpets. This is clear in all, That what plague comes on the Church by the
trumpets, the contrary good comes by the vials, and what advantage Antichrist
got by the one, he losseth by the other. Now, it is certain, that as by the
fifth trumpet Antichrist rose, and these Turks (before bound at Euphrates) were
loosed by the sixth, as a plague following Antichrist on the Christian world;
So by the fifth vial, Antichrist is put from his seat: and therefore in order
by the sixth the Church should be next freed of that enemy, which Antichrists
rise to the throne brought on: especially considering that the expressions are
so like other; in the sixth trumpet, they are loosed as if Euphrates were
overflowing all banks; here again, by the sixth vial, that overspreading is
restrained and dried, which must be a drying up suitable and apposit to that
loosing, which was before in the sixth trumpet. Beside, there is no other
application probable; for to apply this to Cyrus his taking of Babylon, as if
he had been a King from the East, his coming from the North will not suffer it,
Ier. 50.41, 42, 43. Or, to call these Easterns, heathen Nations, or Turks to be
made use of to destroy Antichrist, cannot be: for these vials are poured out by
some from the Temple, and Kings that formerly whored with the whore will have a
main hand in her overthrow, Chap. 17. Or, to apply it to the weakening the
Popes revenues, which as a River strengthens him, no question, he being
formerly put from his throne, and these Kings turned to hate him, his coffers
will be empty before this sixth vial come: Neither do these prepare so the Jews
way, nor speaks it formally such accession to the Church as the other, which
is clear to be understood here from Chap. 19.

There are two chief Objections to be removed, The first is, That these vials
bring wrath on the beast, as the effects of them, and he is the object they
pour their plagues upon; but neither the in-coming of the Jews nor
down-bringing of the Turks, touches him or affects him. Answ. 1. Though the
beast be the chief object, yet not the only object, especially in these last
two vials; all other enemies, Kings of the earth and Nations are also plagued,
as is clear, comparing what follows with Chap. 19.2. In all these vials, two
things are joined together, the standing and spreading of Christ's Kingdom and
the decreasing of Antichrists: and these two proceed together; what brings
Antichrist down, advances Christ's Kingdom; and what advances His Kingdom,
darkeneth Antichrists: and though directly it strike not on Antichrist, yet
consequentially it does; for, all Christ's followers are Antichrists enemies. 3.
It is not simply the Jewish Nation their conversion, and the Turks overthrow,
that are spoken of here; but it is the Jews conversion and union with the
Gentiles in pursuing Antichrist now discovered (and therefore first here ^alled
the false prophet) and the Turks now apparently as united with Antichrist (it
being like, that he is among the chief of the Nations or Kings of the earth
which he addresseth unto) and so both the Jews conversion and Turks ruin, will
be of great concernment and a heavy stroke to the Pope.

Obj. 2. Can such a great accession stand with that, Chap. 15. that none would
enter the Temple till these plagues were ended? Answ. 1. It cannot be meaned,
that no growth should be of the Church from the beginning of the vials, till
all were closed: for then there should never any be, for they close the last
judgment, and yet every vial has a new accession to the Church and some
victory over Antichrist. 2. The meaning of that place then, is, 1. none were
able to stand to interceed for these who were to be plagued, but necessarily
and inevitably they were poured out, and no intercession was admitted. 2. None
entered of these creatures devoted to Antichrist and his destruction, they
continued hardened to the last, even after Rome is destroyed and the Popes
abolished, yet some remainder there is to the very last vial.

All which should stir us up heartily to pray for these things that sometimes
will be so good news to the Church, that in due time the Lord would perform it
and hasten it. So far may we be warranted from this place.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, come out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false prophet.

14. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto
the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle
of that great day of God Almighty.

15. Behold, I come as a thief, Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame.

16. And he gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrew tongue,
Armageddon.


FRom verse. 13. to verse. 17. follows the third effect of this vial, to wit,
the last great expedition of Antichrist for his support, now after Romes fall
(or at least the shaking of that dominion hugely) and before his ruin. It may
either be called a third effect following on, or occasioned by the former two;
To wit, the first appearance of the Jews enimity against him and the Turks
decay; Or, these verses may more fully explicate the manner how Euphrates (that
is, the Turks dominion) was dried up to prepare the Jews way, it was by the
beasts engaging them for him, who then by the battle of Armageddon were ruined
both together, and an excellent state of the Church, both of the fullness of
the Gentiles and in-calling of the Jews, followed: whereupon these praises (
Chap. 19.) are by anticipation set down before the battle: however, the
effects are the same.

This expedition in this Chapter (beside the event of it, Chap. 19.) is set out
in five things. 1. In its authors, the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet. 2. Its
special agents, three spirits. 3. Their task, to gather the Kings of the
earth. And, 4. the success, they are brought together in Armageddon, verse. 16.
and before this, after the preparation in parenthesis, there is cast in a word
both of warning and of comfort. Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he, etc.
verse. 15.

1. The Author is designed by three names, yet is the same party under diverse
considerations. The Dragon is the same mentioned, Chap. 12.8, 9. to wit, the
devil, here acting not immediately, but for supporting his lieutenant the
beast, to whom he gave his power, Chap. 13. leaving nothing that hell can do
for that end. The beast, is the first beast, named, Chap. 13. to wit, the Pope,
as he is head to the civil State of Rome. The false prophet, is the two horned
beast, Chap. 13.11. for ( Chap. 19, 20.) the false prophet works miracles
before the first beast, which is the very work of that two horned beast, Chap.
13. and his place only. He is called here the false prophets, because that
vizorn of respect to the Lamb, which formerly he pretended, is now taken away,
and he that pretended to be Christ's Vicar, is now discovered to be the great
deceiver and false prophet which was to come: and as these two beasts are one,
Chap. 13. (as was there cleared) so is the beast and false prophet one here:
for, Chap. 19. verse. 19. the beast is distinct from the Kings of the earth; so,
verse. 14. of this Chapter, yet it would seem that all Civil powers under the
name of Kings (as Ch^p. 17.) are contrad^stinguished from the beast and whore,
as they that shall once support her and afterward hate her; neither can the
Emperor be secluded from that reckoning: and therefore it is no supreme Civil
power. 2. They are both cast into the lake together, verse. 20. and the
now-Roman Empire (likely) was either d^stroyed or turned from the Pope to hate
him under the fourth and fifth vial. 3. They both end together, and it will be
hard to think that there will be no succession of Emperors or Civil states,
representing these parts or powers after the Popes overthrow: yet are they all
three named d^stinctly, to show what concurreth for supporting papacy, devilish
subtillity, temporal power and deep hypocrisy. In a word, all unlawful and
carnal shifts, and that both Civil and Ecclesiastic are made use of.

Secondly, These inferior agents are several ways described. 1. In their
nature, they are spirits: not prope^ly, for spirits, as such, cannot be seen,
neither is it such that can treat with Kings and persuade them to war, as sent
out of the mouth of the beast and false prophet. But spirits, 1. for their
activity and nimblnesse in compassing their designs. 2. Because they call
themselves spiritual men, in opposition to Laics, such as the Popes
Negotiators are, as Nuncios, Legates, Jesuits, etc. are exceeding meetly taken
in here; for, their institution, oath and way of proceeding, answers well to
that of these fr^gs, as singularly commissionated to spread themselves through
the world to engage all Kings against Christ's followers, who may also have
lying spirits waiting on them to make their embassage effectual* as Ahab's
false prophets had, 1 King. 22. to which this may allude.

2. They are described by their qualities, they are unclean spirits, like
frogs. 1. In their rise, not of God, but the devil (for they are called so,
verse. 14.) as all their orders are not of Christ's pl^nting, therefore compared
to locusts, Ch^p. 9. 2. In their ends, devilish, opposite to the Lord Christ, as
the devil is. 3. In their manner of proceeding, by all means devilish
instruments, etc. as murders, treasons, lies, equivocations, etc. they care not
what, if they may effectuate their designs for supporting the beast. 4. In
their life, filthy and loathsome, like frogs that use marshes (which in
Reformations are not cleansed, Ezekiel. 47.11.) so that brood continue in these
places, which remains unhealed and haunteth such company. 3. In their number,
they are three, that is, a considerable number. In the 11. Chap. when Christ's
cause was low, he had but two witnesses, Antichrist has three, as it were^ more
do back him to his last than Christ had, so ten^cious and constant are men in
evil rather than good. Three also, to suit with the nature of him that
commissionateth them. So some act devilish^y and subti^ly, as from the Dragon
representing him; Others by might and civil negotiations carrying the
business, as servants to Princes. A third sort, counterfeiting Religion,
either by pretending many miracles to have been done by their party or
strengthened by the devil to do great wonders themselves for covering their
hypocrisy, and strengthening their cause: and according to this threefold
commission they act. 3. This design of the beasts by these agents, is more
particularly holden forth in four things.

1. To whom they are sent, to the Kings of the earth and of the whole world,
that is, to all Nations and Powers whether Christian or Heathen that would join
against the true Church. Therefore if the Emperor were one of the Popes
followers, the commission must be sent to him, and he not be a sender; but as
the naming of the Dragon distinctly supponeth no distinct visible power, so
neither does it in the other; likewise by the Dragon cannot be meaned heathen
persecuters, for they are sent un^o by the beast also, and do not send, but it
is the beast now appearing both l^ke a Dragon and a false Prophet. 2. Their
errand, is, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty,
that i^, to an eminent appearing of Gods, in taking vengeance on them: not that
this is their intentention to fight against God, as it is expounded, Chap. 19.
or to meet his vengeance, but that in Gods providence thi^ is made the result
of all: and though they think its fighting for Christ's Vicar, yet he expounds
it otherwise, as it is, upon the matter, a fighting against God Almighty; for
it was to oppose His Churches rising, and in that battle God was party. 3.
The instruments are more clearly designed spirits, not of God but of the devil,
suiting well with such a commission. 4. The means how they prevail, it is by
working miracles, such as the devil, by his natural and experimental
knowledge of things, and special dexterity to do and compass things, can out
of natural causes easily and really bring forth, which may be wonderful to
men who can act nothing like these: or, by his deceit, making men believe he
does things of themselves beyond the power of nature, which he does not really
perform, but deludeth men to believe that they are performed: such are the
beasts miracles, Chap. 13.12. Or, by making men believe, that all their legends
of counterfeit miracles are true, which they make a mark of the true Church,
and thus persuade men to support their Babylon.

Before he set down the success of this negotiation, which is, verse. 16. he
casts in ( verse. 15.) a word of warning and comfort. It should be in
parenthesis, as if the Lord Christ said, such ill days and great temptations
to draw folks in snares are coming, that many will go on in these designs as
thinking all their own: The advertisement, is, Behold, I come as a thief: when
they think least on it, and sees least appearance of it, I am at hand to take
vengeance on them, and to deliver the Church; So he speaks, Matthew. 24.43.44.
2 Pet. 3.10. 2. There is insinuated a duty suitable to this advertisement, that
is, to Watch and keep their garments clean, which was expounded, Chap. 3.3.
Implying, 1. a strait and difficulty; 2. the only mean of being preserved in a
strait time, that is, watching, seeing by it only men are kept free of spots
in their profession and Christian walk. 3. There is set down here two excellent
motives pressing this necessary duty of watching, 1. from their happiness who
does so, they are blessed, 1. In themselves, being kept from much sin and
wrath which others fall under. 2. In reference to others, who being by that
design of Antichrists ensnared, shall share of wrath. The second, is, because
by watching, men keep their nakedness covered, which by sinning is discovered
to their shame: a spotted garment hides not this shame, but manifests it. To
be kept from sin, is a great motive, and to keep from sin keeps from shame;
for, shame follows ever upon sin. And there is a behold prefixed, yet Readers
may not pass it, but observe the warning for their instruction in duty, and
the encouragement of blessedness for their upstirring and comfort. Gods people
would never look for a constant peace in the greatest growth of Religion, even
at the Jews in-coming, the Church has one of her sorest battles. There is
great odds betwixt a thriving Gospel and the real advantage that comes by it,
and outward peace and prosperity.

The last thing, is the success these foul spirits had. They gathered these
Kings who for many years despised the Gospel, and never had been gathered by
it, in Gods judgment they are given up to yield to them. This has these
circumstances, 1. The success, They are gathered: and who? It is these to whom
they were sent, both Popish Kings and Heathen Kings: It is like, the Turks as
nearest, are most easily engaged to set on Christians: In a word, such special
enemies as God minds to be about with. 2. It is said, he gathered them, not
the spirits, that is, either the beast who commissionated them, or rather God,
who in His secret providence orders that design of the beasts and the
enimity of these Kings for such an end as might glorify Him, and undo them. It
is like an allusion is to the commission Satan gets against Ahab in
persuading him, wherein though the devil be isntrumental by false prophets in
bringing Ahab to Ramoth, 1 King. 22. yet it is by Gods permissive providence to
punish Ahab, that makes him prevail. So it is here, the devil has one design,
the beast another, God a third, and He makes use of both for furthering of
His; He does it when they seem to get most way in theirs, and its but the
effectuating of His; so Gods hand is sovereign, even in Antichrists designs.
3. Concerning the place unto which they are gathered, two things are to be
enquired, 1. What this Armageddon is? 2. Why it is expressly said in the Hebrew
Tongue?

1. Armageddon is not to be taken literally, as if there were such a place, in
which indeed bearing that name, that battle is to be fought in, but
figuratively, it sets down before hand, from the effect and event of that
expedition and battle, after the manner of the Hebrews, who called places from
notable events in them, as Bochim, Achor, Hamon, Gog, Ezekiel. 39. Bethel, with
many others. Now, this is two ways applicable, 1. Gnarim, which Arma comes
from, signifying subtillity and applied to the Serpent, Genesis 3.1. yea
subtillity with deceitfulness. 2. Geddon comes from a root that signifies
gathered together, so the word signifies deceitfully gathered together by
craft; or, the first root may signify destruction, so it is gathered to be
destroyed. The second way how it is applicable, is, to take it in allusion to
Megi^do; so it will be the hill of Megiddo, a place in Judah, famous for two
events, 1. ( Judge. 5.19.) in overth^owing Sisera's mighty Army by a woman's
help, So these enemies brought into such a fit place, shall be as Sisera at the
river Kison, Psalm. 83. The other at Megiddo, by Ios^a's death is lamentable.
Thus it relates to the great zeal and repentance which shall be among the Jews
at such a joyful event, Zech. 12.12. both, or either, will suit here, what
ever way it be. But take it from the force of the compound word, it agrees
best to the Hebrews way, and that is the reason why especially it is mentioned
here expressly in the Hebrew tongue, implying, 1. that they put that name on it;
for, it is not like that other Nations would give it a name in a strange
tongue. 2. Their respecting the event in the name, as is their manner, as
before was said: thus the name speaks out the event.

If it be asked, why the Lord delayeth so these vials, or carries them so on
as the Pope gets such help, and brings Gods Church low, even when he is
near to ruin? Answ. 1. This way tries the faith and patience of Gods people
most, as, here is their faith and patience (Chap. 13.) imports. So was Israel
tried in their slow delivery out of Egypt. 2. This effects His end amongst
enemies more, and gives them occasion of kything, and in Gods judgment
hardens them, by hopes sometimes to prevail, till His wrath come on them. So
was Pharaoh, by Isreal's straits at the Red Sea, and the Magicians counterfeit
miracles, hardened: thus Christ's coming, is as a snare, Luke 21.35. 3. It
contributeth more for Gods glory, He gets them thus together to the great
battle; He has by this means many victories, and much glory over one enemy,
as He had over Pharaoh, otherwise they would never uphold a contest with God.
The Lord in this does (as one says) as a man, who, being to leap far, goes a
little back to come up with the greater force.

For sinful causes of it, we may name, 1. their ingratitude and unanswerable
walk who receive the Gospel, which will make God remove it, and therefore also
not to propogate it. 2. Little pity on them that lies under Antichrist, and
little prayer for Gods hastening His judgments on him and fitting of
instruments for it. 3. Little singlnesse in any undertaking for that end, few
Kings minds it: self-interests sway all, and others carnally seek their own
glory in being isntrumental in such a thing; or, under such a pretext, pursue
their own more than Christ's, therefore they are not blessed. 4. Want of a
powerful Ministry, and lives answerable amongst Professors, which makes this
Truth to be loathed, seeing so many are carnal, deceitful, etc. who profess
it. Thus many have a sinful accession to Antichrists standing.

LECTURE VI.
Verse. 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his vial into the air, and there
came a great voice out of the Temple of heaven, from the Throne, saying. It is
done.

18. And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings: and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake and so great.

19. And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the
nati^ns fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unte
her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

20. And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the
weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail;
for the plague thereof was exceeding great.


THis is the last vial: for understanding whereof, It will be necessary to
enquire, whither it brings the last judgment only on the beast? Or, if ^t
looks to the last plagues on the world simply, including in it the last
judgment? Which last, being of largest extent, and including the former, we
conceive to be understood, not only because of the series of this proph^sie,
which being divided into thre^ principal, typical prophesies of sevens
(whereof this of vials is the last) and other explicatory prophesies or
visions, both which go along from Ioh^'s ti^e to the and: and therefore this
vial, being the last st^p and close of the typical proph^sies, according to
that series, it must extend it self to the end, which afterward is more fully
explained, Chap* 20, 21, etc. as the two former vials are, Chap. 17.18.19.
Beside this, these reasons evince it, First, ( Chap. 15.1, 2.) they are the
last plagues ^n which are fulfilled Gods wrath, and that simply in the world:
for here, the Cities of the Nations are d^stroyed as well as Babylon, and these
plagues are to be understood the last, with reference to such plagues as went
before them under the seals and trumpets, which are first and second plagues,
and these are extended even to the Heathen world: Therefore so must also the
v^als be, and not be ast^icted to the beasts kingdom only. Secondly, The
seventh trumpet brings the last woe, which ( Chap. 10.6, 7.) finisheth the
mystery of God when time shall be no more; but it is cleared, ( Chap. 11.)
that the last woe and the last plagues are one: Therefore the day of Judgment
must be the period of these vials, seeing it is the period of the third woe. 3.
The expressions of this v^al are such as bear it out, It is done; a great
earthquake, mountains were not found, etc. which show another manner of change
than was under the seals, as the particul^rs will clear. Only take these two
cautions, 1. Not to think ^t brings the l^st judgment immediately, as if it
contained no preceding events* but only that the plagues immed^ately
preceding that judgment, are set out in this vial, and that there are no
succeeding judgem^nts on the earth after it, but it terminateth and ends in
eternity and Gods final immediate inflicting judgment on the world of the
wicked. 2. That we look not on this, or the other vials, as fully or
principally holding forth the condition of the Church in that time, but
consequently; for they hold forth wrath on enemies: from which may be gathered,
If it be ill with enemies, it is good and well with her; but that is more fully
to be sought and gathered from the explicatory visions respectively
contempo^ary with these, in which the flourishing state of the Church, and the
succ^ssive inflicting of these plagues o^ her enemies, is more fully expressed.

In this vial we are to consider, 1. the object. 2. the effects. The object,
is, verse. 17. He poured it out into the air: which object is of a larger extent
than any of the former, and comes nearer Satan's kingdom in the foundation and
extent of it, who is ( Ephesians. 2.) prince of the power of the air: the earth, sea,
sun, and seat of the beast, are destroyed before this is poured out into the
air, as that which was only resting, and comprehends what yet stands of
Satan's kingdom, for the air to be plagued, has influence on all under it,
especially these who b^eath in it, and leaves nothing breathing, and so no
living in Satan's world, yet a power he has in it so long as it stands. That
thus it is to be extended, appears, 1. by the effects which are on the great
City, i.e. what of it remained, and on all the Cities of the Nations, Islands,
Mountains, and men that are smitten with it. 2. by comparing verse. 10. Chap.
20. with this event, it is on the devil and his kingdom, Gog and Magog
universally: for, two of the three grand enemies, that engaged against Christ
under the former vial, to wit, the beast and false prophet, are destroyed,
Chap. 19. and casten into the lake. The third, to wit, the devil, has some
essay by other instruments after these are gone, Chap. 20.10. He, by this last
via^, is cast into the lake, where the former two are before him. And his last
instruments, Gog and Magog, are more immediately destroyed from heaven, as the
effect of this vial afterward clears. This then takes in what dominion yet
Satan had in the world, and is to overturn it where ever it were, and amongst
whomsoever.

The effects of this vial are three ways set out, 1. by word. 2. by sign. 3.
by real effects and conseq^ents, all speaking the greatness of this judgment.

1. The word, verse. 17. 1. generally, is a great voice, to make it observable.
2. whence it comes, from the throne, out of the Temple of heaven: In a word,
from God, to show the authority of the speaker, and the certainty of the thing
spoken, which is the third thing the expression it self bears. It is done; it
is like alluding to Christ's word on the Cross, it is finished, when that work
was at a close; so here there is an end of Gods plagues on the earth; and what
H^ had sworn ( Chap. 10.) concerning the finishing of the mystery, was now
perfected, and what was before prophesied of the end, now they are fulfilled:
which words suppone not an immediate, instantaneous fulfilling of these
effect^, but successive, so as by that vial in due time and order they are
brought about and closed.

2. The e^^ect is set out by sign, verse. 18. And there were voices, thunders
and lightnings, which as we heard ( Chap. 11.19.) do signify great and
dreadful changes and judgments; and it may here include, with the last
judgment, these commotions of Gog and Magog which do next preceed. 3. It is
set out by the real effects and their consequents, as means by which these
judgments are produced. They are of two sorts, First, a great earthquake,
verse. 18. and a great hail, verse. 21. These are not to be limited only to the
very same plagues; but hold out, 1. a concurrence of heaven and earth for
inflicting that judgment, as it was in the deluge, the earth shakes from
beneath* and the heavens throw down stones from above. 2. It holds forth the
dreadfulnesse and greatness of the judgment of this vial. 3. The
immediatnesse of it, without any instruments interveening, He executes it on
them Himself, as in earthquake^ (...)* so ( Chap. 20.9.) it is said to be by
fire from heaven, which is, upon the ma^^e^* ^^e same. This earthquake (verse.
18.) is described in it^ degree, Then in its conse^^ents or effects, 1. A great
one, such as never was, far beyo^^ that, Chap. 6. And indee^ ^^e last judgment
will shake the world beyond any thing that ever it felt before. S^con^^^y* The
effects of this earthquake are marked to be three or four, 1. The great city,
to (...) Sodo^, Chap. 11. where the witnesses were killed, or Babylon, wa^
d^vided in th^ee, that is, overturned: for, a city to be divided in three parts
by an earthquake, making the gapes of the earth that great and wide, and to be
overturned, is one. Beside, in plain words, it is spoken afterward of the
cities of the Nations, that they fell, which expounds the former. Thus what
relics of Popery or Papists in any part of the world, whether ^ Rome, if
possibly somewhat recovered, or any where else (yet without their Pope) shall
now wholly be overturned. The second effect is on the heathens, called cities
of the Nations, and contradistinguished from this one great city, They fell;
all these shall be ruined also. 3. Babylons judgment is enlarged and aggreged,
that it rests not in a temporal overturning, but God puts in her hand the
cup of the fierc^ness^ of his wrath, spoken of and threatened to all her
followers* Ch^p. 14.10. Wher^by it appears, 1. That this judgment ends in
eternity: And, 2. that it respects former threatenings.

A fourth effect, is, verse. 20. shew^ng what influence this vial or earthquake
shall have, not only on Cities, but on Islands at a distance, and mountains. In
a word, on all the universe, which shall not only be moved as at other
earthquakes, and verse. 12. Chap. 6. but here, they shall fle^ away and shall
not be found, holding out thereby the consumm^tion that shall be at the end,
further expounded, Chap. 20.21.

The second effect of the bail ( verse. 21.) i^ to the same purpose, to show
that then sinners shall have refuge neither from earth nor heaven: the hail is
terrible* alluding to that plague, Exodus 9. but exceedingly beyond it: never
such an hail heard of as this, every stone a talent weight; it is irresistible,
there is no fence against it: and it may allude to Ezekiel. 38.2. where Gog and
Magog are to be destroyed by hail: the expressions of the judgment may be
borrowed, as the names of the enemies, from G^g and M^gog. The greatness of
it, is fur^her set out by the effect on reprobate men who are the object of it^
they now break out in open blasphemy against God, so that the last wrath
me^deth them not, though it be great. That exceeding greatness of it, without
mixture of mercy, is insufferable and insupportable, and yet they are continued
in a being after such a plague We must therefore look upon it as an eternal
judgment; for, a temporal life could no^ sustain men under it, but in hell:
although malice being now inveterate and at its height in reprobate^ and
devils, so as they neither fear nor love the Lord, but do constantly blaspheme
as their continual exercise under their plagues, yet are by the revenging
justice and power of God sustained in a being for ever, for the declaration of
the glory of Hi^ Justice: and now the sentence being past on them, we are to
look upon this obdured, desperate, maliciousness rather as the just fruit of
former sins, than as having influence to increase their punishment after their
final doom. It must be a dreadful thing to be in hell* especially after the
last Judgment.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. ANd there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials, and
talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show unto thee the
judgment of the great whore, that sits upon many waters.

2. With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the
inhabiters of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication.


WE have had a little view of Gods judgments against Antichrist and Babylon
his seat, in the former principal and last typical prophecy of the vials,
which carried it on to the last judgment. Now, follows the last explicatory
prophecy, in two visions: wherein some special things, mentioned in the
former, more darkly and shortly, are more fully explained. The holy Ghost
aiming hereby clearly to point out what this Babylon or antichristian Church,
and who this Antichrist is, (the one in opposition to the true Church, the
other to Christ, the right Head and Sovereign thereof) with a more clear
description of them, their actings and ruin. We are therefore to look on this
prophecy, and especially on this Chapter, as a special key for opening the
main mysteries concerning these things which are delivered in the former
prophesies. In order to which, and for understanding of what follows, in
general we premit these things.

1. Concerning the scope, it is in these words, Chap. 17.1. I will show unto
thee the judgment of the great whore: by which is meaned not only nor mainly
the last judgment, or last step of her judgment under the seventh vial; for,
all which follows, a^ the destruction of Babylon, Chap. 18. which is the seat
or throne of the beast, belongs not to the seventh, but to the fifth vial;
nor the battle of Armageddon, where the beast is taken, belongs not to it,
but to the sixth: and this would make the story of the seventh more
comprehensive than it will bear.) But we take in the remarkable events on the
beast and his throne, which are by temporal judgments to be carried on by the
Kings, who, once having given their power to this beast, shall afterward
withdraw from her, and piece and piece hate her, and make her naked, as is
clear, verse. 16. all which clears, that this following vision ( Chap. 17.18.
and 19.) does belong to the fifth and sixth vials, and not to the seventh.

2. Concerning the series and placing of them, it is thus to be done, 1. He
describes ( Chap. 17.) the object of these judgments, to wit, the whore and
the beast, and who are to be understood by them, with a general hint at the
instruments to be made use of in their ruin. Then, ( Chap. 18) he more fully
and pathetically shows the temporal destruction of that city or whore, by
the following lamentations of her followers: which shows it not to be the
last judgment on her, which could have nothing following; but that judgment
on the beasts seat, mentioned under the fifth vial, Chap. 16. Then ( Chap. 19.)
he goes on to describe the events of the sixth vial in the battle of
Armageddon, which was defective, (till supplied there) Chap. 16. after these,
In the last vision ( Chap. 20.21.22.) till verse. 6, 7, etc. he sets out the
events of the seventh vial: wherein Rome, is not only destroyed, as in the
fifth; and the beast, as in the sixth: but the Dragon in his universal
dominion, which belongs to the seventh vial. So, Chap. 18. expounds the
fifth vial; 19. the sixth; and 20.21. the seventh; and this 17. Chap. makes
way for all.

3. For this 17. Chap. (which is a ground well premitted to all the rest) it
has three parts, 1. An introduction, or preface, containing the occasion of
what follows; or, the proposing of the sum and scope of the vision following.
This is in the Angels words to John, verse. 1, 2. 2. There is the vision it
self, more darkly represented to him in types, or in a figurative vision. This
is from verse. 3. to verse. 6. 3. From that to the end, we have a clear
interpretation (upon the occasion of John's wondering) more fully expounding
this than any other vision is expounded. Concerning which, Observe more
particularly,

1. That there is great odds between the figurative expressions, in which the
vision is set down, and these by which it is interpreted. The vision and
prophesies are set down darkly under figures, and we must take them so; and to
take them literally were absurd: because they need interpretation, but the
interpretation, is in plain words and more properly to be taken. Otherwise, to
expound one allegory by another as obscure, were no exposition, and contrary to
the Angels scope here, which is by this interpretation to make John and us know
the meaning of the vision, and contrary to the manner of exposition in all
other places, as ( Chap. 1.20.) the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches,
literally so, and no more, as they are named. The seven Stars the Angels, or
Ministers of these Churches: and ( Chap. 7.) these are they who are come out of
great tribulation, i.e. so indeed. And therefore here, though in the vision,
heads and horns be not to be properly and literally understood, yet in the
interpretation, seven heads are seven hills, or ten horns ten Kings, they are
literally and properly to be taken, especially when the Angel circumstantiateth
the hills, such as the woman fitteth upon; and the Kings, by this, that five be
past, one is and the other is to come; and the ten Kings, not as yet to have
received power, but to get it afterward, and so forth. All which demonstrate,
that the Angels purpose and words are to be literally understood. So the woman,
the city, ( verse. 18.) is so circumstantiated by her dominion, as constrains
it literally to be understood.

2. Concerning this woman and whore, Obs. 1. That the woman and whore are both
one city or state, but diversely considered* for, she who is the whore, verse. 1.
is styled and represented as a woman, verse. 4. and the woman there represented,
has the whores name, verse. 5. yet (I say) diversely considered, for, to be an
whore and an adultere^-whore, such as the Scripture uses to mention to this
scope: therefore this name is given to Israel in their defections, and not to
Heathens, because it imports a Contract and Marriage with some party and a
foul breach of that tie. The whore then, as such, can be no city that never was
Christian, but some eminent Church, making defection to idolatry and falling
from the F^^^h given to God their husband; at least, this engagement to Him,
must preveen their being accounted so notorious an harlot. And, 2. as the woman
and whore are one; So Babylon (called the great city, Sodom, Chap. 11. verse.
8.) and the whore, are the same, as appears by then names, verse. 5. and verse.
18. and their practices are the same, to wit, to allure to fornication, Chap.
14.8. to persecute, Chap. 11. and their ruin and judgment is one. Compare
Chap. 14.9, 10, etc. Chap. 16.19. Chap. 18.2, etc. And where the epither great,
is added to City, Wh^re or Babylon, the same singular party is described, but
in diverse considerations, either of her dominion, as verse. 18. or whoredoms,
oppressions, pride, or some such thing, for which she gets diverse names,
and is represented by diverse types.

3. Concerning this Woman, it is by most of the Fathers applied to Rome.
Ter^^^i^nus, lib. adversus Iudaos, Cap. 9. Sic and Babylon, apud Ioannem
nostrum, Romana urbis figuram imp^^^, proin^^ and magna and regn^ superba, and
Sanctori^^ debellatricis, that is, Babylon, in our John, is a figure of the
city of Rome, being so great, so proud of the Empire, and the destroyer of the
Saints. The like he has, lib. ^. contra Marcionem, Cap. 13.

Hieronym^^, epist. 17. ad Mar^^ll^^, nomin^ Pauli and Eust^ch^^, ^pist. 151.
Alg^siae, quaest. 11. Comm^^^. in Cap. 47. Es^iae. in lib. Di^ymi de Sp^r.
Sa^nct^, praef^tione ad Paulinianum. Ambrosius Ansber (...) locumpunc; where he
says, ^oc manifestum est, i. e. it is manifest. Also Victorin^^, Prima^^^ and
others, cited by Ful^ in his answer to the Rhemists, 4. note upon the place.

Nay, Augustine (howbeit cited for another opinion concerning what is meaned by
Babylon from his Comment. in Psalm. 26.) does concede what we say, lib. 18. De
civitat^ Dei, Cap. 2. and 22. And Arethas Caesariensis, Comment. in locum,
grants the same to be the judgment of diverse: whence Fulk gathers, That
this was the common opinion of the ancient Greek Fathers.

The same is granted by the most learned of the Papists themselves. ^aro^ius,
(Anna^. Tom. 1. An. 45.) has these words, Roman, in Apocalyps^ Io^nnis eo^^m
nomine (sci. Babylonis) notatam esse* in confesso est apud omnes, i.e. That
Ro^^, in the Revelation of John, is designed by the same name, to wit, of
Babylon, is confessed by all.

^ellarmine is both frequent and full in this, lib. 3. De pontif. Romano. Cap.
13. having, first* proposed that opinion of Augustine, Arethas, Ha^o^, ^eda
and ^apertus, who, by the city Babylon, understand the multitude of the wicked.
And adds, Se^anao* dici potest, and ^ea judicio melius, per meretrice^
intelligi Roman, that is, It may be said also, and in my judgment better, that
by the whore, Rome is to be understood. And lib. 2. Cap. 2. he expressly
disputes for it; Praeter^a, Ioan^^^ in Apocalyps^ passim Romam vocat
Babylonem* and aperta colligitur ex Cap. 17. Apoc. ubi dicitur Babylon magna
sed^re super septem montes, and habere imperium super Reg^s terr^: Nec (...)
^lia civitas est, quae, Ioannis tempore, ^^perium habuerit super Reges terrae,
quam Roma* and notissimum est super septem colles Romam edificatam ess^* that
is, Moreover, John in the Revelation, everywhere calls Rome Babylon, and it
is evidently gathered from the 17. of the Revel* where Babylon the great is
said to sit upon seven hills, and to have dominion over the Kings of the earth:
Neither was there any other, which in John's time had power over the Kings of
the earth besides Rome; And it is a most known thing, that Rome was builded
upon seven hills. See also his 3. Book, Cap. ^.

The same is the judgment of Esti^s, in 4. Sent. Did. 47. S. 9. and of Ribera
upon the place, The Rh^mist^ also acknowledge, that Rome heathen may be
understood her^, and Alcasar confirms it; Also Cornelius ^ lapide, Blasius,
Viegas and others.

Reasons in the Text do constrain it so to be understood, 1. Its local
situation, This whore is a City sitting on seven hills in John's time: whereof
afterward. 2. It is an Empire or City, which had before that changed five sorts
of Governments, had then the ^^xth, unto which one other was to succeed, as
Popes have done, who were not come in John's times* 3. It is ( verse. 18) clear
from its Dominion, she is that city, that great city, which then commanded all
the Kings and great men of the earth: which grounds (I say) make even the
adversaries apply it to Rome, but they fall in two foolish shift^* ^ome
applying it to Rome heathen, others to Rome under the Antichrist, who (they
say) is yet to come. Of these we shall speak particularly in the close of the
Chapter, and ^ow premit*

1. That this beast, that bears or carries the woman, is the same mentioned,
Chap. 11. that comes out of the bottomless pit, and kills the witnesses,
and the same with that beast, Chap. 13. their rise is one with this, out of the
pit, verse. ^. Their description in heads, horns, and exercise in persecuting
the Saints and maintaining blasphemies, and the time that they belong unto,
will be one; that beast, ( Chap. 13.) rises after the wounding of the sixth
head; This when that Government, which then was, is expired: yet fall they
under diverse considerations, as the two beasts formerly, Chap. 13. The beast
is as the Husband or rather Adulterer, the woman, the wife, or whore; the woman
represents an apostate Church, or the body; the beast here suppo^^ing her,
points at the head or mungrell power sustaining her and acting her, which in
respect of absolutnesse, tyranny, and persecution (though in a kind distinct
from the former, ye^^ become they one, as we will hear.

2. Observe, that there is a great propinquity betwixt the woman* or whore, and
this beast, they belong to one time: for, the beast carries her, and they
(...) together, They ^re of one color, scur^^^. They have both blasphemies on
them and fornications, (the same upon the matter) they both are up together,
the woman is great when the Kings give the beast their power, when they
withdraw i^ then she comes down, his throne, which was the Dragons, ( Chap.
13.) is her seat, to wit, the seven hills: from which neernesse, (...) evident
they must dwell together.

3. This beast then must signify such an Empire and Dominion as does not only
support Rome, the city, but Rome a whore, and that not as a temporal head
merely by force keeping down men under it, as did the old Roman Empire; but
such a head as the world wondereth at, as is Chap 13. and here also, verse. 8.
and such a head as when ten Kings, out of the ruins of the old temporal
Empire, shall assume Dominion and soveraignity to themselves, and withdraw from
him, yet willingly they shall yield their power to be disposed of by this
beast: and so long as they reverence him, the whore is in no fear by them, but
when they cast him off, then she is burnt. By which it appears, that as by
the woman the Roman Church is described, in opposition to the true Church,
Chap. 12.1. called a woman there; so, by the beast must be meaned the Roman
sea, or the Papal power, by which this whore is supported, and to whom the
Kings of the earth give their power, and after whom the whole world has long
wondered, as was cleared ( Chap. 13.) of this same beast: and the propositions
laid down there, are also to be applied here.

4. We would consider at what time this which is spoken of the beast and whore,
is to be applied to Rome, and the powers which govern Rome, which is the beast,
as the other is the woman. There are these characters to find it out by, which
now at the entry we shall but in general propound, 1. It is the time when the
beast should appear, as he rises from the bottomless pit, verse. 8. to wit, in
the last state of the Empire, before his utter ruin: and so it is not that
which was in John's time, any lawful succeeding power (which comes not from
the pit) but it is that which the Dragon gave, Chap. 13. an authority and
soveraignity invented by the devil, and not warranted by the Word, such as is
Universal Bishop, Prince of Pastors, and Vicar of Christ; so it is no mere
civil power, though persecuting: for then, as it was in John's time, it might
have been said to have ascended from the pit, and it had not been peculiar to
the future state of the Empire, which is a foreign Government of an other rise
than these which went before, such as that of the Popes, who are distinct and
different from Emperors. 2. It is Rome under the last head of seven, whereof
five were but past in John's time, and Caesar's were the sixth: the seventh
called the eighth for his twofold consideration (as Chap. 13.) then was not
come; for, this last head is expressly called the beast, verse. 11. Therefore
Rome under none of the first six Governments is the beast here, but under the
seventh or eighth, which in Rome succeeded to Emperors, or Caesar's; for, this
last is to have none after it. A third character is, to try the time by the
horns, That Government of Rome is to be the beast, which shall have with it ten
Kings reigning, which had not recieved their Kingdom in John's time, verse. 12.
Again, it agrees to that state of Rome, when other Kings, that have withdrawn
their temporal subjection from the Emperors, shall yet unanimously and
harmoniously of their own good wills give their power unto, and be at the
devotion of this beast. 3. These Kings shall be especially employed by this
beast in making wars against the Saints, till God discover the whores
rottenness to them or some of them, verse. 14. compared with verse. 16, 17. It
must then be applicable to that time when persecutions abounded through all the
Christian world by the Laws of all Kings and Kingdoms, which was when the
Prophets prophesied in sackcloth and were killed, Chap. 11. and 13. A fourth
character we take from that, that the woman is called a Whore: therefore it
cannot agree to Heathen Rome, for she was not then married nor ever called a
whore.

5. The last thing we premit, is, concerning the times mentioned, as past,
present and to come: when they are particularly differenced, they are not to be
confounded, yet that any thing in the vision is affirmed in the present time,
it will not prove it then to have been, seeing it is ordinary for things to
come, to be represented as present or past.

More particularly, we come now to the preface of the vision, verse. 1. and 2.
Wherein the sum and scope of the vision is proposed: In which, consider, 1. the
thing proposed to be shown, It is the judgment of the great whore. 2. some
properties of that whore hinted at. 3. by whom this is revealed.

In the proposition, the word whore, (which in all languages comes from
mercenarinesse) shortly implies two things, 1. An engagement on the party
sinning, there is a breach of wedlock-bond, as Ezekiel. 16.38. 2. The nature of
the sin as inconsistent with the nature of that tie, to wit, Idolatry, etc.
with which God will have no communion: though many other infirmities may
consist with that bond of Marriage, yet this is particularly whoredom in
Scripture, a peoples shameful prostituting themselves to idols and strange
worship, who were engaged to God. See Hos. 4 12, 13. with the right exposition
of that place. So here, by whore is understood some city or state, as verse. 18.
yet such as has been engaged to God and has made defection from him to
Idolatry. In which respect, Israel, Judah and Jerusalem do get the name of
harlots peculiarly, and are charged with spiritual fornication beyond other
Nations because of this their tie to God which others had not. Beside, this
whore is painted out in opposition to that woman and wife, Chap. 12. which
evanished: and this whore and strumpet appears in her place. 2. By judgment
we understand her ruin, especially when it comes to her seat, which is the
great city, and is here manifested to John, 1. to show that it was certain, and
so to prevent stumbling at that whores greatness and pomp. 2. To show that it
came not by guess, but that God had ordered her ruin. 3. To begin this
explication with the fifth vial preceding, Chap. 16.

2. The property of this whore hinted at here, is, her greatness; Thus to
distinguish this corrupted Church from ordinary defections, heresies and
schisms, whereby often the married Spouse of Christ has been an harlot, and
particular Churches have degenerated. This is the great whore, looking to the
great defection and falling away, spoken of in Scripture, 2 Thessalonians. 2. to be in
the days of Ancichrist, and the greatest eclipse that the light, after Christ's
days, had to endure. This greatness of this whore, is four ways expressed
and proven, 1. She sits upon many waters, verse. 1. to set out the greatness
of her temporal dominion, she that was a mistress over People, Nations, etc.
verse. 15. is to be this whore, and by her whoredoms and idolatries was to keep
these under her power. 2. She is a great whore in respect of these who sin with
her and share of her idolatries, superstitions and errors. These are the Kings
and great men of the earth, such have been Popish for many generations. 3. In
respect of the extent of her whoredom or commonnesse of it: It is not only with
Kings, but indifferently, she proposed unto and did bear in her strumperies on
all sorts, great and small; the meanest behoved to bear her mark, Chap. 13.
even all the inhabiters of the earth. 4. She is a great whore in respect of
that degree of whoredoms wherewith she has intoxicated them. She has made
them d^unk with the wine of her fornications. 1. Her sin is fornication, which
ordinarily in the Old Testament is applied to Idolatry, in putting some other
in Gods room. Now there is no Christian Church has degenerated in this respect
to own Images and Idolatry but Rome. 2. She has entysing ways (as poisoned
cups of wine) to allure to her idolatries: Many threatenings, promises and false
miracles have been made use of to engage the world to this. 3. She makes them
drink of these till they be drunk, being through Gods judgment deluded, as 1 Thessalonians. 2. madd and irrationally addicted to and bent on that way of
superstition, as appears by the many Abbacies, Mon^steries, superstitious
titles and submissions given to Popes, and persecutions against all her
faithful opposers, which bear witness how drunk the world has been with that
conceit of the Roman Church.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 3. So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw ^
woman ^it upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having
seven heads, and ten horns.

4. And the woman was arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with
gold and precious stone and pearls, having a golden cap in her hand, full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication.

5. And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE
MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.

6. And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: --


THe vision it self follows to the 7. verse. and there are two circumstances
premitted, verse. 3. before it be represented to John, as contributing for the
disposing and fitting of John, for the beholding of it. 1. He is carried in the
Spirit: which holds forth the frame of his mind; he was not in body
transported, but by the Spirit; his soul was withdrawn from its ordinary way of
making use of bodily organs to another more immediate and sublime way of
receiving impressions of what was represented, such as was spoken of Chap.
1.10. signifying that it is needful to be spiritual before one be capable of
the visions of God; a spiritual man and a spiritual frame, is the best
discerner of these, 1 Corinthians. 2. 2. He is taken to the wilderness: by that
ecstasie he is removed from ordinary commerce to a wilderness, where that
whore is represented to him, though it be not her dwelling. By this is employed,
1. That spiritualnesse of frame and abstractednesse and retiredness go often
together; one in the Spirit, will be one often apart in private, as our blessed
Lord was. 2. That an abstracted, retired frame of heart, is fittest for
discerning what is right and what is wrong. It is not at Court where folks come
soonest to discern the whore, the glistering of that show keeps men from the
right up-taking of her: But when men soberly retire to think of things in the
most abstracted manner, then what seems gold to others, is often found but to
be gilded to them, as here, verse. 4.

When John is thus qualifyed and composed, then is the vision represented: an
uncouth sight, a woman described in four or five properties or marks, 1. by
the beast which supporteth her, verse. 3. which beast is in four characters set
out. For understaning of which, beside what is said, Observe That by woman is
understood here the whore formerly mentioned, to wit, a whorish Church, or, a
faithful city turned to be an harlot, Isai. 1. Consider then this woman two
ways, 1. simply as a woman, so it is the city Rome that then was. 2. as a
whore, so it is the apostatized Church of Rome which though in John's time it
was not come, yet was in vision represented to him as come. By beast in
general, some wicked Dominion or Empire (as Dan. 7.) must be understood.

More particularly, We may take the beast in a fourfold consideration, 1.
complexly with its seven heads, as in any form of its Governments; so it
points out the Roman Empire indefinitly, as it was before John's time under
the five heads who were fallen, as it was in his time under the sixth, and was
to be afterward under the seventh: There is but one beast in all, thus
considered. 2. We may consider the beast (to speak so) as a body, or the beast
without relation to any head; so it holds forth the Empire, Dominions, or
Countries, which made up a Monarchy under any of these sorts of Governments or
heads. It is a body, upon the matter the same, however its Governments changed.
This seems in the exposition to be called the Peoples, Tongues, and
Languages, verse. 15. on which the woman sits, and is expressed by many
waters, in the preface, verse. 1. on which the whore sits, as she does here
on the beast. 3. We may consider the heads as distinct from the beast, and so
they are the forms of Governments which successively guided that beast and
supported that city. And thus the last head, which succeeds the Caesar's,
which did reign in John's time, will be the Pope (or Papacy) who now has headed
that Empire for many years. By the former heads, the woman, as a city, is
supported, by the last as she is a whore. 4. We may consider the beast, as
under, and acted by the last head the Pope, so by it, is represented the Roman
sea, (or se^es Romana) which by Religion, under pretext of Christ's Headship,
rules as broadly as ever any of her former states did, as appears by what
was said, Chap. 13. In this respect, it is of an Ecclesiastic nature, to hold
out a twofold respect in this beast beside any of the former; so this fourth
consideration takes up the beast as the Authority ruling, and the whore as the
city where he rules: for ( Chap. 19.) he as a Beast or Governor, has a being
when the whore is destroyed in the 18.

If it be asked here, Under what notion the beast is considered in this place?
Ans. 1. Under the last, as it is headed with the Pope, and under pretense of
Religion domineereth. Reason 1. It is the same beast, Chap. 13. but that
looks to the last head of this beast or state of this Empire, as is said. 2.
Because only the last state of this beast contemporateth with this cities
becoming a whore to be supported by it. 3. It is the state of the beast which
then was to come, and the sixth was then in being: therefore it is the last,
for it is to go to perdition. 4. It is the beast which all wonder at, that
Kings give their power willingly unto, which is expressly called the beast,
verse. 8. which should ascend, etc. and the beast to which the Kings shall give
their power, verse. 13. and with whom they receive power, verse. 12. which only
are true under the last state of the beast, it being not so with any of the
former Governments, where heads were crowned and not the horns, Chap. 12. here,
the horns were crowned, Chap. 13. and are Kings in respect of temporal
jurisdictions; yet these same Kings, under pretense of spiritual power, are as
much kept under the beast with the seventh head, as ever under any of the
former.

If it be further asked, how the woman sits on that beast? It is clear two
ways, 1. she sits on it, as having her principal seat in the chief seat of
that Roman Empire; she sits on that Dominion, and has the city Rome for her
nest. Hence ( verse. 9.) in the exposition it is thus cleared, she sits on
the beast, i. e. on the seven hills, which is the center of the beasts
Dominion; and on many waters, that is, that same Empire. 2. It is expounded in
that word, the beast that carries her, verse. 7. that is, supporteth her by its
authority and keeps that city (which otherwise had been desolate) in some
grandour by her, as in Chap. 15. even as she was made famous by being the seat
and residence of these who formerly managed the authority of that Dominion.

This then is the first thing whereby this whore is described, the power or
Empire wherein she dwells, and whereby she is supported, to wit, Rome, or the
Roman sea, which they call the rock on which their Babylon stands as an
unerring and an infallible foundation, at least so far as to discover her to be
this whore.

This beast or Empire gets four marks in the Text, 1. Her color is scarlet,
pointing out, 1. her grandour. 2. her cruelty, as the Dragon was colored,
Chap. 12. 2. This beast is full of names of blasphemy, Chap. 13. every head had
blasphemies on it, that is, was blasphemous and idolatrous; but this, under the
last head, is now all full of them, superstitions, idolatries, arrogant titles,
and usurpations were never claimed so much by any of the former as by this:
whereby appears, that it holds forth no Christian Empire, or Rome as
Christian, except under its defection.

The other two parts of the description, to wit, heads and horns, are so
particularly interpreted by the Angel afterward, that we shall forbear till we
come to it; which is the last part of the Chapter.

The second thing whereby the whore is described, is her pomp and outward
gloriousness, verse. 4. Whereby is set out, 1. their pride in being so
arrogant. 2. their wealth and riches. 3. her carriage to allure to her
superstition with poisoned cups and such deckings as whores set themselves out
by. 4. Yet her deckings are but carnal and counterfeit, decked, that is,
gilded, in the original, it is not gold, but gilded external pomp only,
whereby the world is taken more than with that simplicity wherewith the woman
is adorned, Chap. 12. So this pomp appears yet more, 1. in the nature of her
worship, in Churches, altars, holy days, ceremonies and garments. 2. In the
nature of her officers, great Cardinals, stately Princes are her Ministers. 3.
Their carriage is not needlessly observed, that their great men delight in
purple and scarlet, is not by chance, but by providence. Baronius (as cited,
Chap. 13,) says it was, that Christ's Priests should be in their pomp equal
to the heathenish Pontifex Maximus.

The third property of this woman, is her name in her forehead, verse. 5. which
is not, that this whore will own such a name as mother of harlots, but rather
disown it: but (alluding to the manner of impudent whores, who set their badges
and names to be known over their doors and on their heads) he would show two
things in the antichristian Church, 1. Great impudency in owning and
maintaining these things, which are indeed great abominations, their public
Images and bowing to them, their disputes for and defenses of their grossest
superstitions, so that her whoredoms need not be sought out by secret search,
they do it before the Sun. 2. Great evidence of guilt, so that by trying her
and comparing her way with the Word, it will be found clearly that she is
Babylon, etc. as if these titles and superscriptions were written on her, as
her name: which name is to be gathered, not out of letters and words (as
neither that of Chap. 13. ult.) but out of doctrines, practices and others her
properties, by spiritual wisdom making the application of these descriptions,
both Chap. 13.18. and here, verse. 9. for, none, owning the Revelation to be
Gods Word, will willingly take that name which will make them pass for
Antichrist or his Church: and if this name be not literally taken, why should
the number be, Chap. 13?

The name is in three, 1. MYSTERY: which shows there is both great iniquity
here, and that it is so put together, that it looks like a mystery, either to
conceive it or to discover by it such a party to be the whore. (For which it is
called (2 Thessalonians. 2.) the mystery of iniquity, in opposition to the mystery of
godliness,) In all which, Antichrist imitateth Christ, lest he should be
discovered. Or, it may be mystically Babylon, as spiritually Sodom, Chap. 11.
Babylon, not really, (which none can plead) but in a mystery. The second part
of the name, is, BABYLON THE GREAT: of which we have spoken, and applied it to
Rome. It is called BABYLON, first, for its headship during the fourth Empire,
as Babylon was in the second. And, secondly, for its idolatry in it self, and
in its cruelty, in bringing and keeping at under Gods people. And, thirdly,
because Babylons curse follows it for Babylons sin. Of this more was said,
Chap. 14.

The third word, is, MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH: which
sets out a superiority and precedence in this Rome, in polluting the world
actively with her pollutions, and that the superstitious way of the rest of the
world is derived from her; she is as the mother and fountain that brings
forth all superstitions. 2. A sort of precedence and priority of a
Mother Church, (as she calls her self) she shall claim not only to be the
first Church, but to be over all, as the rule and example to them. And indeed
in respect of the corrupt part of the Church, as it is antichristian, she is
so. It holds forth eminently high defection, which must have its birth from
Rome, and over which Rome shall especially preside. Which titles cannot agree
to heathenish Rome, that never propagated error to others, but rather civilly,
and left still an (...) of Laws and Religion to the Nations they conquered. But
they agree well to Rome now in its splendid titles, as Peter's Chair, the
infallible Church that cannot err, the Church that cannot be obscured or
ruined, Catholic supreme Judge of all, etc. and so has given the rise to all
the idolatries and superstitions that have come into the Church from it; and
like a kindly mother, has always taken the defense of these, and fostered them
as her own brood through all the world.

The last two properties of this whores description, to wit, the fourth and
fifth, we put together, as holding out her practice: whereby her inclination
and guilt appears in these, 1. An entising of others to that sin of
fornication spiritually, by that cup which she holds forth to them, with her
abominations, that she may entise them with these, verse. 4. he alludeth to what
is written of the filthiest whores, to which he compares this harlor. 2. An
humor and inclination to persecution, verse. 6. which is three ways set out,
1. In respect of the parties persecuted; they are, 1. Saints, for alleged
crimes, persecuted, and wrongs falsely imputed to them. 2. Martyrs, such are not
only Saints unjustly wronged, but persecuted on the account of Christ's Truth,
or for opposing her way, and witnessing against it. 2. This persecution is set
forth by her contented manner of going about that work, she thirsted for their
blood, and drinks it, as with delight and satisfaction. 3. In the degree, it
came to so much, that she was drunk with blood, having thus drunk so much, that
she was loathsome under it, senseless of it, and overflowing with the guilt of
it, as drunkards are with drink beyond measure. How well this agrees to Rome,
look Chap. 13. That by blasphemy, is holden forth Idolatry, and by whoredom,
defection to Idolatry, appears also, 1. It is one sort of blasphemy which is
common to this seventh head with all the rest of the heads, and theirs was
Idolatry. 2. By the common phrase of Scripture, that when Israel is charged
with whordom or breaking wedlock, Ezekiel. 16. and blaspheming God, Chap. 20.27.
It is expounded in the verse following, to be their Idolatry and whoring after
Idol-worship on every high hill. See Ezekiel. 23.7. and 30.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 6. -- And when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration.

7. And the Angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee
the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her, which has the
seven heads and ten horns.

8. The beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall
wonder, (whose names were not written in the book of life from the foundation
of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.


THe third part of the Chapter, to wit, the interpretation of the former
vision, follows: and before we come to it, there is the occasion of it set
down, and the undertaking of the Angel, verse. 6, 7.

The occasion is the effect which that vision had on John, he wondered with
great admiration. This wondering is not as the world wondereth, verse. 8.
(which, of such a one as John was, cannot be said) but he wondered to see that
beast and the woman so linked together, and desidered in himself to know the
meaning of it, as the Angels words imply, verse. 7. a wondering what it might
mean, such a type of a beast he saw formerly, Chap. 13. yet the exposition of
some parts of the description is left till now, that it might hence appear that
the knowledge of this mystery should not altogether, but piece and piece be
manifested, and that the revealing of Antichrist is especially reserved to the
last days of his begun ruin, and therefore it is no marvel that many of the
Fathers speak obscurely and wildely concerning him.

The Angel, verse. 7. propounds to clear four things, 1. the woman. 2. the
beast that carries her. 3. the seven heads. 4. the ten horns which agree to
her, as now under the last head. And he begins at the beast, because we know
by this who that whore is, by knowing who supporteth her. The woman being
spoken of last, We come to the first thing followed, verse. 8. to wit, the
description of the beast in general, under the notion of his last head: for,
John, in a prophetical vision, gets a sight of this backslidden Church, and
the Empire or dominion that supported her, as she is a whore; for, that is in
the words, verse. 8. The beast thou saw: Now, the beast he saw was that which
supported the whore, called ( verse. 11.) the eighth head, pointing at the last
state of this Empire. So this answers a seeming contradiction, how this beast
can be said not to be, and yet to be, verse. 8. for, it is not to be understood
simply that it is not: (for in the end of the verse it is said, It yet is,
which makes the wonder the more; and ( verse. 10.) there was one King, head to
that beast, even in that time) but the opposition is to be understood in some
respect, that is, it was formerly a large Empire, but is not the Empire under
that Government and form which is here intended: in that respect, it is but to
come, which is verified in the state of this beast which John saw and the Angel
describes.

More particularly, this beast is described in a threefold respect, 1. as to
the time past, it was, that is, this is an Empire which is not now to begin
simply, but long has had dominion in the world, though differing from this
under the last consideration: for, 1. It was under Kings, Consuls, Emperors
and other lawful civil Governors; this ascends from the pit. 2. It was a
civil Government, governing by power and force of Arms; now its Ecclesiastic,
bearing rule by Religion and pretext of Christ's horns. 3. It was openly
heathenish and idolatrous, avowedly persecuting Christians; now it is not so, a
pretended Christian, but really idolatrous, and an enemy to all true
Christians.

2. It is described in respect of the present time, It is not, that is, in
respect of this last state which was coming, and is opposed to all the former,
in that respect it is not come, as it was to be antichristian, and as the Roman
city is not yet an whore; So this Government, which is the last of that beast,
is not now in the world, because it is under the seventh, head, and the sixth
was then, verse. 10. for though the mystery of iniquity began to work very
soon, yet this birth was not then brought forth. So it is in vain to seek this
beast amongst the forms then existing, though that same Empire was in other
respects in being even then.

Here also it would be adverted, That this was, and is not, looks to John's
time, and is to be made a truth then, as the word in the future, but shall
arise, clears: But was, and is not, in the end of the verse, looks to the
time after his rising and becoming the object of the earths admiration, which
is the cursed privilege of the last head that then was to arise from the pit.

3. It is described in reference to the time to come, and or but (as often)
shall arise: though he be not yet come, yet he shall come, and because there
was most difficulty to know him that was to come, and it is most concerning
also to Gods people, That future state is set out also in a further description
in these four, 1. in his rise, He shall ascend out of the bottomless pit:
where two things are insinuated, 1. Concerning his nature and kind. 2.
Concerning his order or manner of rising. By his original, from the
bottomless pit, We understand the same thing, as Chap. 9. of his being Angel
of the bottomless pit. His arising from thence, Chap. 11.7. and his getting
power from the devil, Chap. 13.5. All which imply, not only that he should be
of a hellish disposition, but that his power or form of it, which was to
succeed that which then was, should have a rise, specially from hell, that is,
should be no civil Government of any sort (all which, Romans 13. are Gods
Ordinances,) nor merely a power abused by the devil in oppression and
persecution; for, that had not been any peculiar mark to this beast, or this
state of the beast, for all the former almost were such, and so it would not
reach the Angels scope, It must then be understood of a Government unwarranted
by God, and a meddling in things not put in men's power, an office not
acknowledged in the Word (such as Papacy is) but in effect, a power especially
plotted by the devil, and brought out of hell to supply the Dragons place, when
he should be dis-throned in the heathen Emperors. By which it appears, that
this is a singular dominion in respect of its rise, as being specially obliged
to the devil for that, and singular in its usefulness to him, which can be
spoken of no ordinary Government, though the persons be sinful that are in it.

Secondly, This, and shall ascend, etc. implies, 1. a great height this beast
should come to from small beginnings, as Chap. 13. 2. That gradatim, or piece
and piece, he should come to it: not all at once at an height, but one step of
usurpation after another, till the height were come unto, but in a covert way,
as papacy arose: so that there seems to be some intervall, as it were,
between the beast that was, and is, his evanishing in that shape which he then
had, and the last beasts appearing: in which respect, it is said, Chap. 13.
peculiarly of this change, that one head was wounded, and discerned to be so,
before it was recovered by this last. For the time and manner of this rise, see
more Chap. 9. and Chap. 13. Only here it appears, that the future state of
the Roman Empire, which should be in its nature and rise different from the
former states thereof, is the state that is set out by this beast, and all know
that this is the Papacy, or Pontificatus.

2. This last state of the beast (which in this Chapter is called commonly the
beast) is set out in his ruin, as he was under that form to succeed what had
gone before, so that there should be none after him; for he shall go into
perdition, 1. Implying an evanishing of this beast under this head, and not
only the changing of this state; for that had not been peculiar to it, but
common with the former. All by gone states are comprehended in what was; and
this future state or consideration of the beast, takes in all which was to
come of him. 2. It implies a peculiar destruction waiting for him, different
from the former. 3. A slownesse in its on-going, though there be a certainty of
its fulfilling, yet not at once. If Papacy be (...) this head then, we cannot
look for an Antichrist to succeed it, seeing it has succeeded to the state that
then was. It may also mean an active perdition in respect of destroying others,
in which respect ( Chap. 9.) he is called Apollyon, and (2 Thessalonians. 2.) the son
of perdition: for this describes him best in his nature, and is like one who
comes from that fountain from which he has his rise.

3. He is described by the welcome he should have in the world when he arose,
or the effect he should have on the world, They that dwell on the earth shall
wonder, whose names are not written in the Lambs book. This sets out the
absoluteness of his reception, or the obedience that should be given him, in
four. 1. in extent, the whole world, almost all the Roman Empire, (except some
Elect ones by God kept from that impurity, as also, Chap. 13.) it is as broad
as ever it was in any form before. 2. There is the kind of subjection,
expressed by wondering, a superstitious subjection to him as to some Deity, and
not merely as to a civil Governor, as in the former heads, (for, such
subjection many Elect children gave) but this is an Idolatrous adoration, such
as Papists give to their Popes. 3. It sets out the degree of subjection,
this of admiration is more nor ordinary, and is to be wholly at the beck and
command of this beast; under this consideration, it is a superstitious
devotednesse to him. 4. There is the motive of all this, it is willingly; they
admire him, not by constraint of arms, but by a mistaken devotion, they of
themselves give up and enslave themselves to him, as is said of the Kings,
verse. 13. they shall give their power to the beast, and verse. 17. they agree to
do it. They were now out of temporal subjection, the Empire having become
weak, and they upon that had got their Kingdom, yet this admiration had such
influence on them, as to make them universally yield to this beast upon this
account, more willingly than Armies had made them do to the former.

The exception put in a parenthesis, (whose names were not written in the book
of life from the foundation of the world) not only holds forth that
compliance to be an exceeding sinful defection, even such as the Elect should
not, yea, to the end cannot continue in it: But, 1. It shows there is a
difference made by Jesus Christ of Elect and Reprobate, as if by name they were
written in distinct Books. 2. It shows it is eternal, and so without
dependence on our free wills, it is before the world. 3. It shows, that our
standing and being kept clean, is a fruit of Election, and not our Election a
fruit of our foreseen faith, or works. It is, they admire not, because they are
written in the Lambs book; and not, they are written, because they admire not.
4. It shows a suitableness in the end and midses; these Elected to glory are
brought to it by Holiness, ( Ephesians. 1.4.) and Sanctification, 2 Thessalonians. 2. verse.
13. in being kept from such filthiness, as others fall in, and which
otherwise they would have fallen in; and on the contrary they go to
destruction, falling in sins, which are the causes of their damnation, though
not of their reprobation, yet the decrees in respect of their ends are not
without respect to these midses, although not grounded on them.

4. And lastly, he is in this last consideration described by the ground of
this admiration, which points at the state it agrees unto. This is proposed
by way of ridle, When they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.
This is to be understood with respect to the time of the beasts actual
existing under the last consideration, wherein he is admired, and seen by the
inhabitants of the earth, and so not only was, and is not, as in the former
part of the Verse, when this state was to come; but now it is: so it differs
in the notion of timing it, from what it was formerly: and is thus to be
understood, They see now an Empire, which being before that time, was exceeding
different from this, 1. in form. 2. in nature or kind, ut supra: the heads then
were crowned, Chap. 12. now the horns. 2. It is not, that is, it is a Dominion,
but it is not the former which was, it is spiritual, and so admired. 2. It
lordeth and rules over ten Crowned Kings, the former did over ten Legates,
Proconsuls, or Governors of Provinces. 3. It uses not arms directly, but
Excommunications, Censures, etc. 4. It was openly heathenish and idolatrous,
now it is secret under pretext of Christ's Vicar, so that old form is away.

[For, this beast may be two ways conceived, 1. in its general complex
consideration. 2. more particularly, in its heads and horns. In the general
consideration, he compares the whole beast in its Ecclesiastic nature
complexly with the whole beast considered as a temporal Empire (considered
also complexly,) as under any of its first six heads; so this last beast, which
supporteth the whore upon an Ecclesiastic account, is opposed to its civil
consideration as a civil power which went before. In this sense there are but
two states of this beast, one that was present, and to pass when this last
succeeded, another to come. But when he considers again the beast more
particularly in respect of its heads and horns, and compares the Governments
among themselves, verse. 10, 11. there are seven forms, whereof five were past,
one present, and one to come. Hence it is, that he calls this Ecclesiastic
state of this beast the eighth, looking to its distinct nature from the former;
and also the seventh, as it is, upon the matter, the same power, continuing the
Dominion of Rome in one series with the former forms, even as the two beasts
were distinguished, Chap. 13. upon that diverse account, though upon the matter
one. So this first was, and is not, is no contradiction; for, the beast, i. e.
the Empire then was, yet was not this power come as the supporter of the whore,
but was to come, in which respect he is looked upon as distinct from all the
other heads.]

The third step, is, and yet is, that is, though it now differ much from what
it was, yet it is really that same Dominion, upon the matter, by other
spiritual weapons, 1. ruling as amply as ever their predecessors did 2. having
as full and absolute rule as ever it had. See for this, two sayings of Bellar.
lib. 3. de Pontif. cap. 21. page 301. cited Chap. 13. 3. It rules as
tyrannously as any of the former, encroaching on others liberties, till it
bring them under, and when it has done that, it exercises its power also
cruelly, especially against the Saints, as, verse. 14. and Chap. 13. 4. It
keeps the former throne and seat, though under another form, it gets the
Dragons seat and Authority, Chap. 13. and these people, Nations and Languages,
and Kings that formerly had the former beast for their temporal lord, they
have Papacy for their spiritual. 5. in respect of its blasphemous idolatry and
superstitions, which though they differ someway in kind, yet for number they
are as many, for guilt as great, for effects of wrath as dangerous; so that who
would compare the many images, days and Temples before applied to the idols of
the heathens, which now are called and turned into images, days and Temples of
the Saints, they might say the idolatry, upon the matter, is the same, though
the names be changed, even as their Churches are. See, Chap. 13. This, upon the
matter, is the new formed image of the beast, spoken of there. In all which
respects, though it might be said that this beast is not the former, in some
respect, yet materially it is in being, as the Text says.

Hence this argument may be formed, That Government or Dominion in the world,
which in some respect, to wit, as civil, was before John's time governing all;
yet, as such, that is, as Ecclesiastic and under a different consideration,
was not come in his time, but shortly was to succeed that which then was over
Rome, yet as differing from it; and in its rise and nature to be no ordinary
civil power, but an unwarrantable Ecclesiastic power, at which the world was
to admire, and unto which they were willingly to give a more absolute and
divine subjection than to any of the former powers; under that Government Rome
is the antichristian whore, That Government is antichristian, and the head and
supreme Governor thereof is Antichrist: But the Papacy is that Government,
which was not in John's time, yet succeeded to that which then was, in amplitude
of Government, and to which men willingly yield, and have yielded such an
obedience and subjection, which now is begun to go into perdition, etc.
Therefore that Church is the whore, that Government antichristian, and that
head and Governor is Antichrist: for he immediately succeeds to that which
was in John's time, and according to Bellar. de Pontif. lib. 3. since the Gospel
came to light, goes into perdition; and all these marks agree to him only.
Therefore he is the state pointed at by these. Or, thus, That form of Dominion
over the Roman Empire, which is not in kind one with what it was in John's time,
but immediately succeeds to that, and yet in respect of amplitude of
Government, and degree of subjection to it, is the same with, or more ample,
than the former, though upon a different consideration and account; that
Dominion or Empire under that form, is the beast, seen by John: But Papacy is
such a Government, and the Empire of Rome under it, is such. Therefore it is
the Dominion described by him, as the antichristian Kingdom.

LECTURE IV.
Verse. 9. And here is the mind which has wisdom. The seven heads are seven
mountains, on which the woman sits.

10. And there are seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is
not yet come; and when he comes, he must continue a short space.

11. And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the
seven, and goes into perdition.


THe Angel proceeds to a particular interpretation of the parts, to wit,
heads and horns, wherein the beast was most singular and remarkable. There is a
sentence casten in, before he descend to it, Here is the mind which has
wisdom, which is something like that, Chap. 13.18. and it looks both to what
is past, (putting Readers to consider well of it) and to what is coming,
pointing out something that a man of wisdom will not let pass, but take hold
of these marks for discerning of the whore. The words imply, 1. a materialnesse
in the matter written, as conducing for the understanding of this mystery. 2. a
difficulty to get a mind composed to take it up, there will be need of
spiritual and true wisdom. 3. that such wisdom will find what is in it, and
get so much gripping as to fix them in this, who is this whore and beast: and
therefore this Chapter would be the more fully insisted in. 4. It Implies,
that it is a rare thing to apply these marks wisely, and that the generality of
Readers will not do it. And by this we may see, that though promises be
fulfilled and prophesies also, and the expressions be very obvious and palpable
to any that have discerning, yet they are not so to these who have their minds
blinded with prejudice and spiritual blindness; such prophesies as are most
clearly fulfilled and applied to Christ, to the Jews are dark: and others of
Daniel and Ezekiel, which undoubtedly are fulfilled, are also obscure. It is no
marvel then that so many Papists, wondering after this beast, cannot wisely
discern his marks; It will take wisdom to do that, which every one has not:
and therefore that argument of Bellar. against the fulfilling of this
prophecy, because it is so obscure to many, is of no force. He begins at
the heads, and gives two interpretations, or two applications of that type;
or, he declares two things to be meaned by it, 1. The seven heads are seven
mountains, upon which the woman, or chief city, sits. 2. They are seven
Kings. We premit this, that all the marks after described, agree to one beast,
out of all which put together, the clearing of what is signified, is to be
gathered. Therefore that Empire, or city, must have seven hills, which has
seven Kings; and to whom the one is applied, the other must be applied also:
otherwise they do not serve the scope, which is by the parts of one beast to
discover the Empire meaned by it in whole.

The first exposition of heads, is by the fixed property and natural situation
of this city or woman, to wit, mountains. The second, is, by what is
successive, one to, and after one another. The former of seven mountains are
contemporary, this is successive and in diverse forms.

The heads are called mountains, because in this they signify so, and we are
to understand mountains, Kings, and to be set out by heads and horns in a
metonymicall speech, the signs getting the name of what is signified by it,
not that really they are so. By these then, mountains are properly to be
understood; and the number seven is definite also, as appears by the
exposition which follows; for, Kings are properly seven, and the number
definite, as appears by that, that five are past, one is, etc. and this
suiteth with the nature of the Angels interpreting the seven Candlesticks, and
seven Stars, Chap. 1.20. to be seven Churches, and seven Angels, as is said in
the preface. These mountains then, are, 1. described by their number, seven;
and if the number were not definite, but put for seven, nine, or eleven, etc.
then it could not contribute to design one place by another, which yet is here
the Angels scope, who speaks of these seven mountains, as of seven mountains
famous in respect of others, and some way peculiar to this city. 2. They are
described from this, that the woman sits on them. By woman we told was
understood Rome, it is called a city, Verse ult. and it must be such a city as
may serve particularly to discover these mountains from other mountains, they
are such, says he, as the chief city of the world sits on. And then this
city cannot be the multitude of the wicked; for, that could be no mark for
John, or others, to discern on seven mountains from any other seven mountains.
Beside, this city is not the world, or complex body of Kings, but that city
that rules over them, under seven several Governments, as the following words
clear. And the mountains are such as this woman sits on: now her sitting is
two ways understood in this Chapter, 1. she sits on many waters, verse. 1.
that is, many peoples and Kingdoms, verse. 15. over whom ( verse. 18.) she
rules. Thus to sit on, is to rule. 2. she sits in a peculiar way in one
place of these peoples, whom she commands beyond other places, and she
sits not so on the peoples or waters, but on the seven mountains, that is,
she has her residence, pomp, court, throne and abode there, which reaches
over many people. And this agrees well with the Angels scope, which being to
open the events of the fifth vial, he insisteth on the object of it, which is
the seat or throne of the beast, Chap. 16. These seven mountains then will be
such as the Imperial city of the world not only commands over, but is placed
upon; and so that city will be found to be the whore, that dwells on seven
mountains, and this Empire to be the beast that upholdeth, and supporteth
these, and governs them, ut supra. From which it is clear, that Rome is
designed by the Angel to be this city: For, 1. Rome is famous for its situation
on seven hills, that is a peculiar paraphrase of it both among Greeks and
Latins. The seven hilled city, or the city on the seven hills, and Rome, were
still taken as one: for, at first by Romulus it comprehended four, he was the
first founder of it; after, by the sixth King Servius Tullius, were three more
added: hence was that yearly feast, 3. id. December. called festum septimontium:
and these sayings of the Poets confirm this. Virg. Septem quae una sibi muro
circumdedit arces. And Ovid. trist. Sed quae d^ septem totum circumspicit
orbem. Montibus Imperii Roma Deu^mque locus, etc. which made it to receive
these names, septiceps, urbs septicollis and (...), etc. and they are thus
particularly named, 1. Palatinus. 2. Cali^s. 3. Capitolius, or Ianiculus. 4.
Aventinus. 5. Qairinali^. 6. Viminalis. 7. Aesqui^inus, which makes Bellar. (
lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 2.) say, notissimum est supra, septem colles urbem Romam
^edificatam esse. Corn. a lapide, in locum, cites many to confirm this: and if
Rome be the seat, the Roman Church is the whore, and the Pope Antichrist, who
keeps his Court there in a special manner, though he command otherwise all
the world at his pleasure; yet his chair is nailed to that seven hilled city,
and cannot be removed.

That which is objected, may be answered from what is said. Say some, this city
means no particular city, but the company of the wicked in general, which is
clearly contrary to the Angels scope, which is to discover one state and city;
and to the Text, which distinguishes this city from people and Nations, over
which it commands, and from Kings that gave their power to the beast, yet are
they no small part of the wicked in the world. Beside, it is such a city as is
situated on seven hills, peculiarly distinguished from others, which cannot be
the wicked.

2. Say some, seven are to be taken indefinitely, which is also answered from
the scope, that points out seven hills, on which the woman sits beside
others, to satisfy John in this, as in other interpretations.

3. Say Some (as Bellar.) though Rome then sat on seven mountains, yet it is
not so now, but stands (says he) in campo martio. Answ. It is granted by
Bellarmine, that Rome was then the city signified to John, for it then bare
rule, it must then be understood of it also now, or this one type must signify
one city, or place, to John in his time, and another to us, which is absurd. 2.
It is enough, that it was built so in John's time; for it is the same city,
Empire, and series of Dominion still: and though, as he says, it stands most
in campo martio, yet it is the same Rome, which before that in John's time had
these seven hills in it, or else the Pope sits in some other Rome, than
Peter sat on in John's time. 3. Though some of these hills be without the walls
now, yet they are still linked to the rest by special privileges, all of them
being seats of the Popes Palaces, Abbacies, etc. yet, on an other occasion,
Bellar. says, notissimum est, came supra septem colles adificatam esse, that
is, It is a thing most known, that Rome is builded upon seven hills, as is said.

The Angel, having in the first exposition of these seven heads, discovered
Rome in its local situation, by fixed hills, he goes on, in a second
application, to do it by its fleeting and successive Governments, ver. 10. and
11. In it, 1. he shows what further these heads hold forth, to wit, seven
Kings; (it may be read, they are, or signify seven Kings, as before, seven
Hills) And although one might think it hard that one type should set forth a
Hill and a King: yet the Angels particular explication leaves no room for that
debate. Then 2. he discovers, or characterizeth these Kings in respect of
time and being, that so John and others might the more easily discern what he
proponed. Five are fallen, (says he) one is, and the other is not yet come. 3.
Because the shot of all is to discover the beast under the last head; therefore
in several characters here the seventh is described in the end of the 10. and
11. verses.

For understanding this, we shall, 1. clear the words. 2. Then apply them. 3.
Remove some doubts, or objections.

1. By Kings is not strictly to be understood Governors under that name only,
but, in Scripture, all Governors ordinarily pass under that name; So Moses is
called, Deuteronomy. 33.5. And when Israel wanted all Government, Judge. 17. ult. it is
said, In these days they had no King in Israel, signifying no Governor or
order, every one did what he listed. And here in John's time, that Governor of
the Empire bare not this name of King, though he be called the sixth. 2.
Neither by Kings are understood Governors personally, or individual men, but
a series or succession under one form of Government in a line, as Dan. 7.17.
the four Monarchies, which were not any of them (save it be the third) in an
individual person, yet they are called four Kings: and it must mean so here;
for, Kings here, are as ver. 12. where they are called ten Kings; and shall it
be thought that by these are meaned ten men, who are like, and do all that is
spoken of them in their own time? Experience will say the contrary, That since
the Roman Empire decayed, and Kings arose out of the ruins thereof, many ages
are past; yet, what they have to fulfill on the Whore, is not yet come. And, 3.
these Kings (as is clear) are successive one to another, and that immediately;
the fifth succeeds the fourth; the sixth, the fifth, etc. and there are not
two at once. 4. And that line or succession of the seven together, is to go
from the rising of this Empire to its ruin, while this beast is an Empire, it
is under some one of these heads, except we imagine a beast without an head:
and consequently this succession takes in so long a series, that five
individual persons could not fill up the time before John, nor can one make it
up after him; for, many days have continued since, yet the beast is not gone
fully to perdition, though it then was in his time. It must then be either
under the head it had then, which is false; or, it must be under the seventh,
which succeeded: and however it be, it cannot be one person, who so long could
continue head to that beast. 5. They must be Kings or Governments that are
heads to one and the same body, and sit at Rome: for, the heads are Kings to
that same City to which the Hills belong, seeing they describe one Beast or
Empire; and they must be over many Nations, ver. 15. yea, the same Nations;
for, there is one body of this beast under all the heads, and all the heads are
Governors to one beast or body, and so are Roman Governors, and that of a
great extent. Otherwise one head, were but half an head, or head to half the
beast; and the setting out of both by one type confirms this, that they are
Kings and Hills of one City. 6. These Governors, or sorts of Governments, are
precisly Seven, having one Empire for their dominion, and continuing from its
rise to its close; so the first Government begins equally with the first
head, and it ends together with the seventh, and there are neither more nor
fewer: for, if the Hills be seven, and not more nor fewer, and if just five be
past and no more, then the seven in whole must be so, and not more nor fewer, and
the one to come must be properly one also. And to say there might be an other
Government distinct from the seven, it would also say, it behoved to be an
other beast or dominion: for, says the Angel, This has but seven, the last
whereof goes to perdition and has no successor.

1. From what is said, it is clear, 1. that the naming of an eight, ver. 11. is
not to be understood as of a distinct head: For, 1. Then the beast would have
eight Kings, and so would not be well represented by seven heads, or exponed by
seven Kings, if there were more. 2. Then this beast (to wit, the eight) would
not be one of the seven, which it is expressly said to be, ver. 11. and if one
of seven, it must be one of the seven formerly mentioned, and that none of the
first sixth: therefore it must be the seventh it self, which was to come. 3.
The same called the eight, verse. 11. is all one with that, verse. 8. But that
holds out the Roman Empire under its seven heads, or at least under one of
them, and it is the same beast that was, and is not, which John saw, and which
the Angel is discovering: and if he were not under any of these heads, this
would contribute little to that end. Nor would it be a discovery of the same
beast. 4. The head which was to come is all one with that state of the beast,
verse. 8. that was to arise; for, there is but one state to come, and but one
head to come. Now, were there eight heads, there would be two to come in John's
time, neither could one state have comprehended the whole future form of that
beast, as verse. 8. if it had been to be diverse, and various and under
different heads. 5. If the seventh head be last, then there is not an eight;
But it is said of the seventh, it must continue but a short space, as agreeing
with what is said, ( verse. 8.) of the beast, that it must go into perdition
under that form which was to come: therefore it is not said the seventh, but
the other (and that in the singular number) is not yet come, to show there is
but one to come. How this is called the eight, we shall clear afterward.

A second thing from what is said, is also clear, to wit, that we cannot put
any Government between the sixth head, which was in John's time, and the seventh
or last, whatever it shall be found to be. And therefore we cannot (as some
Interpreters do) put in either the King of Goths in Italy, who for a time
commanded Rome, nor Christian Caesar's. For, 1. there are but seven in all, and
none of these is the last, for there is one since. 2. All these seven heads,
head and rule the Roman Empire, which is broader than that Kingdom of Goths,
which wanted a great part of Italy, and were never Emperors. 3. The papacy was
breeding then, after the wound which was given to heathenish Emperors by
Constantine, and never was healed, till by it, as was cleared, Chap. 13. But
there cannot be two heads together, Therefore. All heads have names of
blasphemy, which cannot be said of Christian Emperors, as such. Then fourthly
beside, if Christian Emperors were an head, when ceased they to be a head?
seeing they kept some name long after they went from Rome, and were weakened
in their power piece and piece.

The second thing whereby these Kings are set out, is clear, that is, they are
such seven forms of Government, as five thereof must preceed John's time; That
is meaned by this, five are away, or fallen, one is, (to wit, the sixth) that
is, one different from any of the former; the other is not, yet come. He says
the other and not the seventh, 1. to show there was but one to come. 2. To show
that it was to be as different from the rest, or more than any that had gone
before, and according to his manner, he points out this last especially,
because it is the scope of all to clear what concerns him. It is said of him
in this verse. He must continue a short space when he comes: which I take to
imply two things, 1. the certainty of this others coming, or of his continuing
a time when he shall come. Thus, when he comes, he shall continue, etc.
holds forth the necessity of his continuance for a time, till he have his
time of it, as well as any of the former, and that people would not think he
shall evanish instantly when he appears. 2. It implies, that that
continuance shall not be long, but a short space: So difficulties use to be
expressed, because of the fainting of Gods people, that they may be encouraged
to bear them. Hence we say, it is not short simply, as if it were a little
time, a year or two, etc. but short comparatively to Eternity, he will have but
a little time: And the reasons why we expound it thus comparatively, are these,
1. It is usual to the Scripture to set out long times by short, when it
speaks of the godly their affliction; it is a moment, Isa. 54. 1 Corinthians. 4.
an hour of tentation, Chap. 3. Chap. 22. verse. 7. and 10. That the
consideration of the transitorinesse of these afflictions may be comfortable to
Gods people under them. 2. When the Scripture speaks of Antichrists tyranny,
and the Churches affliction under him in any definit expression, as Chap.
11.12.13. it speaks of it as short; and therefore when it speaks in
indefinit terms, it is suitable it should be so also; yet, as the former
infers not such a short time in it self, neither can the latter. Hence it is
ordinarily said in the present time, he goes to perdition, yet it was not
begun, to show it hastened. 3. The time equivalent to this (if not longer than
this) of Antichrist, is expressed in this same Chapter by an hour: for, these
ten Kings arise with the beast, when the Empire decreaseth; and they give their
power to him, when they get crowns, as follows: yea, they outlive him, yet it
is said, verse. 12. They get power one hour with the beast: which denotes not
only a contemporarinesse of powers, but the short time that they both shall
have, and yet not simply so, but figuratively expressed, for the comfort of
Gods people who will suffer much from both; and this hour is the same short
space mentioned before and yet is it a long time in it self, so it is a short
time, Chap. 12. after the devils downcasting, which is long in it self: and, on
the contrary, mercy uses to be set out in long terms.

For application then, as the first exposition of seven hills proves it Rome,
this of seven Kings confirms it, for it is notour, that Rome, as such an
idolatrous Empire, has been under seven Governments; five were past before
this time of John's writing, to wit, 1. Kings, 2. Consuls, 3. Decem-viri, 4.
Tribuni militum. 5. Dictators. The sixth, Emperors or Caesar's, were then when
the Angel interpreted this; the other, to wit, Papacy, was not then come, but
has since sitten on that seven hilled city, ruling amply ( ut supra) in his
dominion, as the palpable successor of him who then was.

For more full satisfaction in this application, these things are to be made
out, 1. That Rome has been under seven sorts of Governments, whereof five
preceeded John, the sixth was in his time, and the seventh not then come. 2.
That the Papacy is this seventh who was then to come.

The first must be made out from the Roman story, where it is clear, 1. That
when Rome was builded, it was governed by Kings. Romulus was the first, from
whom were in all seven, until Tarquinius Superbus, who was last (according to
Livius) in his time, for his son Sextus Tarquinius his violating of Lucretia,
the Romans did cast off that Government, and erected two Consuls, and a Senate
to govern, who were to be changed yearly by election. This is the second form,
and continued long, till the Romans became desirous to have all the best Laws
that could be found out, gathered into one body and settled for the rule of
their Government: for which cause, they choosed ten men to collect these and
put them together, These were called Decem-viri, or that Government
Decem-viratus. This is marked by Livius, dec. primae, lib. 3. to be for the
third time that Rome: had changed its Government. But these ten men
degenerating to tyranny, seeking to continue themselves in perpetual power,
and one of them, Appius Claudius, going about to defile one Virginia, a maid
espoused to a Soldier. By this means they drew both the People and Senate
against them, and were put out when they had continued but two years. The
Government again returned to the Consuls, till by the miscarriages of some in
that place, they also became odious to the people, who thereupon contested with
the Senate to have equal power in Government, (for, before no Plebeians had been
Consul) This made the Senate choose Tribuns, who were called Tribuni militum.
They had consulary power, but were five, six, eight, or ten in number, as the
people pleased who choosed them; and it was lawful to choose them
indifferently, decad. pri. lib. 4. page 99. This was the fourth Government:
after them there were diverse contests about the Government, (which again
returned to the Consuls) whereupon (as sometimes before in difficult cases)
they choosed Dictators, who, for a time limited unto them, had supreme power,
and ruled all with much reverence: and, in a strait, that was ordinarily fled
unto, yea, sometimes there would be Dictators for a year, and no other
Government for that time, as Papyrius Cursor, Quintus Fabius, Dictator, etc.
This is accounted the fifth Government, which Julius Caesar often before his
becoming Emperor possessed, to keep the Authority in himself, till afterward
he was styled Dictator in perpetuum. These five were all fallen before John's
time, and then Rome was governed by none of them; for Caesar had gottten the
supreme Authority after his defeating Pompey at Pharsalia, under the title of
Imperator and Pontifex Maximus, by which, the Consuls power was confined within
the city, and the Emperor sent unto the Provinces whom he pleased. This form
succeeded by birth, adoption, or election, afterward, one after another, for a
long time and in John's time was existing in Domitian the Emperor, who
succeeded to his father Vespasian, and his brother Titus, in the Empire: this
then is the sixth which then was.

This which is more sparsly gathered out of Livius, is more compendiously set
down by that famous Historiographer Cornelius Tacitus, in the first words of
his story Vrbem Romam a principio Reges habuere. Libertatem, and Consulatum L.
Brutus instituit. Dictaturae ad tempus sumebantur: neque Decemviralis potestas
ultra biennium, neque Tribunorum militum consulare jus diu valuit. Non Cinnae,
non Sullae longa dominatio, and Pompeii Crassique potentia, cito in Caesarem:
Lepidi atque Antonii arma, in Augustum cessere, qui cuncta discordiis civilibus
fessa, nomine Principis sub imperium accepit. He seems to point out Augustus
as the first Emperor, because after him there was no essay to recover their
former liberty, and he got it with the Senats good will. If any should say,
there are more numbered than six by Tacitus, as that of Sulla, Cinna, Pompey,
and Lepidiu with Antonius. Answ. 1. Some of these men whom he names, do not
infer diverse Governments, but the exorbitant domination of some Governors,
who ruled under the old and ordinary titles, as Sulla, and Cinna, and Pompey
were Consuls, and had still that name; Caesar, Antonius and Lepidus (if we
account Augustus the first, as it seems Tacitus does) they were but by
violence in such places, without any such consent as Augustus had afterward
obtained. Therefore he designeth them by their names and not their offices, as
he had done the former, or as he does to Augustus after, by calling him
Princeps: So this increases not the number. If we reckon again Julius Caesar
the first Emperor, (as it seems just) Lepidus, Antonius, Octavius or
Augustus, will be Emperors, and to be reckoned under the sixth head: for, all
of them had imperial power, and governed, as Supreme, such and such parts of
the Empire, even as often there were sundry Emperors joined, as Dioclesian,
Maximianus, Herculeus, etc. at the same time, Constantine and Licinius agreed
betwixt themselves to divide the Empire, so it was here, and it was still the
same power: and this division or agreement also was only amongst themselves,
without any act of the People, or consent of the Senate, and was a piece of
tyranny as Sue^^nius and Augustus observe, and from that of Tacitus; as also it
is clear, that though there were some intervals in some of these forms, as that
Dictators were now and then, yet when they were, they were supreme, and had a
sort of sacredness beyond any other Governor or Governments, and therefore
justly accounted distinct. The Consuls were both before the Decemviri and after
them, and the Tribuni militum also; yet all of them make up one form, which was
passed before John's days, who wrote in the time of the Caesar's, and so had
not seen the seventh head, which was after to come.

This truth, in the matter of fact, is acknowledged by Bellar. lib. 1. de
Pontif. cap. 2. (though elsewhere he would question it) for there he being to
reckon the changes of the Roman Government, he reckons, 1. Kings, 2. Consuls,
3. Decemviri: for, when he speaks of Tribuni plebis, they were but superadded
to the former Governors, and were not supreme: therefore without respect to
them, Livius reckons the Decemviri to be the third. 4. He names Dictators.
5. Tribuni militum cum consulari potestate: after which he adds the Emperors
or Monarchy. And certainly if there had been any more changes, he would not have
omitted them, it being his scope to show the changeablnesse of all Governments,
till they resolve in Monarchy.

I know also that the same Author Bellar. understands by seven heads
indefinitely all the Emperors, past, and to come in John's time: but that will
not consist with the Angels dividing of them in live, to have been before, one
present and but one to come: for, according to that reckoning many more were to
come than had preceeded that time.

The second assertion to be made out, is, That the Papacy is the seventh
Government of Rome, succeeding to that which was in John's time, and so is the
last: which is holden forth under that type of the seventh head, which was then
to come, and this being a main point, we must insist a little to confirm it.
And 1. its clear that the sixth Government which was then in John's time, is now
also fallen and away. 2. Its clear then also, that the seventh must be come:
what clears the one, confirms the other; for, if the seventh be come, the
sixth is fallen; (because two cannot be together) and if the sixth be gone, the
seventh must be come, for there is no intermission, or interval of such length
betwixt their successions.

That the sixth is gone then, and the seventh come, these things will clear, 1.
It is clear from the truth of story, and matter of fact, that the Government
which then ruled Rome and that Empire, was the Emperors or Caesar's; but from
many ages the Emperors have had no command or seat at Rome, nor any
considerable command over the Territories of that Empire (there being other
Princes since arisen, as France, Spain, etc. who command as broadly as he)
therefore he cannot now be accounted a head. 2. It is clear that that City has
been a seat of a long time to another Government, which has governed it, and
(though under another pretext and on another account) has ruled since as broad
almost as the former. Neither in any reasonable way can that which is now
called the Empire (being very inconsiderable in respect of what it then was) be
accounted the same, or the now Emperor, the successor of these Emperors,
seeing their rise is so different, as was shown, Chap. 13. And if it be alleged
to continue in the Emperors, Then it must either be in the Emperors of the
East, (who in a more direct ^^e succeeded them who then were) who now are
fallen; or, in the Emperors of the West: But neither of these can be said:
for, 1. the east is gone, neither sat he at Rome; nor, 2. the west, for he does
not sit at Rome, nor did since Papacy came to its height, yea, nor many years
before that: and if the Emperor in the east was a head, he must continue so
till his decay; and if the Emperor in the west be a head, he must have been so
from his rise: And so these Empires (or rather parts of one Empire) being
contemporarie, there behoved to have been two heads at once, but then the
Empire was broken, it was no more one. And it is to be Observed, that the first
division of the Empire in several Kingdoms, or parts, not subordinate one to
another, or combined one with another, fell out by Constantinus leaving it
divided in three to his three Sons: for though there were at one time sundry
Emperors ruling at once before that, yet the Empire was not divided, except
for particular inspection, as the Consuls used to do: and every one of them was
Augustus, and it was still one Empire; and therefore it seems, from that
time, Emperors cannot be accounted as to continue as heads: which on Chap. 13.
is further cleared.

2. It is clear by this Chapter, if that which is prophesied to succeed the
time of the sixth head, and to belong to the last Government, be fulfilled,
then the sixth is gone, and the seventh is come; But that is fulfilled, 1. Many
Kings that then had gotten no Kingdom have now obtained it long since. 2. These
Kings having withdrawn from the Emperors Government, have since willingly
given their power to another, to wit, the Pope, and foughten for him against
the Lamb: which things, as they are clearly fulfilled, so are they expressly
holden forth as contemporary with the last state of this Empire which was then
to come, verse. 12. and 13. for he is the head that has the horns, and he is
the seventh head that has Crowned horns or Kings; now these who bear the name
of Emperors, have long since lost these horns; therefore they are not a head,
but he must be this head, whom these horns acknowledge; and seeing they
acknowledge another now, which they did not in John's time, Therefore this must
be fulfilled.

And therefore we conclude that the sixth Government, which then was, is past,
and that the seventh has succeeded ^ except we say the beast for many years
has had no head, and its before cleared also, that neither Christian Emperor
nor Gothish King, can properly be called the seventh head of this beast; yea,
or a head at all.

A third thing clear, is, that the Pope or Papacy may well be called a head or
Government of this Empire: for, 1. that it is a Government cannot be denied,
and of a distinct kind from any of the former. 2. It has its seat at Rome, and
is a King of that seven hilled city, as is also clear. 3. That it extends its
Dominion not only over Rome, or that part, called now the Empire, but over at
least all that was the western Empire, and further, for many years; and if the
same body that is commanded or governed be the beast, the Government that
commands it, being thus circumstantiated, must be the head; or, we must say,
that that Empire has not been under a head for a long time, which cannot be.

4. Therefore we may further argue, If Papacy be a Government of that Empire,
it must be the seventh and last; which we take to be one, as is said: for, 1.
that was not in John's time, it is not that which then was; but that being the
sixth, and this having succeeded to it in its seat and Dominion, must therefore
be the seventh, that was not then come. 2. If all the characters agreeing to
the seventh head be verified in it, Then it must be the seventh; But the first
is true. Ergo, etc. These characters agree to the seventh: 1. to have ten Kings
out of the ruin of the Roman Empire contemporary with it, that Government
contemporary with them is the seventh; Papacy is so. 2. that these Kings give
their power to it willingly. 3. that they persecute at its direction. 4. that
some of them hate her again: all which are verified in the Papacy.

There are two objections against this, the last whereof will lead us to open
the 11. verse, Object. 1. The seventh head is but to continue a short space;
but that agrees not to the Pope. Answ. It is not a short space simply, as is
before cleared; but comparatively short with a sure destruction, for which
cause, it is said also of the eight, verse. 11. that he goes, even from his
beginning, to perdition. The second Objection, is seemingly stronger. If the
Pope be the seventh, Then who is the eight? it seems that would agree better
to him, and therefore their must be some more Governments understood, seeing
there is an eight particularly mentioned. Answ. 1. The Papacy is both the
seventh and the eight, but in different respects, and on diverse
considerations; for, that there are but seven, and that this eight is so the
eight, as he must be of the seven; therefore the very seventh, (six being
before his rise, fallen) is cleared before: and therefore Papacy if it be the
seventh that succeeds the sixth which then was, it must also be the eight:
But I say differently considered, 1. Papacy considered as a Princedome, and the
Pope as a Prince, he is the seventh head, in that same series with the other
that went before. But, 2. Papacy being considered as an Ecclesiastic power
(and so much different in nature and kind from the former) and as having a
twofold relation, as a Prince and as a Pastor (or Prince of Pastors) so he is
the eighth, as being so various from the former, that one of these relations
sets out but one half of him, yet is he even under this consideration indeed
one of the former seven, though by himself or others he shall be thought so
different from them, as to be accounted both the seventh and eight: for which
reasons, he is, ( Chap. 13.) set out by two beasts, one holding forth his
temporal power, the other his Ecclesiastic. Again, consider this beast which
John saw complexly, as with his body whereby he carries the whore, he does so
differ from any head, even from the seventh, and may be called also an eight,
as a seventh. Thus being considered, he is a totum, and the head a part; but
again, considered as he governs that body, he is of the seventh, ((...)) he
is one of that reckoning, by a Synecdoche, the beast, for that head of the
beast, and so he is a seventh and eight, as he is not, and yet is, in diverse
respects: and therefore is it observed, that though he called it (...), which
is in the neuter genet in the Greek, yet the relative even be, (...), is of the
masculine, that looks to (...), or King, represented by that beast, that is,
the King understood by this beast in its last head, he is both the eight and
seventh, that is, of a twofold respect, and so differs from any that went
before him, which is added as a distinguishing mark to difference this last
head or state of that Empire from any preceding. It is to come, and when it
comes it will look like a seventh, and an eight also, yet really is the
seventh, under which form the beast shall go to destruction, and not overlive
that form. Therefore ( Chap. 19.) the beast, that is the body, and the false
prophet, that is the head, go into destruction together. Hence this argument
may be formed, If the seventh head here be that Government over Rome,
succeeding to that which governed it in John's time, to wit, the Roman
Emperors, Then the Pope is this seventh head (for he succeeded;) But the
former is true, Ergo. Or, if the Pope be the seventh Government succeeding to
that which was then over Rome in John's time, Then is Rome under him, the whore,
and he is the Antichrist; But the former is truth, us supra, Ergo. That which
Bellar. asserteth, lib. 3. de Pontis. cap. 15. page 294. that Antichrist shall
be ultimus Rex Romani Imperii, non tamen sub nomine Romani Imperatoris, and
that he is supremum and ultimum caput impiorum, etc. as he asserted immediately
before, alluding to this, that by this last head is understood Antichrist, does
confirm this. And it may then from this be gathered, that the Pope is
Antichrist, thus, If the Pope be the last Governor of the Roman Empire, yet
not under the title of Roman Emperor, Then he is Antichrist, that is granted:
But that he is the last King of the Roman Empire, etc. appears, thus, If the
Pope or papacy be the seventh Government which succeeded to that over the Roman
Empire which was in John's time, yet under another name, Then it is the last;
for, the seventh is last, ut supra; and under it the beast goes to perdition:
But the Pope is the seventh, which succeeded unto the sixth that then was, and
he has kept the Government of a long time since, under another title than
the Roman Emperor. Ergo he is Antichrist.

What is alleged by some, that seven ages of the world are to be understood
here, or the seven oppressing Monarchies where Gods people suffered, as
Assyria, Babylon, Egypt, Grecia, etc. That may be confuted by this argument.
Such Kings are understood by these seven heads as are Governments or Governors
of one City, yea, of that seven hilled city, and commanded one Empire, and do
head one and the same beast; But none of these forenamed, are such. Therefore
are not understood here.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 12. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have
received no Kingdom as yet: but receive power as Kings one hour with the beast.

13. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
beast.

14. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for
he is Lord of lords, and King of kings, and they that are with him, are called
and chosen, and faithful.


THe Angle having interpreted the seven heads, he goes on to expound what is
meaned by horns, They are, says he, ten Kings: described, beside their number
ten, in these four, 1. that they were not presently Kingdoms, (as the beast was
an Empire) but were to come. 2. That they were to be in the beasts time, that
is, in the last state of the beast. 3. That in their practice they would war
with the Lamb. 4. In the event he would overcome them: and some reasons are
given of his victory, that it was certain, verse. 14.

In general, remember, 1. that these horns are of, and belong to, the last
state of the beast, to wit, under the seventh head, which supporteth the whore:
the former sixth head had ten horns, Chap. 12. that is, exerced its strength
and malice by so many Provinces, or Pretors, or Proconsuls: but there is a
difference here, This seventh head (called the eight King) has the same
Provinces almost, and as many, but now they are Crowned, as Chap. 13. He makes
use of Kings to do his business, to persecute the Godly and to fight for him,
as the former made use of their Legates and Officers who had no Crowns, Chap.
12. so both have Governors, in which their strength and help consists; but
the last has formal Kings to be his instruments. This then is the character,
The last state, or head of the beast, shall have as large power as any of the
former, but his Vassals shall be formally Kings, over whom he shall command as
soveraignly, and of whom he shall make use as absolutely, as the former did of
their servants. The term of horns being borrowed from beasts (as the whole
Empire is compared to one beast) who by their horns push and hurt in their
fightings.

2. Advert, That there is no affinity betwixt the ten horns mentioned here, and
the ten horns mentioned, Dan. 7.24. as there is no affinity betwixt these two
beasts: For, first, That in Daniel, is an Empire, which is to evanish at, or
before Christ's first coming in the flesh. Compare Dan. 7.26. with Chap. 2.44,
45. these here get not their power till long after. 2. These in Dan. are
successive Kings of the same Kingdom, one coming after another, verse. 24. here
they are contemporary, verse. 12, 13. These horns in Dan. are supreme Kings of
that Kingdom, which is there set out by the beast exercing that same power (the
beast describing the Kingdom complexly, and the horns the Kings separately, v.
24.) But here, the beast is different from the horns now, when they are
crowned, as it was before they got their Crowns. Hence they give their power to
the beast, the beast is another King, in some respect superior to them, which
is not so in Daniel; the beast there comprehends all these Kings. 4. There is
there one little horn, which is last, peculiarly spoken of, whereof there is no
mention here, so that either there are eleven horns, or there is a difference
among the ten, which is not here. 5. add, that if that little horn were
Antichrist, then the beast here were not Antichrist, seeing the beast and the
horns differ; for, all the horns give power to the beast the seventh head, and
if that little horn be Antichrist, he must do so also. 6. Here the beast
Antichrist, is not posterior to the horns, nor any of the horns to it, or to
one another: for, they are horns of the beast, and at the same time; there,
that little horn comes last, which shows they are not to represent one
thing. Neither can it be said, that that little horn there, and the beast here,
are one: for, 1. that little horn has not ten horns; for, he destroys three
Kings, and seven are past either then he must have but seven Kings under him
which are not destroyed, or only three; for, a difference there must be between
the three destroyed and the other: and therefore there are not ten together. In
a word, these ten horns set forth the Kingdom of Syria, or the Seleucids, (of
which stock came Antiochus Epiphanes, by whom the Jews suffered much) which was
past before Christ's birth. Thus the Papists by mixing these, do but endeavor
to darken this Scripture, and obscure the true Antichrist. But it is clear they
are not to be confounded: for, these horns here, do well agree with the beast,
and for a time unanimously do all give their power to him; but ( Dan. 7.24)
that little horn destroys three before he come to his power. Beside, if that
of the little horn were applied to Antichrist, then it would infer, that he
destroyed the horns, whereas here the horns destroy him. Again, by that little
horn ( Chap. 7.23.) is understood that little horn, Chap. 8.9. and therefore by
the last beast with the ten horns, our of which that little one arises, (
Chap. 7.24) must be understood the same beast with the four horns, Chap. 8.
seeing from it that little horn descends, as by comparing it with verse. 23. is
clear.

More particularly, concerning these Kings, Observe. 1. That they are not
personally or individually to be understood, as if it were so many Kings in one
generation only; for, these Kings, thus characterized, take in all the ages
since Kingdoms arose out of the Empire, which in John's time was subject to it,
at least when in a considerable number they assumed dominion, and sovereignty
to themselves: for, the Empire in John's time, while these Kingdoms were not,
is clearly distinguished from that time and head or supreme Governor, when
these Kingdoms were to come, as having another face of an Empire on it.
Therefore seeing these Kingdoms have had their rise long since out of that
Empire, and somethings concerning them being yet to be fulfilled. It must take
in more ages than one; for, all that time is but counted one state of that
dominion, belonging to that one last head and opposed by these horns to the
former.

2. Obs. That they are Kingdoms of some bounds of the Empire, horns now that
are Kings, which before were horns without crowns under the sixth head in
John's time, and after yielded willingly to the seventh.

3. Obs. That it is not necessary we understand it of a succession directly in
that same line, so that it must be that same Kings stock, and that same People
of a Kingdom, who must hate the whore, that first took to themselves
soveraignity, and gave their power to the beast, It is enough that they occupy
these same places and bounds, though not in that line, as all Emperors before,
how-ever they succeeded, they come in under one King, and are typified by one
head, if they came to that seat of Rome*

Thus then by horns that this last beast has, understand so many Kings,
wherewith, as so many horns, he shall push, as these did in Dan. 8. So here, (
verse. 14.) they make war, which is the beasts own war, prosecuted by them,
Chap. 13.

The first thing in the horns or Kings, is, their number, ten: for
understanding whereof, it is not necessary, that peremptorily that number be
stuck to, as if so many and no more behoved to be (for, they are not so
circumstantiated as the seven Governments) it may be so many special horns who
shall rise, and be especially serviceable to the beast, and isntrumental in
his ruin, though there may be more less observable, as Dan. 8.8. the goat had
four notable horns, because they were chief, though there was some little petty
Governments beside these four of Selucius in Assyria, Ptelemi^ in Egypt,
Cassander, or Antipater in Macedonia, or Grecia, Antigonus in Asia the less,
which is called Anatolia, corruptly Natolia. Besides these, there was one of
Thracia, whose King was Lysimach^^ (to pass eight more that minted at the
Kingdom) he continued forty years. 2. They may signify this much, that this
seventh head should have as many horns as the sixth, and that though Kings
should start out from the Emperors Dominion, yet the last Government should
not the less be strong by them. 3. It may be ten, to show, that in all
tossings of Kingdoms, these divided Kingdoms, once separated from the Empire,
should continue, and be almost about that number of te^, as at the first they
were. They are thus reckoned out by Med., in Ap^c. 8. under the second trumpet,
to wit, 1. of Brittons. 2. of Saxons, both in Britain. 3. of Francks in Gallia
Belgica. 4. of Burgundians, in Gallia Celtica. 5. of Vicegoths, in Gallia
Aquitania, and part of Spain. 6. Suaevorum and Alanorum, where Portugal is now.
7. Vandals in Africa. 8. Almans in Germany. 9. Ostrogoths in Hungaria. 10. of
Greeks in the East. This was Anno 455. or 460. since which time the Empire has
continued divided: and though some Nations have changed their seats, yet the
number has never been less: and by this also it appears that neither
Graecia, nor Germany from this forth (being but parts, as other Provinces, and
having no interest in Rome) are to be accounted heads, but horns with the
others.

The second character (or first, if we count not the number one) of these ten
Kings, is from their present condition in John's time. They had received no
power or kingdom as yet; for then they were under the Emperors civil
Government, and were not called Kingdoms, but Provinces; they had not gotten
their crowns: whereby it appears they are to rise of that Empire, implying,
1. that this Empire was to be weakened, and that many were to withdraw their
temporal subjection from it. 2. It implies that that belonged to the last
Government of that Empire (these horns then are to be Kingdoms, which were
before Provinces) which is inconsistent with that head that then was. 3. They
are described by their attaining Government, set out, 1. in its shortness, an
hour, that is, during the short time of the seventh head they must continue:
for they are contemporary with him. This shows, that though there be changes
in Governments, none is long. 2. This power is contemporary with the beast, it
is one hour with the beast, that is, the beast that was, and is not, which is
the last head. The meaning is, they shall be in the time of the seventh head
his coming to an height; as he grows up to be an head, and to heal the former
wound, Chap. 13. so shall they grow up to be horns to him, and so continue
during his absolute dominion. In a word, they are such Kings, as were not under
the sixth head, so that when we see such horns, we may know what head they grow
from. They were horns before to the former head, but they are crowned horns to
this. 4. They are described by the manner of their becoming horns to the beast,
ver. 13. in two, that is, They shall willingly give their power and strength to
this beast, which is the eight, verse. 11. They were before kept under by
force unto the sixth head; now, this is the difference, they shall give it,
even though they have temporal dependence on none, yet shall they willingly be
at the disposal of this last Government, and be devoted to it, as much as to
the former 2. They shall do this unanimously, They shall have one mind to it,
so that though many provinces shall become kingdoms, yet all of them shall join
upon another account to further, by their power and strength, the will and
greatness of this last head, or King, as if they were horns to him: and by
this we may see wherefore they are called horns, it is because this beast has
the use and command of their power and force, and they become horns, not as
Kings, or when they become Kings, but when they give their power to him, and as
they grow, as it were, out of his head.

5. They are set out by the particular wherein especially their power shall be
exerced, and wherein he shall especially employ them, They shall make war with
the Lamb * all the heads, under whatsoever form, are blasphemous, and so all
the horns crowned or uncrowned, are instruments of persecution now as before.
There is here, 1. their work, it is Warring, that is, a direct (though not
intended) opposing of Jesus Christ, His Truth, Gospel or People, and, upon the
matter, a contrarying of Him (whatever they thought) as Paul did, Act. 9. and
the Scribes and Pharisees, Act. 5. fought against God, by intention of their
work, though not of the workers. 2. Consider the object of it, it is the Lamb;
Chap. 11. His Prophets are foughten with; Chap. 12. the woman and her seed,
that kept the Commandments of God; Chap. 13. it is the Saints; and Chap. 16.
it is Gods servants. Here the Lamb, to show how Christ is foughten against, and
what it is, it is in His Ministers, Members and Servants, as Paul persecuted
Him, Act. 9. for all is one: Michael ( Chap. 12.) and the Woman, have common
wars and enemies; He with His Ministers, Saints and Servants are one Christ, 1
Cor. 12.3. Consider the actors, it is these, i. e. the horns: Chap. 12.7. it
was the devil and his angels; Chap. 11, and 13. it is the beast, that is, the
head: and Chap. 18.24. there the blood is found in the whore, here it is the
horns. All concur, and share both in the sin and judgment, but diversely, The
devil is the fountain and root that this enimity flows from, the beast is his
special Lieutenant and General; the horns are the more immediate actors, by
which the beast pusheth; the whore not only concurreth, but she blows the
hatred, and pusheth-on by advices, laws and edicts, though the as an
ecclesiastic body put none to death herself; yet does she put the horns to it,
who are her immediate executioners, This then is a character of these Kings who
shall give their power to the beast, they shall persecute Christ's true Church
for a long time in favors of the whore and beast.

The last word added, is, concerning the success, the victory is on the Lamb's
side, and the reasons are subjoyned. He is victor in His Members and Cause,
these three ways, as Chap. 12. 1. When in their sufferings they continue
steadfast and overcome, even to the outwearying of the persecutors by their
patience, who are more inslaved and overcome in acting than the other in
suffering. 2. He overcomes by keeping Truth and a Church in the world in the
despite of them, that the Prophets end their testimony in despite of them,
and the Church spreads and multiplieth, even under them, as under Dioclesian,
etc. 3. He overcomes by bringing sad judgments on His persecuters, and
bringing His Church through, and setting up the Witnesses, as Chap. 11. when
they seemed lowest, and by making the world subject to the Gospel in end,
either by moving them to yield, or by crushing them, and restraining them from
doing any hurt to it, He thus prevails.

The reasons added to confirm us of the certainty of the victory, that it
cannot be otherwise, are from two grounds, 1. From the excellency of the
Captain, He has no equal: for He (even this Lamb) is Lord of lords, and King
of kings, words setting forth especially His Godhead, in three, 1. His
sovereignty and absolute dominion over all. 2. His power, being able to command
all: none so great a King as He. 3. His right; for, justice is on His side:
These titles agree to Christ properly as God, so Chap. 19. and yet as Mediator
in some respect: for the behoof of His Church, He is made head over all things,
Ephesians. 1.22. and has all power over all, not as over the Elect, who are in a
peculiar way committed to Him, but in a deputation for their cause and good; He
has a delegated power as Mediator, to restrain, punish, raise up or cast down
Kings, or Kingdoms in the world, as He thinks meet. The first is essential
to Him as God, the second voluntary, and given to Him as Mediator.

The second reason is from the nature of His Warriors or Army, none such are
in the world, they are such Soldiers as are all Saints. 1. Called, that is,
effectually so, from the estate of nature to grace, and so sanctified. 2.
Chosen; they are both chosen comparatively, and chosen and made use of by Him,
to be for the glory of His grace, and therefore cannot be overcome by any
power, but be conqueror^. 3. They are faithful; honest at the heart and real
in His service, which is an effect of the former two, they stick constantly
unto Him; which shows wherein their victory most consists, that is, in
their faith, 1 Job. 5.4. though even in suffering, yet they quit Him not: These
are excellent qualifications. Now, if it be asked, If there be none other on
Christ's side but such, what shall be accounted of all hypocrites, though
formal professors? Ans. 1. They may be for Christ in one thing, as in a point
of truth, yet against Him in the end; they are not for His glory, therefore are
not on His side; for, he that is not so with Him, is against Him. 2. All
unrenewed men are Christ's enemies, and though they sometimes, in some
particular, side, or seem to side with Christ, yet it is not done as service to
Him, as in Judas who followed Him for the bag, and those that preached Him out
of envy, Philip. 1.15. yet are they but serving themselves and not Christ, and
will be ready to do Him an affront when it serves their purpose, as Judas did.
He has no followers indeed, but where grace makes them, nor will He count men
by their practice, but by their ends and motives. Neither can one be faithful
to the end, but one that is called and chosen: others are one time or another
utterly foiled to the shame of their profession, and He will own none such as
Soldiers to Him.

Before we come to the application, two things would be cleared, 1. If this
prophecy be fulfilled? 2. how it is fulfilled? or, when? and much business is
here made by Papists, who make their main demonstrations from this, that
Antichrist is not yet come, because, say they, this is not fulfilled.

1. That this is fulfilled may be evidenced thus. Arg. 1. If these Provinces
that were in John's time without Kings, be now Kingdoms, having their own
Governments, without any dependence on the Roman Empire, Then this prophecy is
fulfilled; But the first in experience, is truth: look through all the Nations
that were Provinces then, not one of them is subject to the Roman Emperor now
(save it be Germany alone, which yet indeed is not so) but all have their
several independent Kings now of a long time.

The connection of the Major may be made out, thus, That change that has since
come upon the Roman Empire, and the up-setting of these many new Kingdoms and
Kings, which had no Kingdom then, is neither no change at all, but consistent
with the head that then was; or, it is some other change than is held forth in
this prophecy; or, thirdly, it is the very same spoken of here; But neither of
the first two can be said: not the first, that the Empire is the same now that
it was then, for, the spirit puts a clear difference betwixt this last
state, ( Chap. 13.) and the first under Emperors, That in the first the heads
were Crowned, here, the horns; and if there be not difference betwixt Provinces
subject to one Empire that rules over them all, and Provinces made Kingdoms
ruling within themselves without any dependence on that head, there is
difference in nothing, (for, Kings cannot be horns to the Emperors, seeing they
act not for him, but for another: thus the Civil head has the crown on the
head, not on the horns; the Ecclesiastic head has them on the horns, it is
consistent with it to have Sovereigns for his vassals, which cannot be in a
civil state: for so either the Kings were not free in civilibus, or the
Governor that were the head, should have no power over them) and so one Empire
in one body, and many Kingdoms in distinct bodies, cannot be one. Neither can
the second be said, that that change on the Provinces or Kingdoms (here called
horns) is an other beside this: for, there are but two states of these Nations,
one then present, while they were subject to that temporal head, the other to
come, in which they are to have Dominion of themselves. There is not, again,
two states of their becoming Kings, but one, and the denying of the one
infers the other. Thus the horns are either uncrowned, that is, subject to
the Roman Empire; or, they are crowned, that is, have gotten a Kingdom,
according to this prophecy; But they are not now in the first state, Therefore
they must be taken in the last consideration. And as there is no head or
Government interveening among the supreme Governments, set our by heads, So
must there be no interveening state of these Kingdoms admitted betwixt what
then was, and the fulfilling of this, whereby their future state is set out.

Arg. 2. If the Kings now in being have the very characters mentioned here,
Then they must be the fulfilling of this prophecy; But in event they answer it
in all things. Ergo.

1. There are now many Kings, which were not in John's time. 2. They are arisen
out of the old Provinces of the Roman Empire. 3. They are under another head
and Governor than was then in John's time, and so contemporary with that which
was to come. 4. They have all jointly given their strength to be serviceable to
the power, that is, the seventh head, which was then to come. 5. They have been
making, for a long time, in all their Dominions, war with the Saints, Therefore
this must be fulfilled, seeing all things prophesied have directly come to pass.

Arg. 3. It may be made out, thus, If the last Government of Rome be come,
which is called the eight or seventh, Then this prophecy is fulfilled; for
they (that is, the last Government of Rome) and these ten Kings, are
contemporary together, They receive power one hour with the beast and give it
to him; and therefore the making out, that any of them is come, is the making
out that both are come: But it is cleared before, and is clear also in it self,
that he is come, thus, If that Government or Governor of Rome be come, to whom
the separate Kings, that refuse temporal subjection to the Emperor, shall
give jointly their power and strength upon another account, Then the seventh
and last Governor of Rome is come: for, that beast which they give their power
unto, is the beast which John saw in the vision (which, verse. 11. was then, is
not, but was to come.) But truth and experience tells us, that another
Governor sits now at Rome than sat in John's time, unto whom these Kings
have given their power, Therefore the last Governor must be come; and so this
pophesie, which is contemporary with it, must be fulfilled.

Arg. 4. This prophecy must either be fulfilled, or it is to be fulfilled;
But, not the last, Therefore the former. If these Kings or Kingdoms be to
arise, they must either rise out of the Kingdoms that now are separate, or out
of that which is called the Empire; But neither of these can be. Not the first,
beside that there is no warrant to expect a second revolution of those Kingdoms
after the first, which this would infer. I say, secondly, they must arise to be
in this consideration horns (to the beast) and Kings, which were not Kings
before: Now all these Provinces, having had this long time Kings, cannot then
be looked on as the subject out of which these to come must arise. Beside, if
there were a twofold arising of Kings out of the Empire, and the one not
distinguished from the other, the arising of these ten Kings would not be a
distinguishing character to discern this beast, and so to make him known by his
horns, which yet is the scope here. And therefore this character of ten Kings,
can agree to no other state or head, but this last.

No^, 2. can it be out of the bounds of that now called the Empire: for, 1.
there is not that extent of dominion, as to furnish ten Kings, especially to
make such a great dominion, as Antichrists is supposed to be, of all People,
Tongues and Nations. 2. If it were no broader, then Antichrists might and power
by his horns would be no greater than what is now the Empire.

2. It appears, that such must be Kingdoms in this state as were Provinces
before; (the horns are the same, or near the same, uncrowned and crowned) But
Germany was never more Provinces than one, or at most two, (as was France and
Spain) Therefore there is no proportionablnesse here to make ten crowned horns
out of that which was but one, or at most two before. Beside, our reasoning is
not only, that there are now so many Kings, but so many who act as horns to an
other power, as the Provinces were wont to do, and they are not horns to these
called Emperors, They must therefore be so to another head; and if so, then
this prophecy is fulfilled.

The manner of fulfilling must be looked in these steps. 1. Constantine, after
the heathens are cast down, removes from Rome and leaves that seat void, so
after that he is not to be accounted an head, as is said on Chap. 13. 2. After
that, anno 412. and 455. the barbarous Nations, Goths and Vandals, did overrun
the western Empire and seven times take Rome; by this the Empire is distracted,
and several Provinces are either now become Kingdoms by the continuance of
these Nations in them, or by others assuming supreme power over them without
dependence on the Emperor. 3. During which time, this last head drives his
design of exalting himself and making an image of that Empire which was fallen.
4. By the means mentioned, Chap. 13.12, etc. all these Kings are brought to
worship that beast, and receive his mark, more or less, as he arose, till he
came to that height, to dispose of Kingdoms, ratify elections under the title
of (...) (as Carrion observes) unto which in time they came generally to
submit, and accordingly possess many of their Kingdoms. 5. When God had
discovered him to be the Antichrist, some of these, who once had given their
power to him, have withdrawn it, and we are to wait and pray for the fulfilling
of this more, as the former of giving their power to him has been already
fulfilled.

Out of what is said, we would draw three sorts of uses. 1. From this, lay down
some conclusions: and the first is, if this prophecy be fulfilled, then
Antichrist is come, and not to be looked-for to come; for, if the horns be,
there is the head, and if the head be, then is the beast, the one is not
without the rest; But that is verified, ut supra. Ergo.

Bellarmine de Roman. Pont. lib. 3. cap. 4, 5. alleges, that this is not yet
fulfilled, because, says he, the arising of these ten Kings supposes a
dividing among them of the Roman Empire wholly to its annihilating, which,
says he, is not yet done, seeing there is one who is called and acknowledged
Roman Emperor. Ergo, Antichrist is not come, seeing he is not removed out of
the way, who then did let, 2 Thessalonians. 2. as he expounds that place. Answ. There
is a twofold removing of the Roman Emperor to be considered, 1. Wholly, in
deed and in name, so as not to have so much as a shadow. 2. In deed, though not
in name, yet full as to the removing of him from being head to that Empire
which was, and so from being the sixth head, this far is necessary, for, two
heads cannot be together, and so long as he stood as a head, he stood in the
way, and was a let of the coming of the seventh; but that there shall be no
name, that is not necessary: for, when the Emperors the sixth head came,
Consuls were in name at Rome, but were not heads, because they wanted the
former power, and were someway subject to another head, and therefore though
the name of Emperor be, yet if he be not now head to that Empire, if the horns
act not for him now, but acknowledge an other head, then he is not head, if he
have not that seat Rome, nor command not that seven hilled city, he is not
head, nor can he be who wants the horns. But that there be not the name of an
Emperor (if he be not an head, but rather a horn, giving his power to this
head or beast with the rest, and as useful to him as any) this far, the
removing of the Empire out of the way is not necessary; But the former is: and
that this is fulfilled, appears in three steps concurring to it. 1. that the
blasphemy of the Roman Emperors, as such, is ceased. 2. That the seat of the
Roman Empire is passed from Rome. 3. That the command of the Provinces (as it
were his horns) is plucked from him: for, these three qualifications, (to wit,
to have a name of blasphemies, to sit at Rome and to act the Provinces as
horns) are necessary to a head of this beast. And that all these are removed
from the Roman Emperor, is clear in experience, and granted by Bellar. as lib.
3. de Pont. Romans cap. 5. and elsewhere. 1. That the Emperor has no command
over Rome, but that the Pope exercises there both Swords, Civil and
Ecclesiastic, of a long time. 2. That the force of his power, or of that
Empire, is also broken, he asserteth, lib. 2. cap. 2. de Pontif. (Praedicit
enim Johannes hanc Babylonem ruituram, quia Romanum Imperium delendum erat, id
quod jam fere factum esse cernimus: an non enim Gothi, Vandali, Longobardi
Romanae urbis Imperium fere ad nibilum redegerunt?) proving Babylon here spoken
of to be Rome, he gives that for one reason, that it was brought down as is
prophesied in this Chapter. If then by him the Goths invasion was the
fulfilling of this prophecy in that part, Then an utter abolishing of the name
of Emperor is not necessary; for then it was: and if that be the fulfilling of
this prophecy and ruin which was to come, Then it is not now to come; and if
that ruin be not the thing prophesied here, Then does not that event
contribute to prove this Babylon to be Rome, on whom that event fell, which yet
is Bellarmins scope. But indeed, upon the matter, we will find this Emperor
but an horn, what ever his name be, thus, 1. If he command but a Province of
the Roman Empire, which was before subject to the Governors of Rome, and have
no command at, or, over Rome, or any other Province, Then he is not an head,
but an horn; But that is truth. 2. If he himself be acted by a power that now
resideth at Rome, as other Kings are, Then he is but an horn to that head, and
not an head himself; But that is clearly true in many experiments, whereby the
Emperors have been commanded by Popes. See Platina, in vit. Greg. 9. He
commands Frederick the Emperor to go to War under pain of Excommunication;
and this is after done: yea, in providence we will find no Province have more
dependence on the Popes now of a long time. 1. They have deposed them, and
transferred their Crowns. See in the life of Greg. 7. called Hildebrand. 2.
They have wasted their Lands; and the order of Election by Electors is
attributed to them. 3. Particularly, their Election depends on their
ratification, and he is not Emperor, but King of the Romans till he approve
it. Hence, in the Decretals it is said, Papa habet potestatem a Christo,
Imperator vero a Papa. 4. They have employed their strength for the Popes, and
for persecuting the Church, (as Sigismund in burning John Husse, Hieronymus of
Prague) Therefore if they be horns, they are not heads, if an other be head and
acknowledged by these Kings the horns, then the Emperor is cast off, and has
cast himself off from the dignity of being head and supreme Governor of that
Empire, which only was necessary. In a word, then the removing of the Roman
Emperors from being head to these Kings, is necessary; for they cannot be
horns to him and another beast also, and thus far it is fulfilled: But the
burying altogether the name, which has not, nor pretends to absolute power
over these Kings as the former did, that is not necessary. And thus far the
Emperors weakness and inability to head the beast, and the Popes Authority
and Dominion to do it, is confirmed by what Bellarmin asserteth, de Council.
lib. 1. cap. 12. where (having laid it down as necessary, that the Popes must
call general Councels, because only his Dominion is of that large extent) he
adds this last, non potest hic, i.e. Imperator, vix cogere Episcopos unius
provincia venire ad Concilium: nam neque Itali, Hispani aut Galli, Imperatori
subjiciuntur, sed suos habent Reges aut Principes: which is enough to clear
what we assert: And in his 3. lib. De translatione Imperii, It is his work to
prove the Emperor to be the Popes vassal, as holding all his Authority from
him: and indeed that this keeps the name of an Empire, and which now is, it
is merely from the bulls and constitutions, If their stories be true.

A second conclusion we may draw from it, is this; that the Pope is Antichrist,
thus, That supreme power of Rome which shall govern it after the temporal
Empire is broken, and the Provinces become Kingdoms, and to which these Kings
shall give their power, and act in persecution of the Saints for his behove,
That is Antichrist; But the Pope or Papacy is that power, that now since the
fulfilling of this prophecy has born rule over Rome, and to whom these Kings
have given their power. Ergo, he is Antichrist: and this far it is fulfilled in
him.

A third conclusion, is, that Rome under the Pope is the whorish Church here
meaned and set out, thus, That Rome which is supported by the beast with the
ten horns crowned, or to whom ten Kings that arise out of the Roman Empire give
their power, after the Emperors cease to be an head to them, That Rome, or
Rome so considered, is the whore (for, the beast and the horns are
contemporary, as the head out of which they grow, and the beast and the whore
are contemporary, as the ryder and beast which carries her: if therefore the
horns and beast be contemporary, so must the whore be with them also: for, quae
convenient uni tertio convenient inter se: But Rome, or the Romish Church, for
these thousand years past, is the Rome governed and supported by that power, or
beast, to whom these Kings have given, and, for a great part, do yet give their
power. Therefore this Romish Church is the whorish antichristian Church
described here. And that which Bellar. says, de pontif. lib. 3. cap. 5.
confirms this, That these ten Kings (which to him are yet to arise) shall
hate Rome and burn her, etc. for, what Rome shall they burn? Is it not Rome the
whore, called so, verse. 17? Therefore it is not heathen Rome, but Popish Rome
that is the whore, for, she is the whore whom they shall destroy; and when they
shall destroy her, to wit, her, to whom for a time they have given their power,
after they have withdrawn it from the Emperor who formerly had it.

A fourth conclusion, is, that Antichrist is no singular person, and is to
continue longer than three years and an half, thus, If that beast or power, to
which the Kings that have received power and Kingdoms out of these Provinces,
which were once subject to the Roman Empire, shall give their power, be
Antichrist, Then he is no single person, or of short continuance (the connection
is clear from this, because that Power or Government, which has these Kings
for horns, has already descended for many ages, and through many generations,
and there remains yet some things to be fulfilled before the final overthrow
thereof;) But the former is truth, that beast is Antichrist. Ergo. Or thus, If
the seventh head that succeeded to that Government of the Roman Empire (which
was in Io^n's time, and acts the Kings that have since gotten power) be for
more generations than one or two, Then Antichrist is not of so short
continuance* Neither is that defection, whereof he is head, so soon to pass,
(for, Antichrist is that last Government) But experience tells the former is
true, that another power than what was in John's time has sitten at Rome, and
rules it and acts these Kings that once were of it for more ages than one.
Ergo, etc.

A second sort of uses, are, to retort or wipe away some objections of Bellar.
against this, whereby he would prove that Antichrist is not yet come, and
therefore that the Pope is not to be accounted this head, for, this is the
surest way for them to guard him; for no other can be imagined to be here
understood but he, if he be come. 1. He does therefore lay down six
demonstrations (as he calls them) to make out this, that Antichrist is not
yet come. The first ( lib. 3. de pontif. cap. 4, 5, etc.) is this, The Gospel
has not as yet been preached through all the world, which (says he) must be,
before Antichrist come. Therefore he is not come, the place cited, is, Matthew.
24.14. Answ. This goes upon a twofold wrong supposition. 1. That all the world
is to be taken there collectively, i.e. for every Nation, and not
distributively, i.e. for many, or most of Nations, as is usual. So, Romans 11.
their sound is gone out to the ends of the earth. The second is, that it
supponeth that (whatever it be) to be spoken in reference to Antichrists
coming, which is expressly spoken of in reference to Christ's second coming
(which is long after Antichrists) or before the end of Jerusalem; which two
ends are only spoken of there.

His second demonstration, which is the main, is taken from that, that the
Roman Empire by Antichrist or before him is utterly to be abolished, 2 Thessalonians.
2. so he that lets must be taken out of the way; but, says he, this is not
done. Ans. ut supra, conclusion 1. The Roman Emperor must be taken from
sitting at Rome, and from governing over the Provinces as an head of that
Empire; that is granted: that is, the sixth head must be removed out of the
way, before Antichrist the seventh come; But that is done long since, There is
no Emperor at Rome, nor that has any dominion there, nor has any horns or
Kingdoms now under him: he is therefore no head to this beast, Therefore this
will not prove that he is not come: for, it is one thing to be called a Roman
Emperor, another to be indeed a head to this Empire, as it is represented by
this beast; this must head the seven hilled city, govern over the Provinces, as
having so many horns to serve him, and have names of blasphemy upon them;
whoever sits at Rome thus qualified, whatever his name be, he is head: for,
we try the changes of these heads, neither by name only, nor by the seat only,
but by the thing, that is, by power and dominion over these Provinces, exerced
from Rome as the principal seat of that Government: and although the want of
Rome will not prove one not to be an Emperor (which is Bellarmin's argument,)
yet the want of it, will prove him to be none of the heads here represented,
even as the having of Rome, will not infer it, except there be also Dominion
over the Provinces, (for which cause we did formerly deny the application of
this to the Gothish Kings) Now, it being clear in it self, that the Emperors
power extends neither to Rome the head, nor to the Provinces the body of that
Empire; and it being clear also, that both these agree to the Pope (though upon
a different account, as the place formerly cited from Bellar. de. Con. lib. 1.
cap. 12. confirms) It must therefore follow, that the Emperor,
notwithstanding of the name, is not to be accounted head, but the Pope, who
possesses the thing.

His third demonstration, is, that the two witnesses, Enoch and Elias, are not
come, who must prophecy under Antichrist and be killed by him, as Chap. 11.
Ans. Beside what is said there to that fable, it is confuted here, thus, These
are the witnesses that restifie against Antichrist and suffer by him all the
time of his reign (as verse. 6. they are Martyrs, etc.) But many since his
appearing have testified against him, and suffered under him, Therefore they,
and not Enoch and Elias, are the witnesses intended; and so they are not to be
looked for.

His fourth demonstration, is refuted by this also, Antichrist, says he, shall
raise great persecution, but that great persecution has not come as yet; for
these that suffer by the Pope are but few, and by one punishment, to wit, fire.
Answ. If this of the Kings making of war against the Saints be fulfilled, Then
that persecution is fulfilled; But that is cleared to be fulfilled, Chap. 13.
by the Pope and his horns.

For the greatness of a persecution, we may consider it in these four, 1. In
the cause wherefore, when not only the full omitting of truth, but the least
opposition to error or abstaining from their idolatry, or countenancing or
performing any allowed duty, is a ground of persecution, that is a great
persecution, but never were there less causes laid hold on than have been by
the Papists and Popish Kings, as the having of a New Testament in a known
tongue, questioning any of their ceremonies, eating flesh in Lent, yea, not
answering clearly to their questions, witness the rules of inquisition of
Charles the fifth, his Edict, and Frances the first his, with all their
proceeding in Germany, England, France, etc. 2. We may consider a great
persecution in the effects of it, that is, the number and kind of these
persecuted. Has there been more than in the Wars of Bohemia, against the
Waldenses; in Holland, England, France, etc. against old and young, women and
sucking children, sick, Ministers, Judges, etc? Bellar. himself, de notis
Ecclesiae, lib. 4. cap. 18. reckons 100000. Waldenses slain at one time, and
many battles wherein always (says he) Papists prevailed. 3. If we consider
persecution in respect of the cruel acts of it, can there be more and greater
than the bloody massacre in France, the fifty thousand that were put to death
in Holland, cities burned? etc. Read that sentence of the Parliament at Aix in
France, executed by the lord Oped against Merindoll and others in Province, as
Sleidan has it, lib. 13. and 16. what has the Inquisition done? the King of
Spain to cut off his own Son, and Philip the second the Confessor of his Father
Charles the fifth, and burning him when he was dead (as is usual to them)
breaking faith, from thirsting after their blood, as at Constance in the case
of Jerome of Prague and John Husse? when the Emperor had given them a safe
conduct, what horrible cruelties and villainies have been used, casting their
dead bodies on the ground, abusing women, spoiling, banishing, starving, and
tormenting, is known to these who have read that history of the Persecutions?
4. It is great in respect of the heat and malice it comes from, and is to be
reckoned by that: if they put few to death, it is either because they know them
not, or were by God and external causes restrained: but their attempts and
laws (as that of Alphonse his making of it treason to deny the Pope or converse
with ^ Lollard) bulls, incitements and promises to engage others to destroy
Protestants, do hold out their humor. Now, laying all these together, we will
find no persecution has been longer, sorer, or more cruel than this. This
demonstration therefore is full, and proves him come, as all the rest, and may
be retorted, If this persecution be fulfilled, then he is come. More may be
seen on Chap. 13.

The fifth and sixth demonstrations are also found faulty by this; the fifth,
asserting that Antichrist is but to continue such a short time, three years and
an half, and the sixth, that the end of the world is to come, forty five days
after his ruin: both which are false, not only from what is said, but from
this, that this prophecy holds forth sundry things to be done after his
ruin, which in such a time cannot be done; yea, all these thousand years,
Chap. 20. are after his begun height. See, Chap. 20. verse. 4. and therefore his
time is not to be of so short continuance. And if that reckoning were true,
then at that time any that could count Antichrists rise or end (which to them
is palpable) might know the precise end of the world before it came, which is
false: and whereas he, lib. 3. cap. 8. de Pontif. makes the continuance of
Antichrist longer than the preaching of the two witnesses, to reconcile that of
Dan. 12. of 1290. days, (which ignorantly he applies to Antichrist); it is
manifestly false: for, the term of forty two months, is (Chap. 13.) set to the
beast, as 1260. days are to the Prophets, the one is bounded with the other:
therefore that place belongs not to this. Beside, if he continue a month
longer, (as that count makes him) then it should not be just three years and
an half; and so themselves add a month more, and break the time which they call
definite.

Thus these demonstrations rightly followed, will not only make out, that the
Antichrist is come, but that the Pope is he.

A third sort of uses are practical. And, 1. see here the changes of Kingdoms
and the shortness of them, and Gods soveraignity in timing them and stinting
them, even those who are most opposite to Him. 2. Our Lord, the Lamb ( ver. 14.)
is an excellent and glorious person: it becomes us to have high thoughts of
Him, to tremble before Him, and to be comforted in Him. 3. It is comfortable
that this person owneth His People, so that they have common causes, friends
and adversaries, He and the Chosen are on one side. 4. Our Lord Jesus gets
always the victory, the side He is on loses never in the end; and as to His
end, what ever it seem to be before men, it is good to be on the lamb's side,
the victory there only is sure. 5. The weight of the victory lies on Christ's
concurrence, because He is on that side: He is the great Captain, by whose
conduct the victory is allanerly attained; His Soldiers need not fight, but
stand and behold His salvation, is Chap. 19. they follow in white, not fighting
but triumphing; It is the Lamb that overcomes all enemies, and therefore only
is armed.

LECTURE VI.
Verse. 15. And he says unto me, The waters which thou saw, where the whore
sits, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

16. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these shall hate the
whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire.

17. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and
give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.

18. And the woman which thou saw, is that great city, which reigns over
the kings of the earth.


THe Angel, having described the beast, proceeds to interpret the woman,
which was the other part of the vision, verse. 3. and of the Angel's
undertaking, verse. 7.

This woman is described by three things. 1. By her greatness, verse. 15. 2. By
her ruin, verse. 16, 17. 3. By a more particular character from her present
state, and the state of the world then, she is a city that rules over them,
verse. 18. The first expounds that ( ver. 1,) of many waters. The second, her
judgment, which he undertook. The third points her out (as it were) with the
finger. Other circumstances of color, etc. are clear from the scope, and need
no interpretation, Therefore are omitted.

The woman (which is called a City, ver. 18.) has her seat on many waters,
ver. 1. that is, not on floods, says the Angel, but they are peoples,
multitudes, nations, and tongues, that is, many and diverse Nations, and a
large dominion: She is said to sit on these, not as she sat in a peculiar
manner on the seven hills; But, 1. by commanding and ordering these; It is
called ( ver. 18.) a ruling over the kings of the earth. 2. By her gathering
treasures and store from these, whereby the pomp and greatness of that City is
supported. 3. She makes use of them for upholding of her pomp; and this is
applied to a City, because her rulers that sit in her, did so command, and it
was by their commanding and ruling, that this affluence did redound to her, and
because the special supreme Court sits there, as it is said of Babylon,
that she dwells on many waters, Ier. 51.13. which is expounded in part in the
following words, by her abounding in treasures. People and Nations are compared
to Waters, 1. In that they are of a flowing, changeable unstable nature like
water, Genesis 49. And, 2. in that they are an unsure, though a promising-like
ground to build a State upon: Babylon has these, that is, many Nations for her
foundation.

The second character, is the ruin of this whore, which is set forth in these
three things, verse. 16. and confirmed by the anticipating of an objection, ver.
17.

1. This ruin is set out in the degrees and greatness of it, They shall hate
her, make her desolate, naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: which
words show not only indignation at her in the instruments, but hold out the
particular steps it should proceed by, 1. To hate her; the love and respect
that once they bare to her shall now be turned to hatred, as is ordinary after
lusts, as in Amnon to his sister Tamar. 2. They make her desolate and naked,
that is, discover her shame, and withdraw their former supply, whereby she was
supported in her pomp. 3. By executing judgments in a most vindictive and
horrible manner, eating her flesh, and burning her with fire, which imports
her utter ruin.

2. This ruin is set out by the actors in it, to wit, the ten Kings, formerly
described and set out by ten horns, even those who once committed fornication
with her, and did partake in her sin; These, or some of these (as it is said of
the thieves that were crucified with Christ, they cast the same in His teeth,
i.e. one of them) shall be the performers of this judgment: for, some of them
continue to lament her ruin, Chap. 18.

3. The time when they shall do it, is employed to be after they had given their
power a long time to the beast, and committed fornication with this whore, they
shall begin to withdraw from her, and perform this execution on her. This is
gathered, 1. from the series of the story; These ten Kings, first, when they
got Kingdoms, gave their power to the beast, and make war with the Lamb, at
that time they love the whore and do sin with her; But, afterward they change
and withdraw: for, it is not done in the time of their giving power to the
beast (for, they cannot give their power to the beast which supporteth the
whore, and make desolate the whore that the beast supporteth, at one time)
Neither do they fight with the Lamb and whore at one time, but when God draws
them from their first practice of adoring this whore, with whom at first the
Kings did commit fornication, then this is done. 2. It is drawn from the 17.
verse, wherein these Kings, in giving their power to the beast, are limited
unto that time in which God shall have performed His Word, of this whores
deluding the world, and then He who put that agreement in their hearts to the
one, is to make the alteration and change to the other.

The confirmation of this, or the anticipation, is, ver. 17. where it may be
objected, How can these Kings be instrumental in her ruin? Are they not slaves
to the beast? and has not the beast and she one standing, so that who
sustaineth the one, must also sustain the other? Or, how can it be expected,
that they who have been so long, and so much drunk with her fornications, shall
after this abandon her?

The Angel, removing the objection, adds a confirmation, thus, It is true,
they shall give their power jointly to the beast; but, 1. that is not forever,
but till Gods Word be fulfilled, which is the word of the great, spiritual
delusion that was to come, 2 Thessalonians. 2. during Antichrists height, and his
continuation for so long a time, but no longer, when that is fulfilled, the
case will alter, as the word until ( Gen 49.10.) implies the removing the
Scepter from Judah then; so this until, imports a change when the prophecies
foresaid are fulfilled. 2. That giving of such a joint power willingly, is not
by accident, nor is it of it self ordinary for so many Kings to give their
power to an other: but, says he, even this is of God, who in His secret wisdom
and justice, that He may bring about what He has determined on an unthankful
world, and might punish both Kings and others, that received not the Truth, and
received it not with love, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Thus far He gave up and shall give up
these Kings to that delusion, so to do till His spiritual plagues be at an end.
And He that made them so extraordinarily do the one, can, and will make them
also do the other: And therefore as we have seen the one part fulfilled, to
wit, Gods putting it in their hearts, thus to agree to be his slaves; so may we
be confirmed to expect the other, and take the one as a pledge of the other,
(though it be unlikely) that is, that the ruin of Antichrist and Rome then,
(which is the object of the fifth vial) shall be by that part of the World,
Kings and Nations over which he longest had his dominion. By which it is clear,
1. that Romes fall is by such Kings (or those who by Gods providence shall be
Rulers in these parts) it is not unlikely also, of these races or lines that
have been deluded, because in that, Gods power (who swayeth Kings to love or
hatred as He pleases, Prove. 21.1.) is most remarkable thus, and their
remembrance of their former delusion wakeneth that hatred most. 2. It is clear
alio, that that ruin is after their partaking of her sin. 3. That sinning with
Antichrist is a spiritual plague and judicial stroke from the Lord. And it
would look otherwise exceeding mad and irrational-like to consider what slavery
many Kings, Emperors, etc. have been put unto by Popes, if the Lords righteous
judgment be not considered; which shows the rise of this delusion. 4. That
the Lord has a special hand in executing spiritual plagues as well as bodily.
This as here it is set down, is sinful, and the Elect are kept from it,
verse. 8. and it is called committing fornication spiritually, yet the Lord
puts it in their hearts. There is more here than a bare permission, He
gives up to a reprobate mind ( Romans 1.26.) those that abuse natures light, and
so to delusion (2 Thessalonians. 2.) those who abuse the light of the Gospel, which is
as a plague inflicted by His justice; and till it be at an end, there is no
off-bringing of these Kings until He do it, who puts them on. This His will
is fulfilled, 1. In punishing the world by this Antichristian whore till she be
at an height. 2. In punishing her, in both which, these Kings are instrumental,
and He over-ruleth them in both, but diversely: in the last, which is good, He
formally inclines them to it, and effects it: In the former, which is evil,
1. in His providence He not only suffers such objects and temptations as
induce to that slavery to occur, but actively brings about many things in
outward dispensations, which being of themselves good, are yet stumbled on by
them in their corruption, so as they are furthered thereby in this enterprise.
2. He withdraws grace, courage or means, to oppose that tentation, and so
they yield. 3. He over-ruleth their blindness and corruption, so as to accept
of, and follow this tentation rather than another, and suffers it to come to
such an height, and at such a time, and not at any other. 4. As they would not
be subject to Him, so He gives them up, and judicially (as that slavery is a
punishment) hardneth them and dementeth them in that subjection (as
Nebuchadnezar was put to live with beasts) and gives them up to the hand of
that delusion, as to an executioner of His justice, till what He intended be
accomplished. If it be objected that this, to give their power to the beast, is
sinful, and therefore cannot be attributed to God. Hugo Card. answers, That
it is pleasing to God, not of it self, but by reason of its consequents, to
wit, the many advantages that He brings out of their malice.

The last thing whereby the woman, or whore, is described, is by her present
dominion: It is (says the Angel) that great city that bears rule over the
Kings of the earth. Where, 1. this woman is, that is, represents a City or
Town literally and properly so, even as in the Angels exposition borus are
Kings, heads are Hills, and Candlesticks are Churches, Chap. 1. etc. for, the
Angel being now to close the characters, he gives the clearest last, thereby
to difference this city from all others, which is the scope. 2. It is that
great city, that city which for greatness, power, splendour and dominion, was
then eminent amongst all the cities of the earth, from which, others, in all
places, thought it a privilege to be called citizens, (especially in Judea) to
wit, Rome, styled always with the epithet Great, or that Great, etc. pointing
out a singular city, known for eminency to be so. 3. It is more particularly
characterized by its present condition, It is the city that rules, in the
present time, not only over Provinces and common subjects, as verse. 15. but
over Kings, deposeing, forfeiting, making and unmaking, at their pleasure,
Kings and Tetrarchs; and that not any great city, but that city, which most
singularly was acknowledged to be so: which words set out some city eminent for
a present, large, ample and sovereign dominion beyond ordinary, in this time
when John wrote: which, by these characters, joined with the former, and the
Angels scope, (which is to make this whore known to John) makes evident that
Rome is hereby designed, being that city, which, in its Governors, and by its
Authority, then ruled over all the world (a^t was called, for its greatness,
orbu Romanus) See Luke 2.1, 2. Augustus commanded all the world to be taxed. At
this time sent they Armies through Europe (almost all) and a great part of Asia
and Africa, as they did their Proconsuls, Governors and Legates in their name:
for, the Empire, after Augustus until Trajan, was in its greatest height,
during which time, to wit, in Domitians days that pieceeded Trajan, John saw
this vision. At that time they used to put up Kings, and transfer Kingdoms, as
they did Herod the great, Math. ^. and Herod the Tetrarch, Luke 3. Agrippa,
Act. 24. beside what is recorded in humane histories. So that no King about
them durst declare an heir or successor, but by their consent, or prosecute any
war but as they permitted. But sometimes they would make a word make the
greatest Kings desist, as C. Popilius Laenas his word to Antiochus lying at
Alexandria, when he had required him to cease from that war in name of the
Romans; and when Antiochus said he would advise, he drew a line about him, and
commanded him to answer before he passed it, which he did and removed.

From what is said, we conceive it clear, that all these characters do evidence
Rome to be this city, and that it cannot be a city figuratively taken for a
multitude of wicked. The adversaries ( ut supra) have confessed it, Lect. 1.
For it is called a city in the Angels interpretation (which must be properly
taken) it is qualified by such circumstances as difference it from other
cities, and points it out to be properly applied, as a distinct city from
other Nations of the wicked over whom she commands, and so must be Rome.

2. That by this apostasy or whore, causing others to drink of her
fornications, also is understood the grand apostasy or falling away under
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. or the antichristian Kingdom (at least the chief seat
thereof) cannot be denied, seeing it is the most singular defection that was
then to come, (such as Antichrists is) and such a defection as is supported by
this beast, whom all adversaries acknowledge to be Antichrist. Therefore that
defection is corruptly applied by Bellar. to the Jews rejecting of Christ,
which preceeded Paul's writing of that: for, 1. he speaks of it as a falling
away yet then to come; otherwise his argument, that the day of Judgment was
not so near, because that was not come, would be of no force. 2. He speaks of
it as a falling away, which supponeth them once to have had the profession of
Christianity. 3. He extends it to be universal upon all that received, (not
the profession of the Truth) but received not the love of the Truth. 4. That it
has special relation to Rome, his expressing the Roman Empire, as that which
then let, (and that under an obscure name) does evince; and what can that
delusion then else be, but what is admiration here? they must therefore both
relate to the same antichristian defection, seeing there are not two but one.

3. Here it is also clear, that this beast (in the last notion, to wit, the
Ecclesiastic) is the Antichrist: for, he is the head of this great defection,
and supporter to it, and supreme ruler of this apostarizing dominion, which can
agree to none other, but to him: and ( verse. 11.) he is (...), an eminent
person or succession of persons as the rest, as he is called (...) elsewhere.

The scope being then, 1. to point out Antichrist: and, 2. his Kingdom, or
whorish Church, or Congregation, Out of all that is said, we may, by resuming
these characters, gather these two conclusions,

1. That the Church of Rome, for these many years past, has been, and
presently is that whorish Church aimed at here, and Antichrists seat and
kingdom. 2. That the Pope, or who possesses the Papacy in his complex
dominion, is the very Antichrist particularly characterized here.

The making out one of these, makes out both, they are so linked together:
for, if the beast represent the Pope, Then certainly the whore must be that
Church, which is supported by him, and whereof he is head, and contra; if Rome
be the whore, he that is head to her, must be this beast and Antichrist. I
shall make out both by resuming the characters and properties applied to both,
thus, If the characters be such that are given to this beast, as are peculiar
to Antichrist; or, if the properties whereby this woman is described, be such
as are peculiar to his Kingdom, Then the Pope is Antichrist, and the Romish
Church the Antichristian Church and his Kingdom: because (which is the reason
of the connection) all these agree only to them; But the first is truth. Ergo.
Or, if all these characters, spoken and prophesied of concerning this beast and
whore, do belong to, and be fulfilled in, the Papacy and the Romish Church,
Then is he Antichrist, and she the Antichristian Kingdom; But that these
properties agree, and are to be applied to them, may be made out, 1. by
induction and recapitulation of the properties themselves which belong to
Antichrist and his Church severally. Then, 2. by pointing out the time or state
in which they are applicable to them.

Antichrist gets these characters here, 1. That he shall be a Roman
Governor, and govern the seven hilled city, and that many Nations and Kingdoms
of the earth beside shall give him reverence, verse. 7. Compare verse. 8, 9, 10,
and 11. 2. That he was not then in being in John's time, verse. 8. 3. That he was
to succeed to that Government which then was, to wit, the Emperors and Cesars
at Rome, verse. 10. 4. That he was not to have any new state of Empire, but to
continue that which was, but in an other form, verse. 9. Therefore was he, in
some respect, before John's time, verse. 8. 5. Though he be to succeed to the six
Governments, and in some respect (as to the absoluteness and seat of his
Dominions) is to be one body with the Roman Empire, yet is he not to be so upon
a Civil account, but on an Ecclesiastic, in which respect he is an other, not
yet come, getting admiration, or adoration, having Kings under him, who has
absolute temporal power of themselves, which they could not have, were he a
civil Prince, verse. 8, 9, 10. So this Empire is two beasts on this ground, and
the last head two in this respect, yet indeed but one. 6. This Antichrist is
too much reverenced, and that in more than an ordinary civil worship, verse. 8.
7. He shall be no ordinary civil power, nor warranted Ecclesiastic power,
neither in name nor thing, but shall arise out of the pit, verse. 11. 8. He
shall have Kings devoted to him, and to be at his beck, yea, such as were not
Kings then, but since have gotten Kingdoms out of the ruins of the old Roman
Empire, verse. 12, 13. 9. He shall especially make use of them to persecute,
verse. 14. 10. When his fall approaches, some of these shall be his enemies,
and God will make use of them for his ruin, verse. 16. 11. The fountain of that
Dominion and seat of that Governor shall be the chief city that then ruled
over all, to wit, Rome, verse. 18, etc. 12. She carries all with much state,
pomp and profanity, verse. 4, 5.

These are the properties ascribed to Antichrist, whereby he may be discerned,
1. In his nature, he is Ecclesiastic or mixed. 2. In his rise, unwarranted of
God. 3. In his welcome, with great respect in the world. 4. In his seat, Rome.
5. In his Dominion, Nations, and Kingdoms. 6. His different and twofold
consideration of Authority, Civil and Ecclesiastic, whereby he is set out as
a twofold head, and by a double type.

These things being clearly properties of Antichrist, and uncontrovertably
applicable to Rome, the question is, whether to Rome heathen before
Constantine, (as Bellar. and Alcasar say, or, to Rome under the Antichrist that
is to come, as Ribera, Viegas and Cornelius a Lapid^ say, or if it be
applicable to Rome presently, as of a long time it has been?

For fixing on the time or state, whereto this, that she is antichristian and
her Governor Antichrist, may be applied, consider these, 1. This must be true
of Rome after and immediately after the sixth Government that then was, cease
to be a head to Rome, and a seventh succeeds to that which then was. 2. It is
when Kings which were not then, shall rise out of the Roman Empire, that is,
when Provinces shall withdraw their civil dependence from Rome, and have Kings
of their own. 3. When Rome has turned from a Church to be an whore. 4. It is
before its fall, and while the Kings or any of them gives him their power,
that is, while he is an head. But all these agree well to the Pope and Rome,
and are fulfilled in them, as they have been now for many years past, and
cannot be applied to Rome heathen, nor can be expected to be fulfilled
afterward.

The application is made out in the exposition of the words. There are three
things I suppose, which especially will stick, 1. That, I say, Antichrist is
not properly a civil Prince, but has other pretenses, and upon an
Ecclesiastic account or pretext assumeth this greatness; Which is clear, 1.
because he headeth the whore, which is not a civil body, but a degenerate
Church and whore: and therefore he must be such a head as suiteth that body and
carries on that defection. 2. He rules over Kings, without infringing (as
they think) their temporal dominion, which says, that he must do it on an
Ecclesiastic account. 3. From this proceeds the admiration the world has of
him. And, 4. this shows why in this last consideration, he is looked on as
two beasts and two heads, because he is formally Ecclesiastic, but really
civil. And in this respect, is not only a distinct head, ver. 1. but a distinct
beast, ver. 11. which could not be, if he had not an Ecclesiastic
consideration differing from these who went before him.

The second objection, is, that Rome is not Antichrists seat, because, says
Bellar. de pont. lib. 3. the Kings that are Antichrists vassals destroy it.
Answ. 1. Then Rome is the whore at that time; for, they destroy her not till
she be the whore, and so must it not be Rome heathen that is the whore, for,
they destroy her not till the beasts ruin be advanced to the fifth vial, as is
said, Chap. 16. and in the 17. until she be a whore. But that Rome is his
seat, appears: for, 1. he headeth Rome, sits on it, and rules as the six
Heads, or Governments, before him did; but they sat at Rome, and had it for
their seat, See Chap. 13.4. he got the Dragons seat, and so it is common with
the rest to him to be King of that city. 2. He sits so as by him and in him
Rome keeps up her former beauty and rule over all the Nations about, during
his being Governor: but that cannot be but by his sitting at Rome. 3. There is
no other reason can be given, why in Antichrists description there should be so
much mention made of Rome, and such particular descriptions of the sibnesse
between him and her, except that he is head to her, and supporteth her, and
sits especially in her, and that Rome the prime seat is named for all the
Body or Kingdom as Metropolis thereof, as afterward. 4. That Rome is great
during his time, is clear, but no other way but this of his keeping Court
there, can be imagined, as that way whereby she rules over Nations, and
propagateth abominations to them, but that in him, and by him she did it, as by
her former Governments in part, who sat there before. Add, 5. that Rome, is
some otherwise his seat, ver. 7. than other Nations are, over which he
governs; and what can that be but this? 6. What other reason is there why
Rome is more plagued, as sharing deeplier in Antichrists sin than others (
Chap. 18.) but this that it was his seat? And, 7. why would the fall of it be
so much lamented, as spoiling all their former Market, and scattering their
Court, if it had not sitten there? Chap. 18. Beside, Bellarmin's argument
mistaketh; for, it is the Kings, who once were Antichrists followers that
destroy Rome, but not while they are so, do they it, but when Antichrist is
discovered, then is his seat hateful to them, whereas his followers lament it,
Chap. 18. and therefore have no hand in it.

The third objection has more show of difficulty, that these cannot be applied
to the Pope, because he arose not from the bottomless pit, i.e. unwarrantably,
but has Gods warrant, as they allege by being Peter's successor, Ergo. For
answering this objection, we are not to insist in Scriptures, whereby the
dominion and office usurped by the Pope is overturned, nor on vindicating of
these Scriptures which they make use of in pretending that: (let that be sought
from Common places) It shall suffice us to assert, that in Scripture there is
no warrant, 1. For the titles or names that he assumeth to himself, there is no
such order or officer mentioned by Jesus Christ in His house, as Pope, Pontifex
Maximus, Vicar of Christ, universal Pastor, his holiness, Bishop of Bishops,
etc. there is no such shadow in the Word as may warrant these.

[This word Papa, est vox syracusa (say Divines) idem significans quod pater, a
(...): It was in old given to all eminent Bishops, as to Alexander and
Athanasius, Bishops of Alexandria, apud Athanasium; to Augustine, by Jerome in
his Epistles to him; and to Cyprian, Epist. 3. where Pamelius says, it was a
word of honor amongst heathens, as was that of Pontifex Maximus: whereof was
spoken, Cap. 13. See also Ruffin. Symb. and Pamelius on him.]

2. We may assert, that for the matters wherein they exerce this power, as to
dispense with oaths, and obligations of men to others, to dispose of, and
transfer Kingdoms, crowns, titles, etc. to dispense with unlawful marriages,
constitute new holy days, and change worship, send to Purgatory and bring from
it, (as they imagine) to indulge and give pardon even for sins to be committed,
to absolve and forgive magisterially sins (without respect to the
qualifications laid down in the Word, but) to such as perform such
superstitions, and obey such and such orders; to canonize Saints (and thereby,
as it were, to create gods to be worshipped) and many more such things which
cannot be reckoned. All these being contrary to the Word of God, and for the
most part not committed to any, but reserved to the Lord as His own privilege,
we may clearly assert that power in so far to be from the pit, so as if an
Angel would profess it, or preach such doctrine, we might account him
accursed; yet such is the power pleaded-for in the Pope. And in many of these
things is acknowledged to be but ex communi consuetudine. See Azor, Instit.
moral. lib. 6. page 561.

3. If we consider it further in the special properties, wherewith they
qualify the Popes power, as it is essential to his threefold crown, twofold
sword, and keys, we will find it of the same nature: as, 1. that it is
extensive and universal over heaven, by opening it, setting up Saints to be
worshipped, commanding Angels (as sometimes they have done in their Bulls) over
Purgatory and the whole world; over the dead, to torment or relieve them at
their pleasure, and over the living in all things, spiritual and temporal; in
order to these, over persons Ecclesiastic (as they call them) and Civil, as
Kings, Emperors, States, to command them to War or Peace, as they please, and
to carry as supreme to them all, ratifying Emperors and elections or not, and
disposing of their crowns to others; yea, over consciences they usurp a
dominion. 2. That it is absolute, supreme and independent, not only of all
Kings, but of all Councels and Decrees to which he gives Authority or not as
he pleases, and they are of Authority or not, as he confirms them; yea, to
all traditions, and even to the Scriptures and Word of God, without which the
Scriptures would not be by them accounted so, as Bailius, Catech., part. 1.
quaest. 12. Aliter non magis fidem adhiberet Matthaeo quam Tito Livio, that is,
otherwise he would not give more faith to Matthew than to Titus Livius, and
generally all affirm, that being their maxim, that the Church gives Authority
to the Scriptures as to us, and that no decree of the Church has Authority but
from him. Hence, according to this pleni-potentiary power, does he constitute
such books to be Scripture or not, and has added many to the former Canon,
which preceding Councels have not acknowledged, and he does confirm traditions
and fables to be accounted truths as he pleases, and yet in all this so
soveraingly as none may say to him, What do thou? Vid. gloss. in Ex^ravag.
Joan. 22, De concessione prabenda, etc. tit. 4. cap. 2. Papa gaudet plenitudine
po^esta^is, ^ec est qui aud^at dicere, Domine, Quid ista facis? But, 3. all
this he does (say they) not only authoritatively, but infallibly as being free
from erring; for, his determination is the first rule: and it is so, because he
has determined so, and this determination is not only extended to matters of
faith, but of fact, as the canonization of Saints, confirming of traditions,
etc. in which (say they) he cannot be mistaken.

Now, all these being pleaded-for, as essential to this power, without which
they say he could not be Pope; and so essential, that they make them, for the
most part, fundamental to Christianity (at least to the members of that
Church) and yet they being clearly, not only without, Scripture, but against
it; yea, to the overturning of Scripture, (for, it were of no great consequence
to have Scriptures or not, if all these were true) and it being true that the
Lord has never committed such unlimited power to men (no not to the High
Priests under the Old Testament, who were singularly types of Christ) there is
strong presumption here, that the power founded on such pillars must not be of
God; for, is no such power be committed to any, then there can be no Popes
warrantably, because these are essential to him; and indeed except it were
received to be so, his power had fallen long since; for, no commission can be
shown for many of his practices, but tradition and constant custom of their
Popes, as their Casuists must confess. Hence it is, that generally in their
Schoolmen and Casuits, the authority by which they determine their Conclusions,
is often not Scripture, but such a Decree of such a Pope, and the like.

4. If we consider their outward grandour and pomp, that Emperors and Kings
must kiss their foot, hold their stirrup, walk at their foot, give them
homage, that they must be so waited on and carried, that they should be covered
while others are bareheaded, etc. All which can have no show in the Word, nor
example in Christ nor His Apostles, but being (as Baronius grants in the
place cited, cap. 13.) derived from the Heathens, and the manner of their
Pontifex Maximus, it must be looked on as coming from the pit, as its pattern
did: which is our fourth assertion.

5. If we will consider that office, by which the Pope of Rome pretends
jurisdiction over all the Church, suppose it but in ecclesiastic lawful
things, whereby recourse ultimatly is to be had to him, as the only exercer of
that power and office, We may assert, that there is no warrant in Scripture,
that such power, as an universal jurisdiction over all the Church on earth,
should be given or does belong to the Pope of Rome, I mean even a supreme power
in lawful things (laying aside their infallibility, and absolute unlimited
power in all things, which yet in this case cannot be separated) there is no
warrant in Scripture expressly, or that can be drawn from it, to prove that
there is such a power of due belonging to the Bishop of Rome, so that whoever
shall come to possess that Sea, shall be invested with this catholic charge.
And if it be not warranted in Scripture, it is not a plant of our heavenly
Fathers planting, but must have its rise from the pit, that without His warrant
will meddle so liberally with His matters, and in such a manner. Neither can it
be thought that the Scriptures, which are full in the enumeration,
qualifications, ordinances, callings and directions, etc. of Pastors, yea, of
Deacons, in particular charges, should yet be altogether silent in this supreme
Officer, wherein, as to them, (as Bellarmine faith) the ground of Christian
faith is contained, ( Praefat, ad lib, de Pont. de summa rei Christianae
agitur) and there applies what is spoken of Christ, as the cornerstone of the
building, Isa. 28.16, etc. to the Pope.

We shall therefore endeavor to make out, that as this power is not warranted
by Scripture under the former four considerations, so neither is it in respect
of this, to wit, of the person that assumeth it: and therefore, as to him, must
be still from the pit, seeing he has no warrant for it, even as they would
suppose it to be in the Bishop of Constantinople, or any other, if they should
assume this power without just title. This we shall hold at, only that the
Scripture gives no power to the Pope of Rome, or warranteth not him to exerce
that absolute and universal dominion, Civil or Ecclesiastic, which he
pretends unto, and this will be sufficient unto our purpose: for, if it fail
as to that person, all that pretended power will fall; for, the question, is,
If the Pope be Antichrist? And therefore we are to enquire particularly, if
they for their deep meddling in Christ's affairs, as His Vicar, can give any
warrant to beat the truth of that conclusion, to wit, that he has right to it:
It is not needful simply to enquire, If there be any such at all? It Is enough,
if it be not competent to him, Then he usurpeth: And seeing (as Bollarmine
asserteth) no other can pretend warrant to that power, Then if it fall in him,
it will fall altogether, seeing Christ has not shown His will to whom it is
due: and we are not to account so of any without His warrant; which cannot be
produced, etc. and therefore this assertion has more in it than at first
appears: for, if it be an office of Christ's institution, Then he has
determined, who is to be accounted so, for warranting His peoples obedience;
But this He has not determined. Ergo, etc. And on the contrary, if He has
given in the Scripture no denomination of the Office, nor qualification of the
Officer, no limits to the Power, no rules of Election and Ordination, nor
grounds whereby the Church may discern who it is to whom such obedience is due
in particular, and to none other, Then it cannot be warranted by him; (who has
done it in all other officers fully, and was not inferior to Moses in ordering
the affairs of his fathers house) But according to this assertion, the former
is truth, the Pope can give no such evidences, either as to the office or the
person exercing it. Ergo.

In prosecuting this, seeing we have the Negative, the probation is incumbent to
them and to make out the affirmative, that not only there is such a power, but
that the Pope has gotten warrant for him to exerce it; and it will not be
sufficient to argue, No other can claim it, Therefore it belongs to him. We
would desire to know from Scripture what more just title he has to it than
others: otherwise any Bishop might so argue, No other can claim it, Therefore
its mine. This will serve rather wholly to overturn it, as is said; and till
from Scripture they make out their affirmative, the assertion will stand good:
yet we shall a little descend to consider their grounds and concessions in this
point, and we will find that the weight of their conclusion, that this power
does belong to the Pope, does rest upon Traditions, Fathers, Councels, and
especially the Popes own determination.

That the Scripture gives such a power to the Pope of Rome, before it can be
believed as of divine authority, these three must be made out by it. (See Greg.
de Val. disp. 1. punct. 7. part. 37.) 1. That Peter not only as an Apostle with
the rest, but as head and supreme over all the Apostles, was furnished with,
and established in that Authority by Jesus Christ over them and the Catholic
Church, as their head. 2. That Peter sat and had this Authority, and exercised
it at Rome, as peculiarly the seat of this Authority, and that this supremacy
in Peter was no extraordinary privilege to his person, but to be derived and
continued in his successors to the end of the world. 3. That only the Pope of
Rome is Peter's successor in this supreme power, and that by divine Authority it
belongs to that seat, and to him who shall sit there.

To pass the first two (which yet can never be made out by Scripture) the
third also must be made out, or it will not bear this conclusion, that it is of
faith to believe, that the Pope is invested with this power; But now there is
no shadow of this in Scripture: and therefore when Bellar. comes to make out
this, he foundeth it on these four, to wit, 1. Apostolic tradition. 2.
General^ Councels. 3. Popes Decrees or Statutes. 4. Fathers and antiquity; But
none of these are Scripture: and in effect all resolves on this, the Pope
appoints himself head and successor. Ergo, he is head, etc. for, it is well
known, nothing is received as Apostolic tradition, but what he decrees to be
so. Not are any general Councels accepted as infallible, but such as are
approven by him, and so far as approven. See Bellar. De authoritate Council.
lib. 2. cap. 1. And Gregorius de Val. casts Traditions and Scripture, but as
owned by his Authority, much less then will they admit any Father that
differs from him. Hence sundry Councels and Acts (as that of Chalcedon and
Constantinople, in these Acts wherein Constantinople was equalled to Rome) are
rejected by them on this ground, because they were not approven by the Pope. So
it runs in this circle, Whence has the Popes this power; or, whence is it
clear to us, so as to warrant our faith, that they have that power? They
answer, in sum, from themselves, or from such grounds as resolve on themselves,
because, say they, their power is such, as determines all these things.

If it be asked further, How gets these Popes power to determine so; and
what warrandeth us to rest on their determination? Say they, because they are
Peter's successors in that universal office. If it be asked again, How is that
made out, that they are his successors? Say they, by such determinations, we
know him to be so. In a word, these determinations give him power, and he
gives them power to do so, and so about: yet this is the main thing, to wit,
the application of this power to Rome, and particularly to the Bishop thereof,
that is here questioned: and though possibly it were not requisite that all the
successors should be other ways known than by History; yet the ratio
successionis, as Bellar. calls it, to wit, Why the Bishop of Rome has this
peculiar Authority beyond others, that would be known, if it be either of
divine, or catholic faith: which two are ill distinguished by Bellarmine.

If it be objected to them, These cannot ground a divine warrant to make a
thing be believed to be jure divino, or of divine authority: Because to make a
thing certain to us, certitudine fidei, and to be believed as such, there is a
twofold certainty required, 1. An objective surenesse or certainty in the thing
it self, 2. Subjective, in them that believe, that is, such certainty as
proceeds from such grounds as cannot cause a mistake, or fail any; which no
humane testimony can bear out: and therefore only Gods testimony can give
warrant for this. Bellar. (De Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 12.) seeing this, does go
about to distinguish between a divine warrant, or else, de jure divino, and to
be of catholic faith: and says, though it be not the first, ( forte, says
he, as loath to speak it out) Yet it is the second, and to be believed under
pain of damnation, upon the grounds foresaid. His words are, Successio est a
Christo, qui uno actu constituit Petrum and successores ejus in Pontificatu ad
finem mundi; ratio successionis, i. e. cur Papa succedit, quia est Romanus, non
est ex prima institutione Christi (quia alibi potuit Petrus fixisse) sed ex
facto Petri; and calls it not improbable to be settled at Rome by Christ's
command. But our question is, How it is evident that this Pope has ground to
claim that succession? or, Quomodo constat cum Petri successorem esse? to which
this says nothing: therefore adds he, that though forte Papa Romanus, quia
Romanus, non sit jure Divino, tamen si quaeratur, Si Romanus Pontifex jure
Divino sit caput omnium Ecclesiarum? omnino (says he) respondendum est, quia
nibil aliud requiritur quam ut ipsa successio sit jure Divino; Yea, there is
more required before that succession can be believed to be peculiar to that
Sea, seeing they go together, and this would be evidenced to be so: for, we ask
not now, If there be succession, but why the Pope carries himself as
successor, and where is his warrant? At last it resolves in traditions and
Councels, which are so, and to be esteemed so, because he decrees them so; and
this is the ground of this article of their faith unto them, notwithstanding
that the Scripture is silent in it: which yet contains all things needful to
eternal life, Ioh. 5.39. 20, 21. And for that instance that Bellar. gives of
a catholic faith, as distinguished from a divine faith, to wit, whether Paul
left a cloak at Troas or not: It is true, this was a truth before Paul wrote
that epistle and is yet a truth, not simply necessary to salvation in it self;
yet, considering it as revealed in the Word, the believing of it now, is of
divine authority and has a divine warrant: which it would not have had if it
had not been in the Word, although it had been a truth in it self.

So that when it comes to this, that the Pope is successor to Peter, that is
only essayed to be proven by authorities. See Greg. de Val. disput. 1. De
objecto fidei, punct. 7. page 35. and 36. Cajetan. Tom. 1. de primatu Romans
Eccles. all of them abusing Scripture, to prove that Peter was universal
Bishop, and that this office is to continue: yet, for the third, that this
office belongs to the Popes of Rome, they can say nothing, but from such
grounds as Bellar. asserteth, or at the most as Gregor. disp. 1. punct. 7^.
page 35, 36, 37. testimoniis omnium locupletissimis, etc. for as Cajetan
observes, these four things must concur to make out this succession of the
Bishop of Rome to Peter, 1. That Peter himself was at Rome. 2. That he was at
it, not as Paul was, in the capacity of an Apostle, but as settled Bishop of
that Sea of Rome peculiarly, and as head of the Church. 3. That Peter lived in
that seat and died there. 4. That he willed his successors in that particular
Sea and Diocese of Rome, to be his successors in the headship of the whole
Church, and so that by his deed he annexed his catholic power unto that
particular Sea, that whoever should succeed in the one, should also be invested
with the other, (beside what is needful to be cleared concerning every Bishop,
that he was lawfully chosen that succeeded in that seat) Now, there is none of
these four that is hinted at in Scripture. Therefore they come to say, as
Cajetan, ibid. that this is not ex Evangelica institutione, but attested unto
by Peter's deed in dying there, and confirmed by an history (or fable) out of
Egisippus, who says that Peter going out of Rome to eschew martyrdom, did meet
Jesus Christ, who told Peter that he was going again to Rome to suffer, from
which Peter drew, that Christ willed him to return to die at Rome, which he
did: and from this rises the strength of all the arguments of Papists for the
Bishop of Romes succession to him, as builded on a ground of says, because
this story holds out Peter acted by Christ; and it is a tradition confirmed
by the Pope, as they are alleged by Greg. de Val. From this unclearnesse it
arises, that it is hotly disputed, even amongst the learnedest of the Papists,
Whether this conclusion, that the Pope of Rome necessarily is Peter's successor,
be De jure divino, or jure humano Ecclesiastico. And Dominicus a Soto, in 4.
Sent. did. 24. quest. 2. (others also are of this mind) by many reasons
asserteth the last. And when Greg. de Val. condemns it, he does it but on
these grounds, because the Fathers and the Popes have not left that
undetermined until now, and that such an opinion as that of Soto does suppose
them to have determined nothing (he says, vetus patrum traditio videtur; and
when it is but videtur in traditions, what certainty is there?) which
determination, as is said, resolves still on the Pope himself: and ye may see
more directly this question handled apud Greg. de Val. punct. 7. page 37, 39.
where he does ride the circle clearly, Says he, How know we this particular
Pope to be Peter's successor? He answers, by his determinations in faith and
manners. If, secondly, it be asked, how we know his determinations to be right?
Ans. Because he has that privilege, who is Peter's successor; for, Peter's
successor has only that power to determine so. From which it appears, that
the Authority of this Pope, which is pleaded-for as necessary to salvation, not
being from the Word, must be from the pit, and yet loose; or, question this
succession, and all fails, it is so essential a ground of Popery, that is
thus supported. And though there be uncertainty sufficient from unclearnesse in
all these four, which Cajetan laid down; yet if we add a fifth principle of
theirs, to wit, that before we acknowledge the Popes constitutions, or the
force of his deeds, we must know that that particular Bishop of Rome has
lawfully succeeded to Peter; for, as Gersom says, and Greg. de Val. grants,
they supponed this, talis Papa rite successit Petro per electtionem. And here
the certainty is as Greg. de Val. says, certitudine morali, and non fidei, and
as Gersom, hoc est humanae cognisione solum cognitum; yet if this fail, the
obedience cannot be claimed, because if he be an infidel or woman (as once
there was) as Platina their own writer, in vit. Job. 8. testifies) such are
incapable of orders, or if the election be unlawful, it is null, they have no
promise of assistance, in which cases, obedience is not due; or, if there be a
schism (as for 70. years there was between two Popes, one at Rome and another
at Avignion, and neither of which had a successor, but a third was chosen,
whiles both these Seas were filled,) it will still be uncertain in such a case
whom to acknowledge, or how to account of their determinations while this be
cleared, so intricate is this great ground of their faith.

If any should say, This succession is but a matter of fact, and needs no
more but humane testimonies of histories? Ans. It is not questioned only about
persons or facts, but the ratio why, or the fact that makes Rome have this
precedence; and if the conclusion be of Faith, the premises that it is drawn
from, must be so also; or, if the premises be humane, then they can bear no
conclusion of Faith: for, the conclusion must be suitable to them. Again, (...)
is such a fact as groundeth our faith, (as to them) and can any humane story
work a divine Faith, such as the History of Moses and the Acts of the Apostles
do? and therefore if the Story of that fact in its matter had been of divine
Faith, necessarily to be believed, our Lord would not have neglected it. 3. It
is such a fact as the clearing whereof groundeth this supreme Officer to them;
and take away that fact and he is away, he depends so on it; and so a Deacon,
or Pastor shall give more warrant for his place from Scripture, than the
supreme Vicar, which is very unsuitable: and yet without supposing it, their
Pope is not Peter's successor. Such then as is the proof of the fact, such is
the ground of this conclusion. 4. There being (as all the forecited Authors
say) an identity now between the Bishop of Rome, and the Head of the Church,
that who is the one, he necessarily (and no other) is also the other, Then
whatever Authority is given for appropriating that privilege to the Sea of
Rome, there must be that same Authority for the continued succession of Peter
(seeing they are one, and the one descends by the other;) But that being such,
as is before said, necessarily then the succession, which is his only and
allanerly, and has never been pleaded-for (as they say) by any other, must
then be of that same Authority, testing on the same grounds of Councels,
Fathers, Popes, Customs, etc. which can never give a divine warrant. And
whatever be truth of Peter's being and dying at Rome (which certainly in a great
part was fulfilled before Luke wrote the Acts) yet is it not for naught that
the Lord has left it unrecorded, that we might thereby know it was not
necessary to be believed: and therefore any conclusion which supposes it to be
necessary to be believed, is not necessary, except we rub on the wisdom of God
who records lesser things than this. And therefore a thing may be truth, and
yet, not being written, is not necessarily to be believed, but with a humane
faith, as other histories at the most, whereas no article of faith is thus
grounded: because the object of our Faith, or the ratio why we believe such a
thing, is not simply because such a thing is truth (for, many facts are truth,
which we are not obliged to believe) but because God has revealed such a
thing, and testifies it to be Truth, Faith resting on that testimony and
giving credit to Him that testifies.

The other Conclusion, to wit, That the Church of Rome for these many years
past and presently, is the whore intended here, the same argument will make it
out. If the Rome that is present be the Rome unto which all the properties here
mentioned do agree, and at this time, Then this Rome is that whorish Church;
But unto the Rome that now is, and has been these many generations past, agree
both the properties and time in which it is to be fulfilled. Ergo. The
properties given to this whorish Church, are four, That she has her Court at
Rome and sits on the seven-hilled City, yet also exercising dominion over
many other Nations, verse. 15. but differently, so as Rome is here peculiar in
another other manner the fountain and splendor of that Kingdom. 2. That it is
Rome turned a whore and fallen from the simplicity she had, and to such an
apostasy of which Rome is the head and chief seat. 3. That it is Rome claiming
a superiority over all those of her association or apostasy, and deriving her
errors to them, and they keeping a dependence on her, she is (and it is when
she is) Mother and Metropolis of all, verse. 5. 4. It is Rome then when the
Emperor has ceased to command it, and another Government or Governor has
succeeded him there. 5. It is when ten Kings are withdrawn from the Empire and
have given their subjection to Rome on a spiritual account. She that is Rome in
that case, is the Whore: But all these properties agree to Rome, not as
heathenish but as popish, and to the Pope as head thereof: And therefore this
is neither to be applied to Rome heathenish, nor to an Antichrist to come, but
to that which is. And it is not unobservable in Gods providence, that
considering the special sibnesse, that is holden forth here, both betwixt this
city Rome, the Woman, Whore and Beast, that yet the Popish Church should glory
in that title of the Roman Church; and many of them dispute that it is
impossible to separate their Pope from that very City, or, that elsewhere he
might choose to sit and continue Pope; and those who in this grant most, do
affirm that he must and would still be Roman Bishop, and that the Church would
still be the Church of Rome, although that city were possessed by Turks. By
this all may the more easily discern, what Church or defection they are, who
have such relation to, and dependence on, Rome at this time when this prophecy
is fulfilled, ut supra.

Before we leave this Chapter, it may possibly not be unmeet, that ( coronidis
vice) we consider how the Popish Writers do interpret and apply it, wherein
they are wonderfully straightened and perplexed. It was their common opinion to
understand by this City or whore, the city or multitude of the wicked
generally. This is followed by Thomas Aquinas, Hugo Card. Lyranus, Haymo, and
many others: but the latter Writers, since Reformation brake forth, have been
constrained to cast that opinion, because this City is so particularly
circumstantiated, as to point at an individual City (to speak so) and she is
contradistinguished from many Nations and Kings, who yet are certainly a great
part of the wicked in the world; and also ( Chap. 18.) when she is destroyed,
there are many wicked, living, and lamenting her destruction, and standing at a
distance from her.

Upon these and the like grounds, the most learned of them are generally since
that time brought to expound it of Rome, and, (as Viegas says) impellimur
aliam interpretationem excogitare: and Ribera says, Interpretes coguntur etc.
Alcasar in locum (all whom, with others, we cited before at the beginning of
the Chapter) interprets it so, and cites twenty Authors of their most
eminent men for it. Also Corn. a Lapide, who adds many to these cited by
Alcasar, amongst whom are Suarez, in 3. part. tom. 2. disp. 5. Sixtus Senensis,
lib. 2. page 88. Pererius, Salmeron, and others. All which take Babylon in all
this prophecy to hold out Rome; and in this they and we agree, as to the
general.

2. There is again difference amongst themselves how to conceive Rome here, so
as to save their Pope and the present Rome from this application. Hence, some
(which is most received) apply it to heathen Rome. Others, as Ribera, Blasius,
Viegas and Cornelius a Lapide apply it to Rome under Antichrist, who therefore
say, that at or before his coming, Rome shall turn heathen and desert the Pope,
and be destroyed by Antichrist, or by the Kings before his coming. Their
reasons are, because it looks to such a state of Rome, as then was to be
fulfilled in John's time; and therefore cannot be understood of heathenish
Rome: but because this opinion supposes Rome to be involved in defection
(which cannot stand with her infallibility, and would shake all (seeing some
plead so much for Romes eternity) and make all suspicious; for, if Rome fall
then, may it not be fallen already?) Therefore others cast it, (as Alcasar and
those named by him) applying it to what heathenish Rome suffered at or before
Constantines time, or after by the Goths. And Bellarmine seems to favor
this, lib. 2. cap. 2. de Pont. Romans Those who take it thus, expound the seven
hills literally, but in other things the differ.

1. Some take the beast for the devil; but, others considering that the devil
and the beast are differenced, and that this beast is cast into the lake long
before the devil, and that the scope is to point out some eminent opposer of
the Church for some particular time, therefore they do in general apply it to
Antichrist, as also that first beast, Chap. 13. (and some make the last a false
prophet that makes way for him) so do they of that beast, Chap. 11.7. and
expressly say, he is one of the seven heads here mentioned, and also called the
eight, because his nature differs from them, and his hurt to the Church
exceeds them.

2. Concerning the seven heads they differ, some applying it to the seven
tyrannous Kingdoms or Empires, Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, etc. or, to the seven
Ages of the world. Others do cast that, as Bellar. etc. and do understand by
the seven Kings, all the Emperors indefinitly.

The reasons that do cast the first opinion, are, 1. These Kings here are such
as command Rome, they being Governors of that City (therefore the seven hills
and the seven Kings are set out by one and the same type) and it is brought in
as a character to difference and discern this City mentioned here from others:
and the applying of it to the seven Monarchies, agrees to none of these, nor
to the Angel's scope, which is to point out something to come, and to help to
discern this City by its heads, when he expounds them to be Kings, as well as
when he expounds them to be Hills, there is but the same scope.

If they say, they are heads of the beast, not of the woman. Ans. It is true,
but the beast being the Empire that supporteth Rome, they must be heads of that
Empire; and seeing they are all heads of the same beast, and it being certain
that the 6. and 7. are of Rome, the rest must be so also. Beside, how can
either tyrannous Kingdoms or such ages of the world be called heads to the
beast? If the devil be the beast, he rather headeth them; if Antichrist be the
beast, he was not then in being to be headed by them; if the multitude of the
wicked be the beast, (which yet their former reasons will cast) how will these
ages or Kingdoms of the world differ from them? This conceit then is justly
casten. Beside, the heathen Emperors being to them the sixth head, and
Antichrist to come but three or four years before the end of the world to be
the seventh, there would be a too great intervall here, and the beast would be
without a head so long, which agrees not, 1. with the scope here, which is to
show the succession of one to another: nor, 2. with the proportion of time that
is among the first six heads: nor, 3. with reason, as if the Church were to
want oppressors for so many hundred years. Beside, this application, being so
general, cannot agree with the particularnesse that is in the rest of the
interpretation, especially to the other of the same type, to wit, of seven
hills: and there can no reason be given for making the number of the ages of
the world or tyrannous Kingdoms, seven, more than five, eight, nine, or eleven,
etc. except as men shall be pleased to name them: and can such an uncertain
rule be the ground of such an application? Therefore they must be Kings that
relate to that body; for, it is of that, and not of all the wicked that ever
were, that the Angel is speaking.

The other interpretation that thinks to evite these considerations, by
understanding all the Caesar's and Emperors of Rome indefinitly, or all the
persecuting Emperors, as Alcasar does, will not be consistent either: for, 1.
these Kings are such as five had preceeded, and one was but to come; but that
cannot be said of the Emperors either way considered. 2. They are Kings, the
first five whereof had fallen, which must be understood not of personal death,
but of a politic change of Government. 3. They are such Kings as in that ones
time that was to come, Rome was to be the whore, and to be otherwise supported
than by that King which then was, or by those that had gone before him; But
that cannot be said of heathen Emperors or any of the Caesar's, or persecuters:
It is therefore some power of greater sibnesse to Rome after its defection. And
so it must remain, (as we interpreted) that by them are understood diverse
changes of Government, whereof the last should be Antichrist, the same with the
beast, considered as he was to come.

And from both these constrained interpretations, we may gather this
concession, That Antichrist needs be no individual person without a
succession: for, according to the first, these first six persecuting Kingdoms
were not in one person: therefore neither ought the seventh (which they apply
to Antichrist) be restricted to one.

If according to the second, by the one head or King that was to come after
John's time, be understood all the following Emperors, Then, by one beast or
King, may there not be as well understood a succession of Popes?

Concerning the destruction of Rome, they that consider Rome here as under
Antichrist do agree, 1. That it is yet to come, and that this part of the
prophecy is to be fulfilled: Alcasar and others, who affirm it to be
fulfilled, say otherwise: but the nature of the destruction and overthrow,
threatened to Rome here, will not admit of that application. 2. That it shall
be a great destruction. But here they differ whether the Pope shall be
necessitated to flee from it or not: but the exposition of the sixth vial and
of the 19. Chap. will clear us. Beside, when ( Chap. 18.) Rome after this
becomes only a cage for unclean birds, they may consider if they will place
him amongst these. That which occasioneth this debate, is, that they think the
supremacy so linked to Rome, that they cannot be separated but by an immediate
warrant from Heaven, and yet Gods People are called to come out of her, Chap.
18.4. If then the Pope be not capable to give obedience, he is not to be
understood among that number. It is true, Domin. a Soto, and Anton. Card.
Gasper C^sal. Valdensis and Alphon. Mendoza (whom Cornelius a Lapide cites as
of one judgment) and any other who hold the supremacy to be due to Rome, but
jure humano, they are not pressed with this consequent; yet, the generality of
them, who maintain these to be inseparable jure divino, or such (as Corn. a
Lap.) who say, Whatever may be disputed de jure of the Popes removal, yet they
are sure de facto it shall never be, these will find more difficulty in this
case.

3. They expound these Kings, to be the Kings that shall be in the world at
Antichrist's coming, and that these shall be isntrumental in Romes
destruction; as also, that this destruction shall be causally procured to Rome
for the old bloodshed of the former Emperors, which is then to be repaid, with
her late guilt of forsaking the Pope.

But in these they differ, 1. that some say the Kings shall destroy it before
Antichrist come, because there are ten Kings at the destruction of it; others
say, by Antichrist, after these Kings have submitted to him. The occasion of
this difference is the confounding of this Chap. with that of Dan. 7. where it
is said, that the little hor^ (applied by them to Antichrist) shall subdue
three Kings, and therefore there will be but seven that yield to him: but of
this, is somewhat said before, that these Prophesies are distinct; and this
clears it, the Kings here willingly give their power to the beast, and
continue to reign with him contemporally: there, the standing and rising of
one, supposes the overthrow of others; We do thus far agree with them, that,
1. Romes destruction, prophesied of here, is to come, 2. that it shall be
great, 3. that it shall be by Kings or Governors, such as shall then be in
Antichrists time.

Further, we may observe from these interpretations. 1. What inconsistency
there is in them with reason: For, if all they speak of Antichrist were laid
down, it would look as if we imputed fables to them. 2. With one another, each
differing opinion strongly confuteth another, because none asserteth what is
right; and it is the strength of the one opinion, that the opposite is absurd.
3. It is inconsistent with their own way, sometimes they take things exceeding
literally in darkest prophesies, (as about the time of Antichrist's
continuance) sometimes in the interpretation, which is plainest, they
excogitate mysteries, as in the exposition of that, the heads are seven Kings,
i.e. say they, seven ages, and so give a new exposition, overturning what the
Angel gives. 4. It is inconsistent with the Fathers: sometimes they stick to
them (when they speak of Rome, before it become antichristian) yet their
exposition overturneth many assertions of the Fathers on this Chap. All the
reason is, because the difficulty is great, to grant that this is Rome, and yet
that the Pope is not Antichrist. And indeed, that being the scope and intent of
this part of the prophecy, it is impossible to wave it, and not to miss the
mark. Neither can this confusion and darkness of theirs be any evidence that
this Prophecy is not fulfilled: that is an unsafe ground to argue from, that
all Prophesies, however formerly dark, yet do become clear at their fulfilling
(which is a main subterfuge of theirs in this case:) For, 1. do we not see the
plainest truths of doctrine dark to these, whom the God of this world has
blinded? 2. Do we not see many Prophesies of Ezekiel, Daniel, etc. which
certainly are fulfilled, yet to be obscure to many? And, who will deny, but
many Prophesies concerning Christ's Death, Birth and Sufferings, etc. are
clearly fulfilled? yet generally, to the Jews they are as a sealed book,
because the vail is not taken off their hearts, although the Word be clear, 2.
Cor. 3. Yea, if we look to the strain of this Antichrist all along, we will
see it is still to many as heresy and blasphemy, to apply it to him: else,
would so many worship him, when this Prophecy concerning his coming is
fulfilled? and when Babylon is destroyed, Chap. 18. yet are there still many
that were drunk with its abominations that lament it; and ( Chap. 19.) many
shall side with the beast, even until the battle of Armageddon make an end of
him. We ought not therefore to marvel that Antichrist's worshippers discern
not that the Pope is he, or that Rome is his seat. If they so did, then this
Prophecy of their admiring of him, adhering to him, and perishing with him,
would not have been fulfilled; but, we would rather acknowledge the justice of
God in the thing, and observe His truth and omniscience in foretelling it, even
as the event is found to be.

Although we have formerly spoken to the many things in the opening of the
Chapter; yet, having proposed their opinions, and finding the great weight and
stresse to lie in these four. 1. If Romes destruction, which is threatened
here, be to be executed by Antichrist, or the Kings while they befriend him;
or, if by Antichrists enemies, while his kingdom is in destroying?

2. Concerning this defection, for which Rome is to be destroyed, if it be the
same very defection, whereof Antichrist is the father, (as it were) and here
she is to be the mother, ver. 5.

3. If that defection, whereof both are guilty, be a falling away from the
profession of Christianity to heathenish idolatry, refusing worship to the true
God, or Christ, directly and expressly? or, if it be a defection and corruption
in Christianity, and such as is consistent with a profession thereof?

4. If all this defection be to be confined within three years and an halfes
continuance, which they make the duration of Antichrist, and the expiring
thereof in Antichrists ruin shall be but forty and five days before the end
of the world and Christ's second coming? or, if it shall preceed the end of the
world many generations, and so to be in the world already? and consequently, if
this Rome, as it is to be the whore, and the Pope who is present head thereof,
be Antichrist? Seeing therefore much weight lies on these, and if one of these
pillars be shaken, their doctrine concerning Antichrist will ruin. We shall
therefore shortly propone these assertions or considerations: And, 1. we say,
the actors or instruments in this destruction of Rome, are not Antichrist or
Kings befreinding his way, neither is this overturning of Rome an advantage to
his kingdom; but the actors are opposite to Antichrist, though of these who once
gave their power to him. And this destruction of Rome is a main victory of
Christ over the beast: for,

1. Rome is the seat of this Antichrist (as upon the fifth vial, Chap. 16. and
above in this, and in Chap. 18. is showed) and this whore, being, as it were,
the adulteress, and Antichrist the adulterer, he must certainly have his
residence where she dwells, seeing he supporteth this city by dwelling in it,
even as its greatness was supported by the former heads, by their dwelling
there: its overthrow therefore must be near to him. Its, 2. while these Kings
give their power to Antichrist, then Rome is in pomp, and is supported by him;
for, while he is great, she is so too; and he is great so long as the Kings
give him power, Therefore it is not while they continue friends to the beast,
but when they become enemies. 3. This destruction is the prosecution of one of
the vials (we say, the fifth) all which pursue the beasts kingdom to destroy
it. 4. This is marked as a main victory of the Lamb over Antichrist, who for a
long time had made use of these Kings against him: it can be therefore no
victory to Antichrist for which the Saints thus rejoice, Chap. 18. 5. Add, that
(Chapter following) all Antichrists followers are lamenting: and would they
lament the destruction of Rome, if it were procured by themselves? and yet
supposing (as they do) that then Antichrist commands all, can there be so
many Kings and great men, etc. elsewhere to lament that ruin? 6. Could Rome be
charged, as mother of harlots in the earth and yet to have no share in
Antichrists defection? yea, it is a fountain of it, and therefore its ruin
must have influence on the weakening of his kingdom.

2. We say, that the defection whereof Rome is found guilty, and wherefore she
is thus plagued, is the very same with Antichrists: which thus appears, 1.
Romes defection is some singular defection very general and extensive, and is
everywhere propagated to others, Chap. 17.5, 6. and 18.9. But there is no other
such apostasy that is universal, spoken of in Scripture, but Antichrists,
which singularly is the falling away. 2. All the characters of Antichrists
defection agree to this Rome, 1. She commands over Nations, so does he. 2.
Both spread far and wide. 3. Both are guilty of the blood of Saints and great
persecution. 4. These who give their power to him, commit fornication with her.
5. They belong to one time, and the beast Antichrist supporteth this city while
it is a whore, and therefore he must be thought to strengthen her in her
whoredoms. Beside what was said, that Rome is Antichrists seat, does clear this
also: And wherefore should Rome perish in Antichrists ruin (which is carried
on principally by the vials, Chap. 16.) or be lamented by his friends, Chap.
18. if she did not partake deeply of his sin? neither could she be called the
mother of abominations in the earth, if yet she should have no hand in
Antichrists abominations, whereof the world will be guilty at the time of her
ruin, as the most learned of themselves grant. And, to what end should there
be still such connection betwixt Rome and Antichrist all along, if an
especial relation between Rome and that defection were not demonstrated by it?

3. We say, that this defection, whereof Antichrist and Rome are found guilty,
is not a total falling from Christianity in the profession of it, but such,
as, failing in the matter and corrupting the principal Truths of Christianity,
shall yet stick boldly to a proud profession of Christianity, as claiming a
special relation to Christ above others: for; 1. Antichrists defection is
such, (as we show, Chap. 13.) and they are one. 2. This great Antichrist is
some way proportionable to the petty Antichrists that were in John's time, and
were his forerunners; but these were not simply Heathens, but such as under
the name of Christianity, and pretending to be eminently for it, (so as to cry
down true Apostles) did wrong Christ. 3. It is that defection spoken of, 2 Thessalonians. 2. which is a giving up to believe lies, even while he sits in the
Temple of God, and boasts of being a prime instrument in the Church. 4. His
defection is such as was let by the standing of the heathen Emperors,
whereas if heathenish Idolatry were his sin. Antichrists design had not then
been working under ground, but had been palpable in them. 4. It is observable,
that whenever the Scripture speaks of Antichrists defection, it
distinguishes it always from heathenish idolatry, and speaks of it as of
another thing; so, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Antichrists mystery of iniquity is opposed to
that that was then among Heathens for the time: and by comparing the last part
of Chap. 12. of this Book, with Chap. 13. it will appear, that Antichristianity
succeeds to Paganism, as a new design of the devils, to recover what he lost
by the fall of the former. Add, that here it is called whoredom, which
supponeth it to be against a marriage-tye, Ezekiel. 16.36, 38. which could not
otherwise be. Again, If Antichrists, or Romes defection, were thus gross, why
should it be called a mystery, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and here, ver. 5? and what need
were there of so many marks to discover Rome under that state, what
deceiveablenesse would there be there? The Scriptures insisting so much in
this, is certainly to make Believers wary, and to show there will be need of
spiritual wisdom to discern her, or him. Lastly, It is said, that all the World
(except the Elect) wondered after this beast: and can it be thought that all
Christians shall turn Pagans except the Elect, and that there shall be no
hypocrites in the Church? yet this contradistinguishing of Antichrists
followers (not from the Church visible, but from the Elect, who invisibly are
so) says, that this defection will make a narrower search in the Church than
Paganism can do.

We do therefore take this assertion for truth, that Romes defection under
Antichrist is a spreading of lies under the pretext of Christianity, not simply
striking against God, but against Christ in his Offices, as Mediator, and the
end of them, and derogating from them; in the spreading of which, the city of
Rome, as a mother, has a special influence and claim.

4. We would say concerning the continuing of Antichrist, or this defection and
the time of its close, that it is not to be confined to one person (and that
within three years and in half) and to finish but forty five days before the
end of the world; but is to take up a longer time. Of this we spoke somewhat,
Chap. 11. and Chap. 13. and also before on this. And now we further add, that
Antichrist has a proportionablnesse in his continuance to the great effects
which his dominion has on the world; But that cannot be within three years and
an half. 2. Antichrist is one, as the series of the heathen Emperors was one;
for, he is the head next succeeding, and he is opposed to him, 2 Thessalonians. 2. He
that lets must be removed before he (that is, Antichrist) should come. Now,
seeing he that let was not an Emperor personally, but the series and time of
them in their continuance, Therefore Antichrist who succeeds as the other was
removed, is not one person, but a succession: and would the Scripture so
frequently and pressingly speak of Antichrists kingdom and that defection, if
it belonged only to the case of the Church for three years and an half
immediately before the end of the world? certainly many other trials of the
Church had been of greater concernment: beside, Antichrists hurt being
principally to souls, it cannot be effectuated so in such a time, which can
have influence, at most, but upon some of one generation.

For that part of their opinion, that faith that Antichrists coming is but to
preceed the end of the world three years and seven or eight months, and Romes
destruction to be within that time of his reign, there is for this no probable
show: for, 1. Are there not many that lament Babylons ruin and rejoice over
her? and will that be but for a year or such a time? 2. Is not the battle of
Armageddon, Chap. 19. posterior to this, where the beast is taken? Again, Is
not that overthrow of Gog and Magog posterior to that, Chap. 20. when they are
cast in the lake, where the beast is, before they come there? Beside, Is it
probable that in the end of the world, when all, especially the Jews, shall
give themselves to Christ, that universally they shall again make defection?
And does it not appear, that a glorious Church shall be on the earth after
Antichrists height? I desire it may be considered, that the Jews are, in the
body of that Nation generally to be converted after their blinded estate; which
is yet to be fulfilled. Now, when shall that conversion be? It must either be
before this Antichrist, or after his destruction; But neither can be said: It
cannot be before his destruction; for, 1. then they would not be so ready to
receive Antichrist and follow him (which yet they pretend) to Jerusalem. 2.
Where is there a falling away of the Jews for the second time spoken of? But on
the contrary, the Lords promise looks otherwise, Romans 11. which imports
such a re-ingrasting as not to be broken off again: and considering the
tenderness that the Jews shall have after their reingrafting, Zech. 12. 10.
for so much wrong done to Christ formerly, can it be thought that they shall be
the prime instruments of promoting Antichrist again, even after so much mercy
is shown unto them, and that so suddenly? Neither can any say that the Jews
conversion is to be suspended till Antichrists ruin, upon their principles,
because, say they, there are but forty five days to the end of the world:
either therefore Antichrist must preceed that time allowed him by them, or the
prophecy concerning the Jews conversion must be shaken.

From this it will necessarily follow, that the coming and revealing of
Antichrist in the world, must necessarily preceed that time; if his ruin be
sooner and his continuance longer, his rise must be proportionable: and
considering that the Apostle speaks of the working of that mystery in his
time, it must either be said, that it has left off working (which agrees not
to his scope) or that it has continued working for many hundreds of years, and
has made no progress (which were absurd to say,) or, we must say, it has
already come to an height, and we are to look for it in the generations
preceding the end of the world. 3. To what end were the many exhortations to
watchfulness that are propounded even to the Christians that lived in the
first ages after the Apostles days, if they belonged only to the Christians in
the last four years? Yea, 4. seeing from Chap. 12. ult. and Chap. 13.1. it is
clear, that Antichrists rise is the second great design which Satan drives to
overthrow the Church after the overturn of heathen Emperors, or paganism,
Shall it be thought, that for ten or twelve hundred years he has had no
success in it? or, that the Church has been so long free from a public
oppressor? Add, that he being at a height, before the first vial which
begins his ruin, and there being a long time to the pouring out of all,
before the end, it must be thought that his rise and growth to his height, was
proportionable in length of time: and therefore must preceed for many
generations. Again, the world that is overturned by the vials (being the world
of the beast) is that same world, which increased under the trumpets, the
increase of it is under the one, and the ruin of it under the other; and seeing
the trumpets will rise that high as to succeed the seals, which contained the
first period of heathenish persecution, It will follow therefore not only, that
this defection will and must be long before the end, but also that it is
already come into the world.

If we can then make out this, that this defection has already seized on Rome,
and that she must before this time be infected with it, there will be a short
way to loose all the former questions: which may thus clearly be made out,

We have four characters to evince it, in this Chapter. 1. If the sixth
Government over Rome, which was in John's time be now ceased from ruling that
city, Then this defection must be come; for so the Angel fixes that time, and,
a These. 2. the Apostle timeth Antichrists revealing, and the coming of that
falling away, spoken of there, at his removing (to wit, the heathen Emperors)
who then did let.

2. If the seventh Head or Government over Rome be come, which then was to
come, and be acknowledged as is spoken of in this Chapter, Then the apostasy
contemporary with it, is come also.

3. If there be ten Kings arisen, to be supreme independent Governors over
Provinces of that Empire, which in John's time had not power in themselves, but
were dependent on the Empire as parts of it, and have given their power to a
new head upon an new account, Then this is fulfilled; But all these three, in
the former exposition, are made out: Therefore this defection, which is
supposed in all these changes, must have its beginning also.

4. If some of these Kings that once acknowledged this seventh head, be
withdrawn from it, Then the defection must have been at its height; for, their
withdrawing supposes them once to have been involved in it, as the context
clears. But in experience it is evident that some of these Kings have
withdrawn, and so in part this event prophesied of is fulfilled: Therefore what
it presupposes, must be fulfilled also: for, this their withdrawing must
either be that prophesied of here, or some other thing; But it can be no other
event: because, 1. the Kings that rise, are the first that shall rise so
qualified as are here: and so, 2. the withdrawing of these Kings that withdraw,
is the first withdrawing of these Kings upon this account of hating Rome as the
whore. For the context and series will clear this, the scope being to deduce
Romes future remarkable changes without intermission; as, 1. Then heathen
Cesars did govern all. 2. He shall be removed, and that Empire shall be weakened
and not have the dominion that it had in the world. 3. Out of it shall arise so
many Kingdoms, which shall be independent as to it. 4. There shall step up a
Government from the bottomless pit of another nature than the former, that
shall govern Rome. 5. These Kings that withdraw from the former head, shall
willingly give their power and homage unto this Government upon another
account. 6. These Kings (or some of them) again, out of hatred to Rome and that
Governor, shall withdraw from it and hate her and diminish her greatness.
These steps go in a series succeeding to one another immediately, and cannot be
interrupted by the rising of any other Kings, or their withdrawing after it,
without confounding this prophecy and darkening the Angels interpretation and
quite overturning of the scope, no more than we can say there may be other
cities with seven hills, etc. to which what is said of this can agree, seeing he
points in this interpretation at as particular and singular events in respect
of what was to come, as in respect of what then was present.

5. We may argue from Chap. 7.1. thus, That defection, mentioned Chap. 7. of
the winds which then were to blow, is this apostasy of Antichrist; But that
defection is already come. Ergo, etc. That its Antichrists defection,
appears, 1. from the singular hurt of it; it is the great defection that the
Church was to be troubled with after heathenish persecution. 2. It is the
defection of the fifth trumpet, and the same that is mentioned, Chap. 13. as
was said on the place, But that that must be come, this will clear it, that it
immediately succeeded to the seals, and was immediately to follow upon them,
and the Angels have to seal the Elect evidenceth it, which is more fully opened
there. Now, the seals having their close at the overturning of the heathenish
Empire, This then which immediately succeeded, must long since be in being.

6. We may gather it, thus, This defection is contemporary with the Prophets
prophesieing in sackcloth, the woman's fleeing to the wilderness, Chap. 12. and
is the same with the Gentiles treading the outer court. Chap. 11. But both
these are begun, even at the child's taking up to heaven, which is the close of
heathen persecution (yea, and is closed as to the days set there) Therefore
this must be of a long time since in the world also: both these propositions we
cleared on Chap. 11. And all these arguments that prove the contemporariness of
the beast and Babylon with the trumpets, and the succession of both to the
heathenish persecution, and that immediately, as on Chap. 6. Lect. 1. and 8.
Chap. 7. Lect. 1. Chap. 9. Lect. 1. Chap. 11. Lect. 4. Chap. 12. Lect. 1. and
3. etc.

7. This defection is the same with Antichrists, as is said: Now, his defection
is long since begun, and has its rise from the healing of the head, which was
wounded, Chap. 13. as there was made out, Therefore this is not to come.

8. We may have some light from Chap. 20. where this will be clear, that
Antichrists defection must go before the thousand years there mentioned,
because it supposes saints to have been killed by the beast, who are there
brought to reign; But we cannot look that these thousand years are wholly to
come, and his persecution to go yet before it also, (that would take longer
time to the fulfilling of all events, than in reason any will allow, yet to be
running to the end of the world) This concludes the more strongly, because
generally not only our writer, but even the Popish themselves grant this, that
it is not to come, but that they are begun, if they be not finished, so do
Corn. alap. Viegas, Alcasar, the Rhemists and others, who though they senslesly
apply it, and with contradiction, as their manner is; yet agree in this, that
long since they are begun. And although there should be difficulty to show when
this defection began and how, (because much of that rises from humane story)
yet these characters prove it must be in being and before this time begun; and
that is sufficient to us. All these arguments begin it (almost) after the close
of the heathenish persecution, whereof we spoke more on Chap. 11.

We may add an argument or two further, thus, If every condition of the visible
Church be either contemporary with the seals, that is, the heathenish world, or
with the antichristian world under the trumpets wherein Antichrist comes to an
height, or with the vials wherein is his declining, Then this apostasy must be
come, because we are not now under the seals; that period is past: we must
therefore be under one of the following two, seeing these three prophesies
carry on the series to the end; But if we be under the vials, then Antichrist
is not only come, but is already at his height: and it is not like that there
being so many hundred years since the seals ended and the trumpets began, that
still they be running, at least, in the first six; for, the seventh
comprehends the vials.

Again, if the properties, concomitants and characters and events given to
discern this defection be fulfilled, Then this defection of Antichrist must be
come, seeing these characters can agree to no other; But we will find the first
true, as the former exposition of Chap. 9. 11. 13. and 17. will clear. Ergo.
Taking this for granted then, that the antichristian defection is of a long
time since come, and this also, that when it comes, it continues until Romes
destruction, which yet is not fulfilled: It must therefore follow, that it is
in being for the present in the world, and has been so for a long time; and
that therefore we ought to look where it is for the present.

This is certain, that it is not to be fought amongst Pagans or Turks, but
amongst professed Christians. 2. Not among ancient Heretics that now are not
in being, or such as have no pomp or splendour in the world: this being so
eminent a Kingdom, cannot be applied to them. It must therefore be either in
the Roman Church or amongst us who are called Protestants; it can be attributed
to no third now in being: But for us, they themselves will absolve us; for, we
have neither the seat of this defection, not a Head or Monarch, as is over this
kingdom, etc. This cursed privilege therefore belongs to them who have both,
and glory in them.

2. Again, if these be truth, that Rome is infected with Antichrists defection
while it is in the world, and is the whore spoken of after its appearing till
she be destroyed, Then it will follow (laying aside other arguments from other
circumstances) that Rome, as it is and has been for many years, is the whore
here spoken of, which is guilty of the Antichristian defection; (and this
consequence will stand good till the antecedent be overturned) But the former
is truth, from the former arguments, and from their concessions that grant that
this destruction is not yet come. Ergo.

3. We may therefore resume our argument confidently. If all the characters
applied to this whore be verified in Rome now present, and as it has been for
many years, and in its Governor the Pope, Then is this Rome the whore, which
is to be destroyed, and the Pope Antichrist, and no other is to be looked for;
But the former is truth, they are fulfilled, and in them. Ergo, We may
warrantably conclude that she is the whore, and he the Antichrist.

It is a wonder to consider how little the most learned adversaries have to say
to this, except what evidenceth the force of the wine of her fornications on
them: for, if Antichrist be come, there is no way to vindicate Rome and their
Pope from this charge, it so natively follows. Again, there is no way to
evite this, that he is already come, but by pointingout such another imaginary
Antichrist as shall never come, and thus to bound him up to the three or four
last years of the world, contrary to the whole strain of this Prophecy, in
some part following the way of the Jews, who, to evite the fulfilling of the
Prophesies concerning the true Messiah, do fabulously inquire for a Messiah
contrary to the Scriptures, with such wars and effects of his reign: which,
because they are not fulfilled, therefore tenaciously they adhere to this, that
the true Messiah is not yet come, which way, as it is just with God in both,
thus to plague their rejecting of clear light, so ought it to work humility and
commiseration in us, considering how unreasonable the wisdom of man is in the
things of God. They say, 1. It cannot be the Church of Rome, but the City.
Answ. But we have shown it is not the City simply (for, then it had been a
whore long before John wrote; for there was a City) but it is that City once a
Church and afterward degenerating. Then (say they) Peter, and the Martyrs under
the Heathens, are to be reckoned of this defection, for they lived there. Answ.
No; for then that City was not become an harlot, neither is it simply Rome that
is the whore, but Rome degenerated, such as she was foreseen to be after the
heathen Emperors removal out of the way, which was not then fulfilled. Nor is
it simply living there, but as a member of her that makes one guilty, except
it be made sinful by other circumstances. Lastly, they say, Rome cannot be the
whore, because (forsooth) of her holiness, And what is that? There are so many
Abbacies, Mortifications, holy Churchmen, Relicts and Temples of Saints, many
Masses and such like there, etc. All which serve not to prove this conclusion,
that she is so. And it is not unobservable, that immediately after this answer,
Corn. a Lap. professor at Rome, does justify the toleration of Stews and
Brothel-houses in it, as a thing tending to prevent much sin, and becoming a
well-ordered Commonwealth; And when this is mentioned by them as a piece of
Romes holiness, we may the more easily judge of the rest.

We may add yet one argument more for confirming of our application, which
especially is binding, from their own principles. The Rome that is described
here to be the whore, and as such to be destroyed, is either Rome heathen,
which is past, or under Antichrist, which is to come, or popish under the Pope,
which is present: for, (as Alcasar, Disp. 1. in hoc caput. assereth) there is
no other Rome, which it can be applied unto; But neither of the first two can
be said: Therefore it must be the Rome that is present. It cannot be Rome
heathen which is past; for so the arguments urged by Viegas, Ribera, and
Cornelius a Lap. against it, are unanswerable: some whereof are formerly
touched in general.

Arg. 2. If it be the destruction of Rome heathen, Then it must either be (as
Be^ar. and some others make it) the destruction which Rome suffered by the
Goths, Vandals, etc. and the rest of the barbarous Nations; But that cannot be:
for, 1. that is not done by Antichrist, the Beast, or Kings, befriending him
(as they say) nor for that guiltiness, as we and the text say. 2. Rome was not
then the whore, neither upon that account did these pursue it. 3. That
destruction was not unrecoverable, as is here prophesied of. And, 4. (as
Alcasar urges) it is not suitable to punish Rome heathen by the overturning of
Rome christian, and now become so holy: it cannot be this then. Or, 2. it must
be the overthrow which Constantine gave to the heathen Emperors (as Alcasar
asserteth it) But that cannot be, 1. That was not of Rome the whore, which had
once made defection. 2. That was not a destruction of Rome, (much less a total
overthrow, as is employed in Chap. 18.) but was rather a liberation of Rome; for
even Rome the City had much freedom and glory by this, which is contrary to the
scope of this Chapter and the Chapter following: therefore this opinion is not
only called ( singularis) a singular opinion, by Cornelius a Lap. but by
Alcasar himself, ( Not. 11. pro^miali) is suspected to be accounted a paradox:
It is true, that was indeed the wounding of one of the heads, mentioned Chap.
13. But it is one thing to wound the head, another thing to destroy the City it
self, the Government had been often changed before, yet the City stood. Now,
this destruction is not any such, which was to come on its Governors only, but
on the City it self; and that a total stroke: Therefore this cannot be
intended here, but is justly casten, and that unanswerably by the Authors
foresaid, especially the last. This then cannot be understood of heathen Rome
in any sense. Nor, 2. can it be understood of Rome, as under a defection yet to
come so immediately before the end of the world: for, 1. It is not agreed
amongst themselves if it be possible that Rome can fall into such defection
yea, others, as Alcasar (Disp. 1. in cap. 17. and Notat. 11, and 13. in
pro^emiali.) does by many reasons oppose this, and with many Authorities and
Prophesies, as one of St. Benedict, cited out of Gregorius, whereby it was
still taken for truth, that Rome should never again be heathen. And, he says,
this opinion is (inova, and que ansam hartticis prebet and omnino improbabilis,
etc.) new, improbable and favorable to heretics, giving them ground to
allege, that seeing Rome has now so many images, etc. that it has already
fallen to that defection. And although his Authorities be not much, yet the
argument that be draws from the series of the prophecy against it, whereby
he shows that this prophecy relates to events long before the end of the
world, and the other events, as that of Gog and Magog, and others, must follow
it, are convincing and unanswerable. For confirming whereof, we add these
considerations further, 1. That by this prophecy the state of the true Church
is holden forth to be most glorious immediately before the end: Therefore it
cannot consist with such an universal defection as this! This will bind the
more, if we take-in the consideration concerning the Jews conversion formerly
mentioned, which has with it the fullness of the Gentiles, as its companion.
2. It is certain that the seven Vials have the last plagues, Chap. 15. and also
that these seven Vials bring judgment on the Beast or Antichrist (who is
singularily the Beast, and the object of the judgment of the first Vial, Chap.
16. 1, 2. and supposes this defection to preceed) Now, it cannot be supposed
that all these Vials are to be bounded within so short time to the end of the
world, especially considering the enlargement of the Church, which, by these
contemporary prophesies, is clearly intimated to fall under them. Therefore
that application unto any future state of Rome, cannot stand: and seeing by
themselves neither of these can stand, it must necessarily follow, that the
third is a truth, and that Rome, as here considered, is the Rome now in being.
And, if any should say that Theologia symbolica is not argumentativa, and
therefore no solid argument can be drawn from this Prophecy: Alcasar
answers, (ubi supra) that though this or that particular expression will not
bear an argument in such Scriptures; yet, says he (and that truly) where the
scope and series agree jointly in a conclusion, it must be of force, seeing it
is Scripture, otherwise no safe interpretation might be drawn from any
prophetical or enigmatical Scripture. And therefore before the adversaries can
exempt Rome present, or the Pope, from this charge, they must not only answer
what we say, but must more satisfyingly answer what one of them opposes to
another; which can never be done until they agree with us in the conclusion.

We have been the longer in this, because it is indeed the great scope of this
Prophecy, to make this whore discernable, and it is their great work to
disguise her so, that she be not discerned. And this Chapter is acknowledged by
all to be the main seat of this Controversy, and the chief key, yea, as some
call it, the Castle of this Prophecy (Arx Apocalypseos,) the opening and
taking-in whereof, does both confirm what is past, and make way for what is
coming.

LECTURE I.
Chap. XVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd after things I saw another Angel come down from heaven, having
great power, and the earth was lightened with his glory.

2. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of
every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

3. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants
of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.

4. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues:

5. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities.

6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double, according
to her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double.

7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give her: for she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and am
no widow, and shall see no sorrow.

8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and
famine; and she shall be utterly burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord God
who judges her.


BY the vials ( Chap. 16.) a general view was given of the destruction of
Antichrists kingdom, especially by the last three. Chap. 17. verse. 1. the Angel
proposes a more particular exposition of that judgment in an explicatory
vision: and for the greater clearness, he 1. describes that kingdom, which is
the object of these plagues, under the title of a Whore and Babylon, pointing
her so out, as it is evident to be Rome in the latter times. 2. He describes
Antichrist the head, under the appearance of a beast, which supporteth that
whore. 3. He does thereafter point out the principal seat of that dominion. 4.
He gives a little general hint at her destruction: all these were Chap. 17.
He proceeds now to explain more fully that destruction, 1. of the whore
Babylon, or Rome, in this 18. Chap. 2. of the beast or head, Chap. 19.

This Chapter belongs to the explicating of the fifth vial, as appears, 1.
That vial is on the seat or throne of the beast, this describes Babylons
destruction, which in Chap. 17. we heard to be the beasts seat and throne. They
therefore describe the judgment of the same thing, to wit, Rome: and if Rome
were not Antichrists seat, but to be destroyed by him, Why then would
Antichrist and his followers so lament and regrate her ruin?

2. The destruction here described of Rome or Antichrists kingdom, is not that
of the last vial, for that has nothing here in time behind it, and comes
after the battle of Armageddon, where the beast that surviveth the destruction
of his seat, is taken, as is clear, vial 6. But this destruction is such, as
after it, both many of Romes friends (especially Kings, who under the sixth
vial will adhere to the beast) lament that destruction, and many of the Saints
do rejoice over it, and its irrecoverable ruin; yes, such a destruction, as
preceedeth the Jews calling, and the battle of Armageddon, which is in the
sixth vial, as is clear from Chap. 19. which follows. Therefore the great
destruction of Rome here insisted on, must be the very same ( Chap. 16.) under
the fifth vial, which being the most remarkable step of the overthrow of that
kingdom (which the other two vials do perfect thereafter) is the more largely
insisted on.

This destruction of Rome (being styled Babylon) is set out in expressions
borrowed from the Prophets concerning the destruction of old Babylon, whereby
its ruin is set down in the certainty, greatness, terriblnesse, justice and
irrecoverablenesse thereof. And that by the voices of three several Angels (if
the second be an Angel) one after another. The first speaks unto verse. 4. the
second from verse. 4. to verse. 21. the third unto the end, and for confirmation
adds a sign.

In the first, the denouncer is described, verse. 1. 2. His manner of
denouncing, verse. 2. 3. The denounciation is set down. The denouncer is another
Angel than spoke to John, Chap. 17. God has many waiting on Him, and makes
use of them at his pleasure. 2. He is a mighty Angel: all angels are mighty,
yet there are degrees, some more excelling in strength than others: there are
Angels and Archangels, but of how many orders we will not determine. The
Schoolmen in this (as in all other unrevealed mysteries) do confidently define,
that there are three hierarchies and nine orders, every hierarchy
comprehending three orders. The first has Seraphims, Cherubims, Thrones; the
second, Dominations, Mights, or Virtuses, Powers; in the third they place
Principalities, Archangels, Angels: this they presume to have from Dionisius
(Pseud-areopagita) who says, de Eccl. Hierar. lib. 7. cap. 7. that he had this
by tradition from his master Hierotheus.

3. As He is great in power, so He excels in glory, the earth was lightened
etc. (as all these ministering spirits do) and, it is like, had some visible
manifesting of His glory in this work. The making use of such instruments,
shows, 1. that God thinks it a great work; for, mighty Angels are employed
in such, as the Archangel in raising the dead. 2. That it will effectually be
done, that instrument will effect it 3. That it is Gods work and not men's to
perfect this judgment; therefore ought He to be trusted with it, and depended
on in it. 4. It is said of the Angel, he came down from heaven; it tells
heaven is the mansion of these glorious Spirits, Zech. 3. 5,7. they stand by as
attendants, and it is a privilege to be admitted amongst them: though their
motion be swift, yet do they at Gods order go from one end of the earth to
another, changing their place, yet keeping their glory, and counting it no
loss to do their Master service. The coming down shows not only a readiness
in the Angel to do what is committed to him, but the approaching of the ruin
he denounces, and a greater clearness in the thing denounced, when he comes
near to do it.

Ver. 2. It is said, he cried with a mighty voice: which shows both the thing
to be certain and remarkable, and him to be serious in going about it.

The denounciation contains these three parts of Romes destruction, borrowed
from the Prophets. The 1. is Isai. 21. 9. Ier. 51. 8. the first denouncing
Babylons ruin more at a distance long before it come; the second more nearly
foretelling it: We had these same words, Chap. 14. 8. of an Angel; but this
differs, in that he is called a mighty Angel, and that he comes down and
cries mightily, neither of which are in the former. The reason is, because
that Angel ( Chap. 14.) denounced the fall of that Kingdom, first, when the
light of the Gospel began to break out; this sets it out nearer her end, and
so speaks it more clearly and powerfully, to show it is now by the fifth vial
fulfilled, or certainly to be closed.

If it be asked here, how Angels speak, who have no organs as we have? Answ.
There are three ways of speaking attributed to Angels, and mentioned in this
Book 1. When Angels speak to men audibly, as to John, Chap. 1.9. 2. When they
speak in visions, as to John in the Spirit, or to Joseph in a dream; even as
things are represented to the sight in vision, so may they be to the hearing.
3. When they speak one to another, as Chap. 14. The first way, Angels speak
audibly to men, by forming an audible voice in the air, as they appear to sight
by assuming a visible body. The second way they speak in visions, is by putting
in, or working impressions of these things on the spirits of men. To the third,
they speak one to another, by ordinating by their wills such conceptions
toward such an Angel, one or more to be understood by them; This is most rested
on by the Schoolmen, and thus they say, 1. An Angel speaks to one or more at
once, as he ordinates his conception toward them. 2. That thus they speak with
a like case and facility at a distance, as when they are near other. 3. That
thus they signify their conceptions to God. And, 4. thus they say, will the
just men made perfect (at least in their souls) have communications one with
another, or with Angels in glory. This (they say) is not conceptum imprimendo
(which was Scotus opinion) but ordinando, and so then that locutio, or
speaking, is not actus ordinans conceptum, but conceptus ordinatus a voluntate,
ut alter intelligat. Our Divines do also assent most to this. But this we
insist not on, neither will we pass any determination. In a word, Babylon, that
is, Rome, her certain and approaching ruin is set down.

The second part of the denounciation sets out this ruin in its greatness,
as dreadful and irrecoverable, borrowed from Isa. 13. 14. and 34.13. 14, 15.
Ier. 51.37. where old Babylons ruin is spoken of, she shall be so far
destroyed (for, it is so certain that it is supposed and set down as come
already) that in stead of unclean men and great pomp of great men in her
before, now she shall be utterly desolate, haunted and inhabited by none, but
ghosts or ill spirits, and suries, and soul and unclean creatures; such as
Oules, Wildcats, etc. as ye see old Abbacies or Monasteries, or Castles when
walls stand and none dwells in them, they are direful-like to men, so shall
Rome be, says this Angel: which imports a great desolation, and it is used
for that end in the Scriptures cited.

If it be asked, If there be such a thing, as the haunting of evil spirits in
these desolate places? We answer, 1. That there are evil spirits rangeing up
and down through the earth is certain, even though hell be their prison
properly, yet have they a sort of dominion and abode both in the earth and air;
partly, as a piece of their curse, this is laid on them to wander; partly, as
their exercise to tempt men, or bring spiritual or temporal hurt to them,
this is clear, Job 1. 2. That they haunt such desolate places of the earth
most, may be also clear. Hence Matthew. 12. he is said to walk through wast and
dry places, and he used to drive these that were possessed to the tombs: This
is, and may be partly a part of their curse, to be restricted there (except as
they get liberty to go abroad, as these got to enter the swyne, and not to be
cast to hell) therefore is it here (...) the original, which signifies a
prison; partly, to show the accursedness of the place to be thus inhabited, as
Saul was when an evil spirit possessed him after his rejection: partly, they
delight in these places, as fitted to make them the more terrible from them,
and as triumphing in the desolation they have brought on men, these judgments
being the effects of sin brought on by them. Some think they glory in these
desolations and graves, as evidences of their victory over men, which yet
tends to their greater condemnation. 3. What ever be of the former, this is
sure, that such places desolate, and uninhabited, use to work generally a
horror and terror in the minds of men (which possibly may flow from the
former) so that they are ever accounted irksom, direful, and horrible places
to abide in; and this common estimation is enough for the scope here, which is
to show what dreadful desolation Rome should fall into, and lie in. Cities,
even great cities had need to be humble and holy, it is hard to know what may
come on, and what may dwell in the greatest: Cities that once have been the
greatest in the world, may now be the proof of this.

The justice of this judgment (though great) is declared, ver. 3. two ways,
1. By the greatness of her sins, in three, 1. fornication; 2. a luxurious and
delicious way of living; 3. intising of others to these sins shamelesly. 2. Her
sin is set out by the extent of it, in her making others partake with her: and
there are, 1. all Nations; 2. Kings; 3. all Merchants that are made rich by her
magnificence: these three are the parties with whom she sins. 1. For the
sins, we may understand them, 1. spiritually of idolatry and superstitions,
pompous worship, as is before said thus her merchandising is not the least part
of her sin, it must therefore be such a merchandising as is sinful. 2.
literally, of filthiness, pride, affluence and superfluity of all things in
apparel, dwellings, diets, etc. Rome abounds in these. 2. For the parties
sinning, Nations and Kings, are clearly literally to be understood as before.
It is more difficult what is to be understood by Merchants. Certainly they must
not at least only be common Merchants: for, 1. they are the great men of the
earth, that buy and sell these wares. And, 2. the wares are souls of men, verse.
14. And therefore, 3. these Merchants must be understood chiefly, as Merchants
of such wares as are vendible or sellable at Rome, and wherein especially its
market excels, and goes beyond other places: and that is not so much in
outward commodities, as, 1. they sold pardons, indulgences, Bishoprics, yea
Christ, heaven, dispensations, etc. (as it is said, omnia sunt Rome venalia)
These make their great men rich. 2. They buy costly things for their own pomp,
and the pomp of their worship: and therefore they are called Merchants, who
both buy and sell, and they are singularily Merchants beyond others. The
righteousness then of this sad judgment appears, 1. from the greatness of
her superstition, idolatry and superfluity. 2. From her propagating of it to
others. 3. From her making a trade of it, so that no calling almost did thrive
better than to be a monger of her superstitions, either in carrying something
from her, or bringing something to her.

The second voice (from verse. 4 to verse. 21.) sets out the same thing, but
as by a new witness of that destruction which men easily believed not. This is
either the Lord Himself immediately who calls the people his, My people; or,
His Ministers mediately by His Authority calling them: His words set out this
destruction, 1. by way of exhortation to Gods people, from verse. 4. to 9. 2. By
way of commination, or foretelling of the lamentation should follow this great
desolation amongst her friends, Kings, Merchants, and Ship-masters, to verse.
20. 3. By incitation to Gods People to rejoice over her, verse. 20, etc. All
which shows the greatness of the desolation: that, 1. all that would shun
the judgment, would flee from it, as Lot did out of Sodom. 2. As it gives
ground of fear to some, so it gives ground of lamentation to others. 3. Of
rejoicing to a third sort, that is, these who have formerly separated from her.
It must then be great that makes and works fear, grief and joy so
universally.

The exhortation has two parts with the reasons of them. 1. There is an
exhortation to separate from her, verse. 4. and 5. which shows, that now her
ruin is at hand (get you, says he, quickly from her, as Moses says, Numb.
16. 26. to the people, to separate from Korah, Datban, etc. it is borrowed from
Ier. 51.6.) and that their delivery approaches with her ruin and fall. The
second exhortation, is, verse. 6, 7, 8. and it is an upstirring of Gods people
not to be remiss in executing Gods judgments on her according to their
callings and stations, as God shall give them opportunity.

Concerning the first exhortation we are to enquire, (beside its scope, which
is clear to show her approaching ruin) 1. What sort of separation this is,
which is called for. 2. In matter of fact, if any Godly have been, may be, or
are to be in Rome before its destruction? 3. What is the necessity or warrant
of separating from Rome? and what more now than before? And why Babylon only is
to be separated from, if this be peculiar to her?

Before we answer, we must premit a twofold consideration of Babylon, and being
in Babylon. 1. Babylon, or Rome, may be considered merely as a great City or
Dominion. 2. As an Ecclesiastic sinful degenerating party, or apostatized
Church of Antichrist: so in the first acceptance, to be in Rome, differs
from the second, which is to be of Rome, as Gods people were in Babylon, yet
not of Babylon; lived in the place, but did not partake of their sin. So one
may be in Rome two ways, 1. locally; thus he is not of it as an antichristian
Church, nor is this in it self sinful, if by some circumstances it become not
so. 2. One may be in Rome as a member of that Church; thus he is not formally
one of Gods people, and if he belong to His Election, he is to be called in due
time.

For answer then to the first question, there are three things distinguished,
even by Independent Divines [ Vide Norton ad. Apoll. quast. ult.] 1. there is
Schisma, that is, a separating from the unity and from the communion of a true
Church, whether more or less pure, if it be a true Church; this is simply and
always sinful, because it is from a true Church: This Schism consists not
always in diversity of Doctrine, which is heresy; but in divided practices from
the communion of a true Church, as Augustine contra Faustum, lib. 2. cap. 3,
Schismaticos facit non diversa fides, sed disrupta communionis societas, so it
renteth unity, and is either negativum schisma, where its simply a withdrawing,
without setting up a new distinct Church; or, positive, when it not only
withdraws, but sets up another worship, or Church (as the Novatians and
Donatists did) to keep communion only with themselves. And this is called to
have altar contra altar. 2. There is separation, and that is, 1. either in
whole, when people withdraw from communion in whole from others, as no Church;
or, 2. in part, when they acknowledge them Churches, yet cannot communicate in
some things with them (as in the Sacrament with Ubiquitaries, since that
ubiquity sprung up) this is sinful or lawful according to the grounds of it.
If it be no Church, such as Babel was, a total separation is necessary; or, in
part it is lawful, if it exceed not its ground: but when separation is from a
true Church (though with some defects) totally, or beyond that wherein she is
corrupted, that is, sinful, and (as Cotton says on Cant. 6. a condemning as
no Church that which Christ accounts one, and is too much nycity not to keep
communion with them, with whom He keeps communion. Thus it becomes schisma.

The third is secession, that is, without refusing the communion of another,
yet locally to remove upon some urgent or lawful occasion spiritual or
temporal, to another or better constitute Church, that is lawful and is no
separation; but may be even from a lawful Church and pure. The first, to wit,
a schism, is neither here called-for, nor is it possible to make a schism with
Rome (she not being a true Church which is rent, or from whom the rent is) and
the second, to wit, separation and that total, is called-for, and was so always
since she became antichristian, that none continue in her communion, but that
they renounce it. The third also is now called-for here, that they would even
separate locally from her, as Lot did from Sodom, or these that were near
Korah, did from their tents: because, 1. the scope is clear to set out the
greatness and suddenness of her ruin: therefore they had need to keep a
local distance, as in the examples foresaid. 2. The former separation was
always necessary in heart and practice from that party (and it is like, except
it be amongst any yet to be called, was actually before this) but here
something more and peculiar to this reason, to wit, her destruction, is called
for, which was not always before required. Separation may be without secession,
and secession in changing place without separation in communion; but here both
are called-for.

For answer to the second, if there shall then be any of Gods people de facto
in Rome^ or, quo jure may they be there till then? Ans. In these Conclusions
(having distinguished Gods people. 1. In elected, regenerated and called, and
elected but un-called.) 1. Many un-called have been and may be in Rome, yea
even of it, and these are called to separate; for, experience tells us, God
has called many who have been members of her, and may do so still. 2. Many of
Gods called people have been in Rome locally, but not of it, and have continued
long so in her bosom: There are true worshippers in the Temple, Chap. 11. even
when the outter court is trod on by heathenish Papists, then the Prophets
prophecy even in the great city, and God has a Temple and Church even where
Antichrist sits, though His Congregation be not that Church, even as the
Lord had His Word, Prophets, and People at old Babylon, captive, when the face
of Worship was overturned in Judah; so in this Babylon, He keeps still His
Word, Baptism (as in the former He did Circumcision) and a Ministry that was
never lost, but all the forty two months of Antichrists reign the Prophets
prophecy, though in sackcloth. Hence in all the Universal expressions of
Antichrists dominion, still they are excepted ( Chap. 13. and 17.) whose names
are written in the Book of life: and ( Chap. 7.) an hundred forty and four
thousand are sealed, who ( Chap. 14.) are found on mount Zion, even before
light in Luthers time brake forth. And it may possibly be, that some sinfully
(as some of the people in Babylon did) have not made a secession from Rome, and
these parts, though they have formerly separated from her communion: or,
otherwise by their callings (as Obadiah was engaged with Ahab) being entangled
to live still. This voice puts them to it, not to lodge a night in it, for
they know not when Gods judgment may seize upon it; yet she is Babel and these
in her are Gods people, even then: but now when the Gospel breaks out, and
her judgment approaches, they are called not only to separate from her, but
to remove out of her and expect her judgment.

For the third, the necessity or warrant of separating, it is grounded on
these, 1. She is Babel and ye are My People, and there is no communion between
light and darkness, Christ and Antichrist: this gives the great ground, she
is but your oppressor, Babylon, not your Mother the Church. 2. Ye cannot shun
her sins, if ye stay; not only should ye own Me in separating your selves when
ye are called (which belongs to the first ground, that is, to confess with
the mouth, by profession, as well as to believe with the heart) but if ye stay
ye are still in danger of snares; yea, sometimes in less or more, are
partaking of them (as Joseph did in swearing by Pharaoh's life at the Court of
Egypt. And by this it may also appear, that many living in such places are
engaged and ensnared in many things, that at a greater distance they would be
liberated of.

If any ask, May not one abide in Rome now, and not be a partaker of her sins,
more than before? Answ. The hazard is greater now. 1. They have a retiring
place and a standard for Truth set up, that they should now follow. 2. They
have Gods call and invitation to come out: and though He was a Sanctuary to
them in their wildernesse-state while the set time of their captivity lasted,
yet when He opens the door, that is not to be expected so confidently from
Him. 3. Babel grows still more corrupt, and never more than since Trent added
to all her former abominations. 4. Because Romes judgment hasteneth: and
though they keep themselves free of many of her sins, yet they may share of her
temporal wrath, as Lot's family was in hazard, had not the Lord removed it
from Sodom. A third reason of secession, is, the coming great plague, so that
God, who had long spared, was, by judging her, to make it appear He had
forgotten nothing, and now her sins being come to an height, her judgment shall
delay no longer; and this presses a local secession.

Hence it follows, 1. That it is no schism to quit fellowship with Rome, she
being no wife to the Lamb, is therefore no mother to His Children; she gives
them poison for sincere milk, by corrupting the truth of the Gospel, and not
suffering them to feed upon the Truth: She has been condemning, persecuting
and destroying the true worshippers for many generations together, and would
have no fellowship with any without the beast's character: therefore is there a
necessity of separating, as was said to the Witnesses, Chap. 11. Come up
hither, and here, Come out of her. 2. It follows also, that folks not only
may quit Rome, but of duty they should do it, in obedience to Christ's call,
and they would try their warrant that go there for curiosity, seeing here is a
command to quit it; Who are they that know what night or day this horrible
judgment will be executed? it were dreadful curiosity to be found there then.
3. It follows, that where God warranteth separation, it is from a company
that is no Church, and must be supposed a Babel; and therefore there is no
separation allowed by Him from a true Church, seeing this is a proof of His
disclaiming her to be a Church, to command them to separate from her. Therefore
here is Babylon contradistinguished from His People, who are called to come out
of her: which supposes that He calls none of His to separate from such as
are His. It Is one thing to withdraw from civil conversing with particular
wicked men, another thing to separate from Gods Church for its defects. There
is therefore this observable in separating and withdrawing, that we are to keep
less fellowship in civil things with a Brother that is a Church member and is
gross, than with one that is without, and not a member, as the Apostle
writes, 2 Cor. 5.10. But we may and should, on the other side, keep
Church Fellowship with a true Church, though in many things faulty and corrupt,
whereas we may not at all with an idolatrous company in their worship. Hence,
in that same Epistle to the Corinthians, going to, and eating in, Idols
temples, or at their feasts, was so much condemned; yet communicating with the
Church of Corinth, or living as a member of it, (though corrupt both in
doctrine and practice) was never found fault-with as to worship: for, it is
clear, that that of not eating with an offending Brother, looks only to civil
fellowship, because it is such a fellowship that is condemned with them, as is
allowed to Heathens, which certainly is such: If our Churches therefore be
Christ's Churches, as sometimes the favorers of separation grant, There can be
no separation from them without turning to a schism.

The second exhortation may be read by way of prophecy; or, because the former
is by way of precept, so is this to be understood also, Reward her, ver. 6.
inviting them to a just zeal in recompencing her. It seems to be borrowed
from Psalm. 137.8. Ier. 51.35. and considering that the Lord here calls for
it, and that according to every ones station and place, from Kings in their
place, and Subjects in theirs, there can be no question of the warrantablenesse
of it. It is, that all (as they shall be called) who have seen Romes whoredom,
shall, or should be ready in holy zeal, by doing or praying, to concur for
executing Gods judgments on her. This word, reward, implies a just meeting and
recompense. She did first the wrong, and now in justice they do but repay.
Those to whom it is spoken, are the persons exhorted formerly to come out of
her, to wit, Gods People, who formerly suffered by her, as the expression of
retaliation clears.

The justice and dreadfulnesse of this stroke, is comprehended in three
reasons, annexed in three expressions, 1. Render unto her double as she has
served you. Which words not only hold out their recompencing of her to be just,
( Lege talionis) but also great. So double is, 1. very much, Isa. 40.1, 2. 2.
Double, that is, not above her deserving; for, that will not be poured-out in
eternity, but it is much or more than ever she for all her malice was able to
effectuate on you. She would fain have utterly destroyed you, so as to have
left no memory of you, but could not get it done: but now wholly make ye her
desolate; for, justice will count in her judgment, not according to her
practice in what she was able to effectuate, but according to her sin, and the
mark she aimed at; which being against God, deserves more than they were able
to do. Therefore it is not unjust with God, to make these His instruments (even
before men) to render double to her in temporal miseries, being all within
what was due to her. The expression of filling the cup, is to the same purpose.

A second thing aggreaging her judgment, is, That as she gets double, as the
fruit of her malice, So let her have (says the Lord) judgment according to her
pride and haughtiness; which being very great, her judgment cannot but be so,
seeing here it is both the cause and measure thereof. And that her pride is
great, there is a word cited out of Isa. 47. and applied to her for evincing
it. This is ver. 7.

The third expression, is, ver. 8. hanging these plagues on her former sins,
Therefore, etc. Aggreging them, 1. that they came thick and many together. 2.
Sudden, in one day. 3. Unexpected and irrecoverable, utterly burnt, another
destruction than ever she saw before. And because it is incredible-like, as
things have for a long time stood, a word is added to confirm it, for, strong
is the Lord God Who judges her: It is not men, nor yet Angels, though both be
instruments; but it is the Lords controversy, and the judgment is his.
Therefore believe it will come, and be encouraged ye to do this work who shall
be called to it; for, the Lord is engaged in it, and cannot be overpowered.
This being the Lords quarrel, and to be executed by Saints once wronged by her,
^^ clears, 1. That it is the same war with that, Chap. 17.14. 2. That Rome is
in a present guilt when she is destroyed. 3. That it is not executed by
Antichrist, but by such as had suffered formerly by her; and afterward, ( ver.
20.) are commanded to rejoice over her.

LECTURE II.
9. And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication, and lived
deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see
the smoke of her burning:

10. Standing afar off for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that
great city Babylon, that mighty city, for in one hour is thy judgment come.

11. And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no man
buyeth her merchandise any more.

12. The merchandise of gold and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls,
and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all
manner vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of
brass, and iron, and marble,

13. And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and
oil, and fine flower, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and
chariots, and slaves, and souls of men.

14. And the fruits that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and all
things which were dainty and goodly, are departed from thee, and thou shall
find them no more at all.

15. The merchants of these things which were made rich by her, shall stand
afar off, for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing,

16. And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen,
and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls.

17. For in one hour so great riches is come to naught. And every ship-master,
and all the company in ships, and sailers, and as many as trade by sea, stood
afar off.

18. And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is
like unto this great city?

19. And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying,
Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the
sea, by reason of her costlinesse, for in one hour is she made desolate.

20. Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets, for God
has avenged you on her.

21. And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into
the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown
down, and shall be found no more at all.

22. And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters,
shall be heard no more at all in thee: and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he
be, shall be found any more in thee: and the sound of a millstone shall be heard
no more at all in thee.

23. And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee: and the
voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee:
for thy merchants were the great men of the earth: for by thy sorceries were
all nations deceived.

24. And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that
were slain upon the earth.


Follows now the second part of this Angels discourse whereby the sad
desolation of Rome is foretold, to wit, the sad lamentation of all her friends;
it shall be so great and dreadful, as to affect and astonish them all: This is
the scope, which is clear, and we shall insist the less in the words.

The parties brought in lamenting, are of three sorts, most especially
concerned, who are sufficient as to the scope. 1 Kings, ver. 9.10. then
Merchants, ver. 11.3. Shipmen and Traders by Sea, ver. 17. All these shall join
in lamenting, but for their several ends.

The Kings, that is, some of the Kings, Chap. 17. who shall not hate her with
the rest, but shall continue favorers of the beast, till the battle of
Armageddon, they shall lament this desolation, not acknowledging Gods justice,
but affected with their own particular, and otherwise blinded. By which it is
clear, 1. That not all the ten horns, Chap. 17. but some of them, shall hate
the whore. 2. That after Romes destruction, many shall remain unsatisfied with
it, even when the prophecy is fulfilled, which says, that the fulfilling of
prophesies makes them not palpably to be so where there is prejudice formerly
drunken-in. 3. It says, that Romes desolation will be sad to many Kings that
are enemies to Christ, and therefore not be executed by them.

These Kings are such as have been partakers of her sin, and have been in love
with her external pomp and delicate way, now they have one common lamentation
with the rest, Alas, alas, that shows affection in them, and desolation on
her, that they lament for. 1. In its greatness, she is burned. 2. In its
terriblnesse, they stand afar off for fear: they cannot or dare not help her,
though they lament her. 3. In its greatness and unexpectedness, that mighty
city is destroyed in one hour. And seeing these Kings both partake of her
fornications and give their power to the beast, It must follow, that these go
together: and therefore this sin, for which Rome is ruined, is Antichrists sin,
and that defection has been derived to all the Nations from it, and by it,
before its destruction, and that for a long time, which has intoxicated or
bewitched them so to affect her.

If it be asked, why Kings so much lament, and are affected? Answ. Many of
them, or some of them, are still drunken with that wine of her fornications,
and cannot lay by that pomp of external worship, whereby their magnificence
has opportunity to kyth, and they love a natural formal way of worship, and
cannot abide the simplicity and spirituality of the Gospel. 2. They have been
for a long time entertained with counterfeit respects from that Court,
receiving titles and privileges from her that have sometimes been thought much
of, such as to be Protector Ecclesiae to the Roman Emperor, Rex Catholicus to
Spain, Rex Christianissimus to France, Defensores Ecclesiae to the Helvetians,
Defensor Fidei to the Kings of England, sanctified Swords and Banners, etc.
These vanities are now taken away from them. 3. All men (especially great men)
love an easy and lazy form of worship, such as Popery is, to get
dispensations to their oaths, unlawful incestuous Marriages (as often many
Popish Kings do, Spain with his Niece, Polland with his Brothers wife for the
time) Pardons, and Indulgences for money for their greatest sins. These things
the Kings love well, and will be in heaven as soon as any, if money will do it,
and cannot abide to want these things that give them liberty, when there is
hope by some money to recover all. 4. Enimity at Christ's way and yoke, They see
her going down makes way ^or the flourishing and spreading of the true
Religion that they still were suppressing, and that galleth them. These reasons
are from their interest. 5. Possibly also the fear of sharing in that
judgment, they being jointly someway engaged with her, it may affect them, and
that fear makes them stand afar off.

The next who lament, are the Merchants, who have their Alas. ( ver. 16.) also
upon these common grounds ( i.e. the ruin of an excellent outward glorious
City) in a general way of pity, especially considering that she, that was just
now gallant in all pomp, is suddenly brought to this desolation; yet the ground
is also more peculiar, they by their loss do lose their trade and gain in
merchandising; and thus their particular sticks to them. Therefore Merchants
are in two ways in this lamentation to be understood, 1. Literally, the
Merchants of those sorts of wares which Rome in its greatness and luxury made
use of; and that for two ends, first, In their pomp and civil outward
grandour. These four are mentioned, 1. all things serving for decking the body
gorgeously, as ver. 12. Gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen,
scarlet, purple, etc. 2. All things that adorn a house, as, Sweet-wood, ivory,
vessels of precious wood, brass, iron, ibid. ver. 12. 3. All manner of things
for pampering the body, and the table, and for savor, as Spices, cinnamon,
odours, wine, sheep, oxen, wheat, etc. ver. 13. 4. All necessaries for outward
pomp and equipage in peace and war, that is, Servants, horses, and chariots: In
a word, whatever delicious thing was desirable. These were all much made use of
at Rome, and are still by their Ecclesiastic Princes. Secondly, they are much
made use of in their external service, and manner of worship, Gold and Silver
in their Images and decorement of Churches, Purple to their Cardinals; fine
linen about, their Relicts and Mass, Tables or Altars; Oil in many things,
etc. Thus Merchants that were sure how to get these things sold at a good rate
at Rome, are now disappointed of their gain; these things fell not so well, and
they lament for it, as it is said concerning Tyrus, Ezekiel 27. but this is not
all. This sort of merchandise is still of worth, Gold, silver, etc. and though
Rome be destroyed they might have recourse elsewhere to their market; it must
therefore be some other sort of merchandise and merchants who live especially
by these wares of Rome, and whose merchandise and trade fails, when it
falls and is so peculiar to Rome, it is clear; for, this merchandise is of
souls of men, distinct from bodies (for the words, souls and bodies, in the
Original, differ in the case, to show that one thing is not understood by
both) that is, selling souls out of Purgatory, and sending them by it at their
pleasure, and trading with their Dispensations, Indulgences, etc. And by her
Merchants then must be understood their Cardinals and great Churchmen, who are
( ver. 23.) called the great men of the earth (and such a greatness is a part
of Romes sin and a cause of her ruin) whose trade is now cried down at Romes
destruction, none buyeth their wares now when their vanity is discovered (as in
a great part has been since Luthers days) These wares are such as are
peculiar to Rome, these make their great men rich; and therefore this decay
makes them cry out, Alar, ala^ 1 This is merchandising of false teachers,
spoken of 2 Pet. 2.3. who profess themselves shepherds, but feed themselves
and not the flock, Ezekiel. 34. This must be the merchandising and the Merchants
here understood; for, great men of the earth, are not for common wares, and
this trade is pitched-on here as sinful in respect of them, as committing
fornication with her was in the Kings.

Having set down the Merchants (who are the great Clergymen) their
lamentation for their temporal loss and hazard also, to wit, both lucrum
cessans, and damnum emergens, (which two are the great grounds of lamentation
among the men of the world,) He proceeds ( ver. 15.) to the lamentation of
the Ship-men and under-rowers of Peter's Bark, (as they call it) or inferior
Clergymen and Sub-ministers of the Church of Rome, who have their standing by
this trade, ver. 17. and their lamentation is much more, as having ^ more
sensible touch of their own misery in hers, They cast dust on their heads
(possibly being more blinded than others) and regrate the desolation of that
City that had no equal in her pump, and has now no equal in her ruin; yet so
they lament, as it appears what pincheth them most, She made all that traded
in ships, rich, ver. 19. not simply all, who traded in outward things, but all
her dependers in Abbacies and Convents, Priests, Jesuits, and all inferior
orders and officers, that were servants to this stately City in her
merchandise, and providing for her venting of her wares, and carrying them
through the world, and bringing back returns for the adorning of her again;
all in that Se^ are made rich: So the Merchants suit with the wares, the
Ship-men and Sea must be suitable to both, employing a trade and traffic of
Rome, sinful to her, and enriching to her servants and merchants occupied in
it, These Ship-mens standing depends on Rome, and her ruin is theirs: for,
all of that sort live by her trade, and that is the change of her Merchants:
from which it is clear, that that Sea is not literally to be taken here, but so
as serves to this Antichristian trade and end of merchandising in the forms,
laws and Ecclesiastic state of that Whore and her Clergy, who are most
useful in that employment and made up by it. The Orders are the ships and men
that trade; The Sea is the spirituality under which notion they trade. Hence
also we may see what trade inricheth Rome most (to wit, of souls) and what
holds on its Merchants, to wit, self interest; it gives them such a being as
they have in worldly esteem and grandour: and what wonder it be sad to them to
part with such a trade?

The third part of the Angels denounciation follows, verse. 20. setting out
the greatness and fullness of this ruin by the great ground of joy it should
give, and justly give to all Gods people formerly oppressed by her. The words
are by an Apostrophe spoken to others than these he was speaking to in the
words before. By Heavens, Apostles and Prophets may figuratively be understood
the great glory God shall have out of Romes destruction, so that it shall
affect heaven and be ground to them of joy; or, rather by heaven is meaned the
Church, so they come in as obeying this, Chap. 19. and they sing, And by
Apostles and Prophets is understood their successors, who are to be in the
Church unto the end. The reason why they should joy, is, because in this
judgment God has had respect to them, to vindicate them and to liberate them,
and is to take vengeance on her for them. If it be asked, how she, to wit, Rome
antichristian, was guilty of the blood of the Prophets and Apostles, verse. 20.
and all Saints, verse. 24? Or, 2. How they are to rejoice at her destruction?
Answ. 1. She is guilty of the Apostles blood as of the Prophets blood (though
she never actually shed the blood of any of them) in these three, 1. because
there is but one body, and who wrongeth any of the members on that common
account, as such, he wrongeth the head and all the rest; for, they have one
cause. 2. Because they who wrong one, they virtually wrong all; and their
malice would reach to all, if they had them, as Matthew. 23.31. ye are the
children of them that killed the prophets, for ye shall slay me, and would have
done so to them, if ye had had them. 3. They are accessory in serving
themselves heirs to the judgments of all persecuters, who have all one lot,
and who come last in, come in on the same score with the former; so is the
generation that Christ lived in, guilty of all the blood was shed from Abel's
time ( Matthew. 23.) unto that. For answer to the second, they rejoice not
carnally or selfishly; But, 1. for that they see the glory of Gods justice
manifested. 2. That they and especially the truth they suffered for, and the
threatenings they had pronounced in his name, do appear now to be vindicated and
ratified, and God owneth them, which for a long time was not believed in the
world: Thus he has judged your judgment, that is, there was still a
controversy between them and Babylon, God comes and now decideth for them,
and declares it was truth they suffered for, and not error. 3. That by this
mean, way is made to the spreading of Christ's Kingdom, the snare is removed
from many a poor soul. This is joyful to them, and upon this account they
formerly prayed for it, and this adds to their joy, when God now hears
them, and makes it appear He hears them.

The last part of the Chapter follows, from ver. 21. by the second Angel, who
by word and sign confirms this final and utter destruction of Rome. The sign
goes first, the word next, and the cause of it is set down in the close. The
sign is a mighty Angels taking up a great stone, like a millstone, and casting
it in the sea. So that as this heavy stone, which is thrown down by a mighty
Angel to the bottom of the sea, cannot but suddenly fall and not arise, so
sure shall this fall of Babylon or Romes destruction be, and that with
violence, and she shall no more be found. This is the Angels exposition, verse.
21. as taken from Ier. 51.63, 64. and spoken of old Babylon. He proceeds to
amplify this desolation, ver. 22, 23. out of Ier. 25.10, 11. where the sad
desolation of Judah is prophesied in these (almost the same) terms. 1. There
shall be no more cheerfulness and mirth there. 2. No tradsmen-usefull for man's
life there 3. No millstone, or provision meet for entertaining man's life there.
4. No light of a candle, or what is comfortable, but absolute darkness there.
5. No marrying or cheerful solemnity of that kind, without out which there can
be no continuing city. These particulars are instanced, according to the manner
of the Prophets, to set out desolation, and its continuing in the highest
degree.

The causes follow, and they are three great ones, the first is, verse. 23. for
thy merchants were the great men of the earth: whereby it is clear, 1. These
are not common traders, but such as become by this trade to be, and are
accounted, great men on the earth, though not in heaven. 2. That it must be
something sinful and peculiarly sinful to Rome, which is not to be found
elsewhere, it being given here as the first cause of their judgment, which
could not be of ordinary merchandising, but that in an extraordinary way she
employed such men (and made it a trade honorable even for the best) in such
things as were sinful, wherein even Princes thought it honorable to be
employed, and these employed were thought so; for though it be borrowed from
the traffic of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 27. yet it is to be applied spiritually, as many
other things in this prophecy, not to temporal wares, but spiritual: this
being John's way (as before was observed) to borrow expressions from the
Prophets their setting forth of temporal evils, and to apply them to
spiritual.

The second cause is her sorceries whereby many were deceived, which is to be
understood spiritually also, as the former of entysing or bewitching, ( Gal.
3.1.) to idolatry and her superstitious worship, though literally sorcery,
wherein Rome abounded, is not to be secluded, as neither in the former the
literal trading where such was.

The third sin is persecution and bloodshed, and that of all sorts, Ministers
and People; yea, she being the last persecuter and head of all the persecutions
throughout other Kingdoms, whether by Inquisitions, Massacres or Wars, she is
found justly guilty of all (upon the reasons given before) and it is now
repayed on her, though others will not be freed of the judgment.

These are the sins, now if Rome be this Babylon, (as adversaries confess)
these sins most either be the sins of heathen Rome, or of popish Rome, or of
Rome under their feigned Antichrist that must procure this judgment (for, its
ruin is not to be separated from its cause) but they cannot be sins of heathen
Rome that procures the ruin of that city, which is irreparable, such as is
here: for, 1. the sins here procuring this judgment are such as Rome is to be
actually taken in the guilt of, and many presently are acting in it; but that
idolatry and persecution of old Rome is broken off long since. 2. This ruin is
on an whore; and therefore such sins as belong to one making defection, which
cannot be applied to heathen Rome; for, this is whoring Rome that is here. 3.
These sins are a following step of idolatry and persecution, that was to be on
the earth, to wit, Antichrist after the heathenish persecution cease, as was
cleared, Chap. 6. for Saints are to be killed after that fifth seal, which is
to be performed by the beast, Chap. 13. and 17. and here it is closed.

4. These sins for which Rome is destroyed, are the sins wherewith Babylon is
formerly charged, Chap. 17. and whereof the world was guilty then, but these
were not the sins of heathen Rome, but of Antichrist, neither is it very like
that Rome so long time after will be punished for faults in thousands of years
before; or, at least, many hundreds. It follows then, 1. that that city Rome
is by this prophecy especially holden out to be a seat of antichristian
tyranny, when she is found guilty of all this blood; otherwise she would not
be so singularly plagued with him and for him. 2. That Rome presently must be
thus under this guiltiness, and that its present practice is the continuing of
this guilt; for, we cannot consider Rome guilty thus, but as either under
heathen persecuters, and this is not the guilt, for she is plagued for a
present guilt, and taken in the act of whoring, for Gods punishment is not on
the walls of a town, where such sins once were committed; but on persons,
principally, presently sinning, or continuing former guiltiness, and long
forborne, and on the walls for their cause; or, it must be considered as guilty
under an Antichrist to come, and to suffer the ruin by him; (if so he be to
come as they say) but this cannot be said either: for, 1. they say, Rome is not
to be his seat, but Jerusalem, Therefore this judgment is not due peculiarly
to Rome, if that defection be not singularily acted and plotted by it. 2. They
say, Rome is to be destroyed by him, or by the ten Kings before him; but that
destruction would be suffering innocently, and not justly for his sins, as
here. 3. This judgment of Rome is given as an evidence of Gods justice, and to
continue a time, as a ground of rejoicing to the Saints, and as a ground of
lamentation to the Kings, who supported the beast and committed fornication
with this whore: that must therefore be a longer time before the end of the
world than they make it, and cannot be by Antichrist (as they say) but for him
that its destroyed; for, that would be no rejoicing to the Saints, but mourning
to them and joy to him and his. Seeing then it is not Rome, one of these ways
considered, it must be Rome popish: for an other state of it, is not alleged
by them; yea, it is this Rome, and this destruction upon such causes yet to
come: for, it is to be done by Kings that in John's time had not dominion, but
were to receive it, and after to give it for a time to the beast, and were to
commit whoredom with this whore, and then after that to hate her and destroy
her. Again, it appears here also, that many will stick in their doting, to
lament Rome, even after its ruin, which certainly could not be, if they
understood this Prophecy. It is no marvel then it be dark to many as yet, who
stick so to that Antichrist then as if he were not Antichrist; So, it is like,
many will defend this Babylon at its ruin, as if it were not the Babylon
spoken of here. The Jews still reject clear Prophesies of Christ and of their
destruction for rejecting Him. Prophesies then after their fulfilling are clear
to such whose eyes God opens only, and are not discerned by all, as Papists
speak. 3. Hence also we may gather, it is but foolish pity that is shown on
Romes greatness in her self or pendicles, such as Abbacies, Monasteries, etc.
Gods justice should be acknowledged on them, and none should thus lament over
them. 4. It must follow then, that the way of worship now at Rome, must be
fornication and sorcery; their executions, persecutions, their selling of
Pardons, etc. the merchandising condemned here.

LECTURE 1.
CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. ANd after these things I heard a great voice of much people in
heaven, saying, Alleluja, salvation,and glory, and honor, and power unto the
Lord our God:

2. For true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great
whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the
blood of his servants at her hand.

3. And again they said Alleluja, and her smoke rose up for ever and ever.

4. And the four and twenty elders, and the four beasts fell down and
worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Alleluja.

5. And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.

6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of
many waters, and as the voice of mighty thundrings, saying, Alleluja: for the
Lord God omnipotent reigns.

7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready.


THe scope of this Chapter is more fully to explain the events of the sixth
vial, Chap. 16. which was more abruptly left there, without showing the event
of that battle of Armageddon, which is supplied here. That it does belong to
the sixth vial, (beside what was said Chap. 16.) does appear from these things,
1. That this is subjoyned to the exposition of the fifth vial, Chap. 18. and
includes other events not on the seat of the beast, but on the beast himself,
who surviveth his seat, and its placed before the exposition of the seventh
vial, the object whereof is not the beast (as in this Chapter) and his
adherents only, but Satan's kingdom indefinitly, who is taken ( Chap. 20.) and
casten into the lake, where the beast and false prophet are before him, as
being cast in there by this sixth vial. This then belonging to an event after
the fifth, and before the seventh, it must be applied to the sixth, by which,
and under which, the beast must end before the seventh come, as his throne did
by the fifth.

2. It is clear, that the event of this battle, described here, is the event of
the same battle, whereof the preparation is set down, Chap. 16. under the sixth
vial: It must therefore belong to it; for, all these vials bring judgment on
the beast: and if this event belong not to the sixth vial but the preparation
only, which was Chap. 16. then it cannot bring a plague on him; for, the plague
consists not in preparation to the battle, but in the cross event of it to
him, which this Chapter sets down, and mentions nothing of his preparing
for it, because that was done, Chap. 16. but proceeds to the event, which was
suspended there in its discovery. That sixth vial contained two notable
effects, one showing the increase of the Church, and a notable accession to
her; the second showing the rage of Antichrist at that, answerable to which
this nineteenth Chapter has two parts, 1. Of exulting at these glad tidings,
unto ver. 10. 2. Of the Beasts overthrow and his helpers, from ver. 11. to the
end. That which is casten-in, ver. 10. is not prophetical, but the record of a
particular of John's carriage, and the Angel's, whereby way is made from one
part of the explication to the other.

The Song has three parts, The first is more general, respecting the former
deliverance, ver. 1, 2, 3, and 4. The second is more particular, respecting, as
the ground of it, the present state of the Church, and a more special way of
Christ's reigning in her, from ver. 5. to ver. 8. Thirdly, This ground of joy is
more fully explained and confirmed, ver. 8, 9.

The first part expresses the Churches rejoicing over Romes destruction, and a
special invitation they give to the Jews to praise God with them, answerable
to that invitation, Isa. 2.5. The second shows what welcome they shall give
them when they shall come in, so both do look some way to the Jews calling, as
was shown Chap. 16. and is so to be applied. The Gentiles now taking occasion,
when this stumbling block of Popery is taken out of the way, to stir up and
provoke the Jews to join with them. This agrees well to the time of the Jews
calling, which must be before the end. 2. It agrees well to these prophesies,
Isa. 2.5. and Mic. 4.3, 4, 5. and Isa. 24. where such exhortations are
foretold. 3. It suiteth well with these phrases here of Alleluja in hebrew,
because it is spoken to them, which in former songs is not used. 4. That these
made ready, are the Lambs wife, as having a former interest in Him, and that
peculiarly He reigns, now when they come in, as Isa. 24. ver. 23. All which
could not be well said without them.

The first Song has two parts, 1. Of many in heaven, as it were more
promiscuously. 2. Of the Elders and Beasts, more orderly, ver. 4. By the first
is understood the joy that shall be in Heaven amongst all the Saints in the
Church militant in their private stations. By the second is understood the
solemn acknowledging of God and giving of Him praise in the Congregation. By
these in Heaven we understand these who ( ver. 5.) are called. All that fear
God, small and great: which taketh-in especially these who are so accounted
here on earth in the militant Church, which is often called Heaven: it will be
no error to take it properly also, there being joy at the conversion of one,
much more at such an accession as this; Their joy is in a vision in Heaven, set
out to John here. The second circumstance, is the time of this joy, After these
things, implying not only the order of John's seeing, but the order of
succeeding, to wit, after Romes destruction, and the lamentation of her
friends, this Song arises. If any ask, Why this Song is after their
lamentation? These two reasons may be given, 1. ^piritual grounds of joy affect
Saints more slowly than temporal grounds of loss do men of the world; the one
is sooner sensible of this, than the other of that. 2. Because this joy has
not only respect to Babylons ruin in it self, but to the events of the Churches
enlargement, that was to follow the removing of that stumbling block out of the
way: therefore it is reserved to begin the event of the sixth vial.

The Song of the Saints, or Church, in general, is, 1. generally propounded,
ver. 1. 2. The grounds of the joy laid down, ver. 2. and confirmed, ver. 3. The
first word is, Alleluja, and it is an Hebrew word, of Hallel and Iab, and is on
the matter that same with praise God, ver. 5. for, so they answer Halleluja. It
is often the beginning and close of many Psalms; it is not used out of any
superstitious account of syllables or letters in this word, as if they were
more holy than others; but that their multiplying of Hebrew words and praises
in them, or exhortations to praise, may now suit with the present scope, which
is to point-out the increase of Christ's praise now after Romes destruction by
the Hebrews; and there can be no other reason why it is so often repeated here,
being in no other place mentioned, where Songs are used, and yet some peculiar
reason thereof may warrantably he enquired after.

More particularly, the praise is expressed in four words, rendering unto God
Salvation, glory, etc. which were before ( Chap. 5.) spoken of. In a word, it
is, the praise of all those be to Him who alone deserves it.

The grounds of all this praise are, ver. 2. In general, His Judgments are
true, that is, His threatenings are fulfilled; or, what is threatened comes to
pass, and takes hold of folks as well as His mercies: so ( Ezekiel. 1.6.) His
word of threatening sticks to a people, when the Prophets who did threaten are
gone. And as they are true, so they are righteous, and not inflicted but on
just grounds that will stop the mouths of all His censurers. Both these are
proven in this great instance of judging the whore, who was justly condemned in
that she corrupted the earth, and deluded the world with her abominations: and
truth kythed in it, in that by it He show Himself the avenger of much innocent
blood shed by her, which vengeance He had often threatened against her, and now
He had performed it.

The repetition for confirmation follows, ver. 3. and again they said,
Alleluja, 1. to show it was no passing fit, but that they continued in the
practice of that duty, and under the conviction of their obligation to it, and
were withal hearty in it. 2. To show they were not soon satisfied in
performing this duty: for, they fall to it over and over again; and therefore
they stir up all, and vent it in an exhortation to all to join with them: An
heart rightly thankful, is not soon satisfied with its own praise. The ground
is further illustrated, that Romes judgment is irrecoverable and great, yea,
perpetual; therefore they praise as being put to continue in it, by the
continuance of that ground; for her smoke is continual, rising up for ever and
ever.

Their solemn thanksgiving, is, ver. 4. tThe Elders and Beasts, (signifying
People and Ministers, as we show, Chap. 4.) they concur solemnly by falling
down jointly, (which is to worship publicly) and putting to their seal in two
words to the former praise, Ame^, that is, so be it; or, He is well worthy to
whom it should be given, Let it be so, in a confident wish and prayer, and
Alleluja, they can express no more, but count God worthy, and invite others
(especially the Jews, for whose sake this is in Hebrew) to give God praise.

The second part of the Song, which is in reference to the Jews calling
especially, follows from ver. 5. to ver. 8. There is, 1. the party exhorting.
2. The party exhorted. 3. The exhortation it self. 4. The grounds of it. And,
5. obedience thereunto, which is a part of the Song in general.

The party exhorting, is, A voice from the Throne, that is, from Heaven, or
from the Sanctuary, representing Ministers serious pressing of people to
rejoice and be glad in this joyful event, and to praise God for it; or, it is
the voice of Jesus Christ, calling God His God as He is Mediator; or, of an
Angel, having his warrant, as by ver. 8, 9, 10. appears in his refusing
worship from John, if the party speaking here be the same that John falls
down before there.

The parties exhorted to this duty, are Gods Servants, called afterward those
that fear Him both small and great, that is, all His house who acknowledge Him
as Lord and Master: for, though all creatures some way be His servants, Psalm.
119.91. yet here they are taken more properly, either for such as are by
Covenant His servants, by tie and profession separated to be such unto God, as
all Israel, even the children were, Lev. 23.47, etc. Or, more especially, for
Believers, who by their practice manifest their respecting of this obligation
in giving Him fear, and that of all sorts, high and low, strong and weak, etc.

The exhortation is to Praise, and that our God, which wants not an emphasis
in praising more than in other duties, as Deuteronomy. 28. the great and dreadful
Name of the Lord your God: that makes praise and all duties to come kindly
from us, and be accepted graciously by Him, when it is founded upon a
Covenant Relation: thus it is not only praise, but so qualified in its object,
our God, that is called-for.

The obedience follows which expresses the grounds, verse. 6, 7. There are
many that go about the work, therefore it is called like the noise of many
waters, and like great thunderings: not to hold out confusion or terriblnesse
in their Song, but greatness in it and earnestness in them who sing, it is
loudness in their Song: which in its matter is distinctly set down from two
grounds (beside their concurring in the former Alleluja, and inviting others to
concur) The first ground, is, the Lord God omnipotent reigns. This is not
Gods ordinary sovereignty, whereby He guides all the world, (for that has no
interruption) but this is the manifesting of that sovereignty at special times
and in special events in the guiding of His Church. This, as before men,
seems sometimes to be eclipsed, as where it is said, ( Chap. 11.) that God
has taken to Him His power and reigns, which He seemed for a time to
neglect. This then is understood here: for, this being a peculiar expression of
praise, it looks to a pecullar manner of His appearing and reigning: Which is
two ways spoken of, 1. When it is evidenced in signal overthrows of His
enemies, so Antichrists overthrow is an evidence that God reigns, Chap. 11.
whose dominion seemed before to be obscured while he stood. See Psa. 59.13. 2.
When there is an accession to the Church, as Chap. 11. when Nations become the
Lords and His Christ's; and more especially, His reclaiming of Israel, and
appointing David their King over them, is looked on as a special part and
evidence of His dominion, as Isa. 24.23. Ezekiel. 34. Micah 4.7. This is when they
shall cry Hosanna, unto Him who comes in the Name of the Lord: for, that being
a part of Christ's promised Kingdom, there is some seeming want in His outward
sovereign reign, so long as this is wanting, Now, say they, Alleluja, the Lord
reigns over Jews as well as Gentiles: for as the in-coming of the Gentiles is
a more eminent step of His reign and marriage than was before, when the Jews
were only the Church; so that the Jews accession to the Church, is as another
remarkable step (when they shall be called-in) beyond what was when the
Gentiles were only His Church.

The exhortation is renewed, verse. 7. with a new ground, le^ us be glad and
rejoice: it is a duty and a great part of praise, even to rejoice in God; it
honors him. The other word proves this that relates to God, let us give
honor to him. This accession is acknowledged to be from Him, and therefore the
honor of it is due to Him. The first part sets out the inward affection in
praising; the second, their outward expressing of it to Gods honor. The reason
is twofold, which is subjoyned, yet to one scope, 1. For the marriage of the
Lamb is come. Christ's marriage with His Church is three ways spoken of in
Scripture, 1. As it comes by the offer of the Gospel, wherein many are
espoused and by faith engaged to Him, 2 Corinthians. 11.2. Thus it has been even
since Christ's days, His marriage was then and many were and are invited, Mat.
22. etc. 2. As it is consummated and perfected at the end, when the Queen is
brought to the King, and abides with Him for ever, Ps. 45. 3. There is an
interveening step, when the fullness of the Gentiles and the Jews shall be
brought in together, that is, marrying eminently, because it i^ the grafting-in
again of the old Branches and the bringing back of a divorced Wife, for a time
forsaken. And because then eminently there will be an accepting of the bargain
of Grace, on the marriage terms, as if what passed had been but wooing in
respect of this following enlargement: And as in Scripture there is a threefold
Resurrection, 1. by the Gospel, which was and is always, Ioh. 5. The dead shall
hear the voice, etc. Ephesians. 5. verse. 14. Secondly, at the end, which is general,
as the first is particular. 3. When Jews and Gentiles shall come in together,
which ( Romans 11.) is as life from the dead, which is between the two former. So
may we consider the Churches marriage with Christ, which is the same with the
Resurrection, in a threefold consideration also. It is not the first nor the
second marriage that is mentioned here; for it is in a singular way such a
marriage as wa^ not before, and the last end is not intended here: for, that
last marriage, does not comprehend an accession to the militant Church, as this
does here, going along with the Popes overthrow before the end. It is
therefore that of the fullness of the Gentiles incoming, and the Jews
re-ingrafting especially, who are here called his Wife: not as all Believers
are, but even in some respect such before their calling. For it is His Wife He
is to be married with, which is peculiar to the Jews, who in some respect stand
in a tie and relation to God by that Covenant with Abraham, etc. which is not
with any other Nation that can come in then to the Church, as appears from
Romans 11.26, 27, etc. for, they are beloved for the Fathers sake, when broken
off, and the Fathers sake relates to the Covenant made with them. So His Wife
here, holds forth the in-coming of the Jewish Nation, to accept of their long
d^spised Bridegroom, and their returning to their first husband, and David
their King, which is said of them to be fulfilled in the latter days, Hos. 2.

The reasons why we expound this of the Jews, are, 1. Because they speak of
this accession to the Church as of some excellent new thing, and calls them
singularly the Lambs Wife; and therefore they must be distinct from the Gentile
Church, who do thus style them and make them welcome: for, these titles are
given especially to these who are now lately joined and made ready for their
Husband and Marriage. 2. Because there can be no such grounds of praise, if the
Jews were not here included. For, 1. it is His reigning in the most eminent way
in His Church; 2. it is the Churches eminent step of glory unto, and readiness
for her marriage; and can that be without the Jews? 3. Neither can there be
such joy, as if now nothing were wanting, if the Jews in-coming, which is
fore-prophesied of, as life from the dead ( Romans 11.) were yet defective.
Beside, that these titles and expressions have a peculiar suitableness and
sibnesse with the Jews, as is said before. Her being made ready, is, her being
made suitable and fit for such a work and Bridgroom, to wit, with the wedding
Garment, Matthew. 22. which is says and holiness; and she is content to take
Him, and longs for a Church State to own Him. She is said to make her self
ready, not as if in her own strength she fitted her self; for, that is contrary
to what follows, To her it was given; whatever she had, she got it freely, it
was not her own. But it implies, 1. that she must be made ready for Him:
common garments are not for that wedding, Matthew. 22. 2. That she is active in
it, in purifying her self as He is pure, from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, 1 Job. 3. 2. Corinthians. 7.1. 3. That what makes her ready, is something
performed by her, to wit, her believing, which yet is done in His strength; and
all the marriage depends on that. Now, she despises no longer, but lays by
her enimity, and submits. It shows the manner how she came to be made
ready, or the putting away antecedently of what marred her; but it shows not
the strength, by which she is made ready: the next verse adjoined guardeth
against that.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 8. And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

9. And he says unto me, Write, blessed are they which are called unto the
marriage supper of the Lamb. And he says unto me, These are the true sayings
of God.

10. And I fell at his feet to worship him: and he said unto me, See thou do it
not: I am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of
Jesus, worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.


THis eighth verse does more fully clear, and the ninth more fully confirm what
went immediately before concerning the Lambs marriage, and the making ready of
His Wife. There are two things cleared in the 8. verse. 1. What it is to be
ready. It is to be clothed in fine linen, clean and white, which is the
righteousness of Saints. 2. How she is made ready, thus, to her it was
granted, i.^. freely given that she should be clothed. The two things, which
are confirmed, are, 1. That it is certain, there is such a thing coming as the
marriage of the Lamb spoken of. 2. That it shall be the great happiness of any
that shall be called unto it: Both which are confirmed, 1. by ^speciall command
to write them, as things that should certainly come to pass. 2. In that they
were not the sayings of Men nor Angels, but the true sayings of God, who is
Truth it self, verse. 9. Both these, to wit, the explication and confirmation,
may be considered more generally, as they yield general doctrines, or, more
specially and prophetically, as they relate to the present scope.

The 8. verse. has three things in it, 1. Who is this made ready. 2. What this
readiness is. 3. How she comes by it.

The party made ready is her, that is, the wife formerly mentioned, verse. 7. to
wit, the Jews: for, the Gentile Church is before this adorned, Chap. 12.1. etc.
The word is (...), that signifies, 1. one espoused only, as Mary was to
Joseph, before they came together, Matthew. 1. this in the Latin is called
sponsa. Or, 2. it is taken for one brought to her Husband, and joined to him,
this the Latins call uxor. It is here taken especially in the first sense, so
that the Jews, that stood before their actual calling in a special
Covenant Relation with Christ, (which is not yet fully obliterated and
dissolved, as concerning the Covenant made with the Fathers, Romans 11.26.) are
now made ready. 2. This readiness is now set out in two expressions, 1.
figuratively, she is clothed in fine ^ linen, clean and white. 2. More
plainly, it is the righteousness or justification of the Saints. Both may be
two ways understood. 1. Of Christ's imputed righteousness, whom we are said to
put on, Romans 13. ult. and Gal. 3. when by faith we are united to Him and made
partakers of His righteousness for the hiding of our nakedness, as in His
counsel to Laodicea, Chap. 3. 2. It may be understood of inherent
righteousness, which also in some respect we are said to put on, Col. 3.12. In
the first sense, it is called clean and white simply, for so Christ's
righteousness is without spot. In the second sense, it is so comparatively;
or, it is cleanness and whiteness not absolute, but in respect of what they
were, and in respect of the holiness of other times; This shall now be more.
2. The righteousness or justification of the Saints is also two ways
understood, 1. for a righteousness before men, evidencing their justification
before God; so it is said, ( Iam. 2.) that Abraham was justified by his works.
2. For that which indeed just fieth and is the cause of our justification
before God; and so ( Romans 4.) Abraham was not justified by works, not only
excluding all the works of the ceremonial Law (for it was then not given) but
even of the moral Law. But he was justified by faith in Jesus Christ, which
was imputed to him for righteousness; the former, is the same with inherent
righteousness, the latter is called imputed. Now, though we take in both here,
as they are always conjoined and go together (and holiness serves in a
special way to make ready and meet for enjoying Christ in Glory, when these
garments shall be fully white) yet we understand here Christ's imputed
righteousness, or, the righteousness of faith especially, as that which
makes the Lambs wife ready, and that for these reasons, 1. This clothing is
that which is the righteousness of all Saints, and that before God; but that
of faith, was Abraham's before the Law, Romans 4. David's under the Law, Psalm. 32.
with Romans 4. and Paul's under the Gospel, Philip. 3.9. therefore so here. 2.
Christ's righteousness is only spotless and clean, ours is unclean, the best
being filthy. 3. This readiness is that upon which the marriage with Christ
stands, and serves to close with Him in that Covenant; but that is in the
offer, he that believes s^^ll be saved: and it is the want of that, that
casts and marreth the making of the marriage; for, holiness inherent
preceedeth not our union with Christ, which is our marriage, but follows our
consent (when the bargain is closed) as duties of a person married. 4. It
agrees best with the scope in reference to the in-coming of the Jews, they are
made ready and brought in by the contrary of that for which they were cast off;
but that ( Romans 11.) was unbelief, stumbling at the stumbling stone, in going
about to establish their own righteousness, and not submitting to His, Romans 9.
and 10. verse. 3. Therefore now, that which makes them ready, must be faith and
submission to Christ's righteousness. 5. This agrees best with, and is clear
from, the expressions setting forth the manner how she is made ready, and that
in two expressions, she is clothed with it: that speaks to the resemblance
of putting on something from without, in which this readiness and decoring
consists, and not of what is within, as Rev. 3. which points at imputing of
righteousness. 2. That it was granted to her, to show it was not of her self,
it was given and freely given and gifted to her: which says, it is not
inherent holiness; for, that someway infers debt, and is opposed to grace,
Romans 4.9. and 11. Ephesians. 2. but it is of grace, which is the same with faith,
that it might be free, Romans 4.16. Ephesians. 2. and that to all the seed: by which it
appears how we are to reconcile verse. 7. with this.

Thus if we look to the scope, as it is prophetical, this Verse says, 1. that
these Jews, on whom blindness and hardness has layen long, shall in the end
in due time be brought in to believe on Jesus Christ, and to submit to that
righteousness which is common to all Saints, Gentiles as well as Jews, and to
take that one way of salvation with the Gentiles, which they have so long
rejected; God shall freely re-ingraft them again in His Church by that same
faith which they despised. 2. That they at their in-coming into the Church of
God at that time, shall be more eminently shining in holiness than formerly,
when the Gentiles shall provoke the Jews; and there shall be a holy emulation
amongst them, more fully to adorn the profession of the Gospel, then shall the
number of believers be increased, and their qualifications of holiness at a
higher pitch, This flourishing estate is promised whatever be of external
peace.

The confirmation follows, verse. 9. where consider, 1. who confirms. 2.
What he confirms. 3. How. First, The person confirming, is not God or Jesus
Christ (for, it had not been a fault, verse. 10. to have worshipped hmi) but is
an Angel: it is like, that Angel, who, ( Chap. 17.) came to show John the
judgment of the whore, and whom, it is like, God made use of, to show John the
things to come, Chap. 1.1. That which he confirms in an extraordinary way by
a special commission to write, that the thing may be the more observed, is set
down in these words, Blessed are they who are called unto the marriage supper
of the Lamb. The Lamb, is our Lord Jesus, often called so. His marriage here,
is that verse. 7. especially of the Jews in-calling to faith in him. It
signifies, 1. that betwixt Christ and believers there is a mutual tie,
consent and obligation of each to other. 2. That it is real. 3. A near tie. 4.
Kindly and loving. 5. Indissolvable. 6. For believers advantage, to share of
what He has. It shows, in a word, a kindly and loving relation between
Christ and them beyond what is betwixt Him and others. It is called a marriage
supper, not mainly from that custom, as if then suppers had been most rise
feasting times at Marriages, what ever truth be in it: for ( Mat. 22.3.) it is
called a dinner that the guests are invited unto: but this seems to be the
cause, that Matthew. 22. looks to the Jews first calling at the preaching of
the Gospel which they rejected: and it is called a dinner, they being more
timely invited to it with the first. This again looks to their calling, which
shall be made effectual when the day draws near to an end at their
restoring; therefore it is called the marriage supper, as more immediately
preceding the solemnizing fully of the Bridegrooms Marriage, when the Queen
shall be brought to His Palace, and the firstborn shall be gathered together.

By Called here, are understood, 1. those who are effectually so; for, they are
blessed and glorified, Romans 8.30. Yea, 2. called even outwardly: Now, they of
the Jews that shall be called to the Supper, are more happy than those who were
called at the first to the Dinner; for, God shall make them generally more
obedient, and the iron sinew shall be taken out of their neck, and the vail
from off their eyes, and they shall generally yield to this Call and flow like
doves to their windows to this Gospel; therefore are they blessed and happy.
Thus these who are called by this happiness, are not only opposed to these who
are not called at all, or only to such who are called and not chosen, Matthew.
20. But this second Call of the Jews is opposed, thus, to the first, Mat. 22.
which is, in a word, that the Jews after their re-ingrafting shall be generally
more blessed, by being made to yield to the call of the Gospel, than those who
did live under the first offer thereof. So, the things prophetically confirmed
are two, 1. That there is a second calling of the Jews, or feast of Christ's
Marriage to come, beside what was at first at the Dinner, a new offer to be
made to the Jews before the end of the world, and a new and most beautiful
luster to be put upon the Church. 2. That they shall be blessed and happy
beyond the former Jews that shall be called to this, as is said.

This truth is confirmed two ways, 1. by a special command to write; Write,
says he, as Chap. 14.13. importing a singular excellency in the thing. 2. A
great certainty in it, that it may be recorded ad futuram r^i memoriam, as Paul
signifies in expressing that of the Jews calling, Romans 11. 3. A difficulty in
believing or receiving the truth so pressed. And a second way he confirms
this, is, These are the true sayings of God; it is from the Author of them and
His nature and the nature of all His sayings; they are (says he) not Men's nor
Angels words, (for, there might be a lie in both these) but they are Gods, all
whose words are Truth, He Himself being Truth, He Himself being God who cannot
lie: and yet as in these sayings concerning the happiness of these called,
there is (as it were) a singular eminency of His faithfulness; so in special
these are His true sayings, and will take effect.

The 10. ver. is notable, by expressing the infirmity of an eminent Saint, and
the Angels rejecting of that worship intended to him by John, with several
reasons, as if purposly he would rectify men in that point of will worship, in
giving that religious adoration to creatures though most excellent, which alone
is due to God.

John's infirmity is set down in these words, And I fell at his feet to worship
him. Worship implies three things, 1. An act in the judgment, taking up an
excellency in the object worshipped. 2. An act of the will, yielding it
conformly to that apprehended excellency. 3. An external act of the body; This
may be common to all sorts of worship. Further we may consider a twofold
adoration, or worship, mentioned in Scripture, that is allowable; one is
Religious, and is a special duty due to God, and commanded in the first Table
of the Law; the other is Civil, which is due to creatures, and commanded in the
second Table. Again, this second sort is twofold: the first, is that which
proceeds from a reverencing of men for their stations or relations, whatever
their qualifications be, as Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, great Men, etc. The
second, is a reverentiall worshipping of men for their qualifications of wisdom
and holiness, so we respect good men though they be not great, as Act. 2.47.
Such living Saints get, and in a greater measure Angels may have when they
appear; such was that which Abraham and Lot gave to the Angels, Genesis 18. and
19. supposing them to be men. All these are lawful.

There is also an idolatrous and sinful worship, and that is, when what is due
to the Creator is given to any creature, and that either more grossly to Idols,
Images, etc. (called worshipping of devils) or, more subtle, to Saints, as that
of Cornelius to Peter. Act. 10. and that to Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14. and is
also of diverse sorts. This here is not of the first two sorts: for, it is not
condemnable to worship God, nor to give holy Men and Angels due reverence; But
it is this third sort, an unlawful worship, as appears by the Angels
rejecting it with so much zeal and earnestness, these two ways expressed, 1.
By a vehement prohibition, See thou do it not: there is no more in the
Original but, See no, an abrupt cutted expression, such as is used when men
hasten to prevent something they abhor and would fain prevent. 2. It is
expressed by the pressing arguments he uses, which are two, 1. This is not my
due to be so worshipped, I am (says the Angel) thy fellowservant, not thy
Lord, and the fellow servants of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus,
and are employed in his Ministry; we have but one Ministry, 1. The Angels to
the Prophets, then the Prophets to the Church, Therefore are Ministers called
Angels, and Angels Ministers. The second argument is taken from Gods
prerogative, to whom only such worship is due, W^rship God, says he, I am not
God, and that is alone due to Him: therefore give it not to me but to Him,
allowing by the one argument no such worship to creatures, and by the other
appropriating it all to God.

He confirms, in the close, his arguments, (especially the first) thus, For
the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy: which may be thus
understood, the Spirit of Prophecy and revealing of these things is not mine,
but it is Jesus Christ's; hence it may be called the testimony of Jesus, as
belonging peculiarly to Him: therefore worship is not due to me, who am but a
servant with thee; Or, to the same purpose, reading the words as they lie, I am
thy fellow servants, for the testimony of Jesus, or the ministry of the Gospel,
(called so for its bearing witness to Christ, in which respect, Ministers are
often called Witnesses. See Chap. 22.8.) is the Spirit of prophecy, that is,
is also His gift and way of revealing secrets and edifying of others, as this
more immediate message which I bear is, they are of the same nature and kind of
service, and therefore from these who are employed in one of them, religious
worship is not due to the other, they being fellow servants.

For more clear opening the doctrine contained in the words, it may be asked,
1. If John sinned? 2. What sort of sin? 3. How he, being such an eminent
servant of Christ, and in the midst of such revelations, fell into it.

First, That he sinned, we suppose is clear, 1. in that he never fell to
worship an Angel before, though he had seen and spoken with sundry, he is not
reproved for that, for this. 2. By the nature of the reproof, See thou do it
not, especially considering it again renewed, Chap. 22. as of an heinous sin.
3. By the reasons whereby John is rejected, as having aimed to give that to a
creature, which was due to God the Creator, and not to it: which reasons do
reject that worship, not for complement, but on such grounds as conclude that
none such is due to any Angel.

For the second, we may easily discern the kind of sin, but more hardly in what
respect he fell into it; for kind, it is (no question) idolatry, in giving that
to a creature which is due to God. Now, there is a twofold idolatry. 1. Against
the first Command, that is, when folks err in the object of their worship,
giving it to another than God: this is of three sorts, 1. to what has no
being, as to such idols, which are nothing; 2. to what has a being, good or
bad creatures, Angels, devils, sun, moon, heaven, etc. 3. More subtly, when
one makes gold his confidence, as Job speaks, Chap. 31. or his belly or some
lust his god: in which respect, covetousness is called idolatry, Col. 3.5.
Secondly, Idolatry against the second Command, is not a miscarrying in the
object, but in the manner of worshipping Him, who alone is the true object of
religious worship, as when men worship God by other means or midses than He
has prescribed. Such was Aarons making the calf to Jehovah, Ieroboam's putting
up the calves at Dan and Bethel: both these sorts are rise amongst the Papists.
Now, for this of John's, it is especially and directly of the first kind.

If it be asked, why John fell now in this sin, and not before? It can hardly
be said that he fell in this fault only upon mistake of the person, as if he
had supposed him to be Christ that spoke to him. For, 1. it is like John knew
it was that Angel, spoken of, Chap. 17.1. who did still speak to him; for, so
we conceive the same Angel to continue his undertaking, to show John the
whore's judgment, which yet to the end of the Chapter is not finished in her
supporter. 2. If that had been the mistake, he needed not then have fallen into
it again, Chap. 22.8. after he was taught in this point. 3. Had that been his
mistake, the Angel needed say no more, but tell him he was not Christ; but the
Angel's answers are to rectify him in the grounds of his practice, as
proceeding from a mistake in what was due to God and to Angels; and his answer
being to remedy his failing, we may the more warrantably read, out of the
contrary directions which the Angel gives him, what was his failing: This
therefore is not the ground. We conceive it then to flow from these three
together surprising the holy man, 1. The glorious appearance of the Angel. 2.
The good news he told him. 3. John's weakness and the nature of our corruption
in departing from God, which is in some measure in the strongest. Now,
considering these three to meet together, it is no wonder that John was
suprised, as it were, even to the f^rgetting of himself, and falling down now
to worship once and again, which he had not formerly done; thus the good news
of the Church on earth here, and of the Church in heaven, ( Chap. 22.8.) again
affects him so. Alcasar acknowledges the same reason: From which we may
conclude, 1. The sinfulness of worshipping Angels, Saints, or any other thing
by religious worship. This Argument makes it out, That which is condemned in
John, is not to be practiced by any; But this is condemned in John. Ergo, etc.
Papists, to eschew this argument and defend their idolatry, run in two extreme
answers, whereof the one overturneth the other. 1. They say, he sinned in
mistaking the person only, and so giving Latria to Angels, whereas Dulia is
only due to them: But this is refuted, 1. in that before it is shown this was
not the ground of John's practice. 2. The Angel's arguments are not only against
this sort of worship, but all worship, and admits of no middle-worship, as
we will hear, but will have all directed to God.

But seeing it cannot be denied, but John understood that this was an Angel, and
not Christ, and that therefore he intended not (...) to the messenger (as
Viegas, Cornelius a Lapide, and Alcasar upon this place, do not only
acknowledge, but confirm:) It is therefore, secondly, their way to allege,
that John sinned not, but that he did his duty: and because that digesteth
hardly, considering the Angel's repeated reproof, they are therefore put to it
to invent reasons, why the Angel does reject this duty, and say, 1. it is but
for complement, to show his humility; 2. to testify their respect to Christ,
who is now man; therefore they shun honor now of men (whereas they say now, it
is on a mistake, as if he who received this honor at any time under the Law,
had been a created Angel) Or, say some, for respect to John's person, or office,
or merits, wherein he was above Angels, especially by his virginity, and
therefore it is no wonder Angels refused it from him.

Unto all which, we reply, 1. Thta it is no wonder that men go wild, when they
give way to their own inventions, and rest not satisfied in the reasons given
by the Angel.

2. It must be a strong addictednesse to idolatry, that when we have it out of
an Angels mouth twice from heaven, yet will we not acquiesce in it, but rather
say the Angel was wrong, than amend that fault.

3. We have shown, that this is sinful in John, when it is thus thrust away by
the Angel once and again, and that upon such arguments as inferred that God was
wronged by it; for, what is that a^gument, worship God? If it be of any force,
as to the Angel's exhortation, Worship not any but God, it must imply, that his
worsh^pping of the Angel was not a worshipp^ng of God, but a derogation to it,
and that wor^hipping of God could not have been consistent with worshipping of
him, otherwise he might have worshipped God and the Angel also, which breaks
the force of the Angel's consequence, which opposes them as inconsistent
together.

It is wonderful therefore, that Be^llarmine should fall in that impudency (
D^ sanct^ b^^titud. lib. 1. cap. 14.) as to press an argument for worshipping
of Angels from this place, thus, Either (says he) John took it to be Christ,
whom he w^rshipped, and so h^ sinned by giving the Angel divine honor; or, he
knew him to be an Angel, and yet worshipped him, which (says he) is a copy to
us; for, if John knowingly worshipped an Angel, so should we, and whether does
John or the Calvinists (so he speaks) know best what is due to Angels? and
this he confirms, If it had not been duty, then (says he) John would not
have done it after the first admonition; for, he was neither forgetfu^l nor
indocile.

Answ. If worshipping of Angels arise from this place, certainly it may be
gathered any where; and seeing the weight of i^ lies here, that if it had been
sinful, John would no^ have done it, and this supposes John to have had no
corruption, and says nothing to the arguments formerly alleged. It may more
easily be re^orted, thus, Either in this p^actic^ John si^ned, or the Angel;
But it cannot be said that the Angel sinned in reproving of him for doing this:
T^erefore John sinned in doing it.

It cannot be said, that neither sinned: For, 1. there is an opposition, the
one disalloweth what the other practices, and if any thing be gathered from
John's relapsing in that deed, Chap. 22.8. the same may be urged still, either
he sinned in renewing of thi^ pract^ce, or the Angel in renewing his reproof:
for, he does again follow his reproof, and that more hotely than formerly. 2.
They cannot both be right here: for, John did no^ worship this Angel formerly;
and if the former was no sin, this must be: neither is i^ to be thought that
the Angel would have confirmed John by this reproof in his former error. 3.
The Angel not only refuses John's worship, but refuses it with reasons, which
will admit no such ^vasi^n: For, either the Angel really abhorred this fact as
he expre^sed, or he did dis^mble; But this last cannot be said. Ergo, etc.
Alcasar confesses, that these reasons which they give, will not hold, and that
it is beside the T^xt to allege any other than the Angel mentions; he does
therefore excogitat (forsooth) a judicious exposition, and says, the Angel
here is Peter, and that, Chap. 22. is Paul, and that they refuse worship from
John their Colleague, as their great Churchmen do from one another, who use to
say to each other in their low courtesies, ke^p that (meaning their humbling of
themselves) to the Sacrament of the altar. He makes that objection to himself
why Peter, being the Prince of the Apostles, refuses that honor which John
was offering. He answers, that it is truth, that in the first ages of the
Church the Popes used not to be so reverently worshipped, their pomp was not
come to an height, Therefore Peter refused it, as being loath at that time that
it should be known how great they were. In all which fooleries we may see what
it is to thwart with clear Scripture.

2. We may conclude the fal^hood of that distinction of Dulia from Latria, as a
mid-worship between Divine and Civil. If the Angel would admit no worship to
him, Then there is no such thing; But he rejects all without distinction.
This is clear, 1. by the opposition he makes, worship God, and so leaves no
religious worship to any but to God. 2. By this, John gave not (...) to him,
but (...), for, he knew him to be an Angel; but the Angel casts that which
John gave him: therefore he admits no mid-worship.

3. This distinction will enervate both the Angels reasons why he casts that
worship. The first, I am thy companion, and ( Chap. 22.9.) companion of all
that keep the sayings of this Book, etc. therefore do it not. His argument is,
No fellow servants that is not Master, is to be worshipped by an other; But I
and all Angels are fellow servants: Ergo. The reason pleads that de jure
nothing is due to hm. Now, if there were any such distinction, it might be
replied, as Papists do, non sequitur: why? because there is a mid sort of
worship allowable to fellow servants, and therefore the Angel did wrong in
rejecting of it. His second reason is, worship God, which says, this worship
and all worship is due to God, Therefore it is not due nor to be given to men.
The adding of this distinction would enervate the argument, and say, it is not
this worship or all worship that is to be given to God only; or, when he says,
ye cannot worship God and me, (for he opposes these as inconsistent) they
would answer, yes, with diverse sorts of worship we can, whereas the Angels
scope is to overturn all such worship to himself and to ascribe it all to God;
and therefore says not, give not me this or that sort of worship, but none;
yea, so he appoints even that which John gave him to be given unto God. And
if (...) were allowed, then worshipping of Angels would be a worshipping of God
the Master; But the Angel opposes here worshipping of God, to the worshipping
of him: Therefore worshipping of Angels, is acknowledged by Angels to be no
worshipping of God: otherwise John might have replied, that he was worshipping
God, the sender in him that was sent.

4. If there were any worship due to Angels of a religious kind, then the Angel
should not simply have prohibited, but should have directed John right, lest
from one extreme he had fallen to another; But that he does not: and if we
consider that God comprehends all worship either in the first or second table
of the Law, and this can be none of them, we need not be anxious about it, but
say, certainly Angels know better what is their due than Papists and Bellarmine
do: Therefore we conclude, that giving of Angels that worship, is sinful and
idolatrous.

It will confirm this, if we consider what use the Fathers make of this place,
who draw a strong Argument for Christ's Divinity from this, that He is
worshipped, whereas no Angel is capable of worship, which they confirm from
this place, vid^ Ath. sermon. 3. contra Arian. page ( mihi) 191. Certainly this
answer would overturn that argument so much pressed by them, if there were any
religious worship which did not prove him to be God that is worshipped. The use
also which Augustine makes of it against the heathens on Psalm. 96. ( nobis.
97) is to the same purpose, expounding these words, Confounded be they that
serve graven images, etc. he enters in debate with the heathens, who (says
he) denied that they worshipped an Image (knowing it to be without life) but
said, Adoro quod video, sed servio ei quem non video, Not unlike this former
distinction. If it were asked, who that were, they answer, numen quoddam. If it
were replied again, that which they took to be numen, was a devil. They
answered, ( Colum. 1088.) non colimus mala demonia; Angelos, quos dicitis,
ipsos and nos colimus, virtutes Dei magni and ministeria Dei magni. Augustine
urges, Vtinam ipsos col^r^ velletis, facile ab ipsis disceretis non illos
colere, audite Angelum doctorem. And then cites this place, surge, quid facis?
illum adora, etc. and concludes, quid ergo, fratres mei, nemo dicat, tim^^ n^
irascatur mihi Angelus si non illum colo, tunc tibi irascitur quando ipsum
col^r^ volu^ris, bonus est enim and Deum amat, etc.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 11. And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat
upon him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge and
make war.

12. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns, and he
had a name written that n^ man knew but he himself.

13. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called,
The word of God.

14. And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

15. And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treads the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.

16. And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written, KING OF
KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

17. And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather your
selves together unto the supper of the great God:

18. That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and
the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.

19. And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered
together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army.

20. And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into
a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

21. And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse,
which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled with
their flesh.


THe last part of the Chapter follows from ver. 11. to the end; wherein the
last part of the sixth vial of the battle of Armageddon (mentioned Chap. 16.)
is more fully set down. 1. In the preparations for it. 2. In the event of it.
The first is to verse. 14. The other, to the end.

The preparation of the beast was more fully set down, Chap. 16. Therefore it
is but touched here, and the Lambs order and Army, who are the other party, are
more insisted on.

I saw heaven opened. This is preparatory to the vision, that he might the more
clearly discern it: but that is not all, hereby it would appear is now set out
a more flourishing estate of the Gospel after the Lambs marriage; for, by a
white horse this was signified, Chap. 6. and by the opening of Heaven and the
Ark, Chap. 11. it was signified also. This would then hold forth a flourishing
Church, able to send out Armies at least of spiritual fighters for Christ,
against His enemies.

The preparations upon the Lambs side, are more particularly set down, 1. By
the description of the Captain. 2. Of an Angel, as an Herald denouncing the
War, or rather foretelling the victory, ver. 17. he insisteth most on the
Captain; for, He is of most concernment in the War, and cannot easily be
described. The properties given Him are of two sorts. 1. Such, whereby he is
someway tied in his proceedings to His Word. 2. Such, wherein He is absolute,
and He has a name answering both as a description. There are four names given
to Him that divide this description; Or, take it as it lies, and, 1. we have
set down His own properties, to ver. 14, Then, 2. His Army, ver. 14. and, 3.
His Weapons or Armor, ver. 15. He now rides on His white horse as Captain,
being spotless in His way and manner of proceeding; for which cause, His first
style ( ver. 11.) is faithful and true in keeping promise and Covenant to His
People. And then, secondly, it is added, that in righteousness he does judge
and make war: which implies, that there is a right end in His undertaking, a
right cause, and a right manner of proceeding in it. Two, properties more are
set down, ver. 12. His eyes were like a flame of fire, importing searching
omnisciencie and terrible Majesty, as Chap. 1. He has on his head many crowns,
not materially so; but to show His absolute sovereignty, that He is an high and
great and glorious King, so that one crown or few crowns will not serve to
describe His glory. This is a great King above all kings, as His name is, ver.
16. This also imports many triumphs and victories over His enemies.

Answerable to this greatness, He has an inexpressible name that none can
take Him up in the infiniteness and greatness of His Essence and glory but
Himself, to creatures it is a mystery and a secret, as Judge. 13.18. for, no
name can adequatly set out His perfections.

He proceeds in the description of Him, ver. 13. as in a most conquering-like
posture, He was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: it is like with the blood
of the former events of former vials, or of this on Him: He follows the chase
so hot, when He once begins and appears so terrible and bloody, and yet
conquering like one mighty to save, Isa. 63.1, 2. His name is here set down
more plainly in a style more usual for John to give Him, and that is, The word
of God, Ioh. 1. So Christ is called the Word. First, in respect of His person,
seeing He does express the character of the Fathers Person as clearly as the
Word does represent a man's secret conception within, Heb. 1.3. Secondly, in
respect of His Offices, because by Him God does as by a word plainly make known
the secrets of the Gospel, before hid in Him.

In the 14. Verse, His Armies are set out, 1. These in heaven: not only Angels
and Saints glorified; but such of the Church, as ( ver. 8.) are arrayed with
such vesture. The new married Jews and the beautified Gentiles are both stirred
up to this employment, They are named, Chap. 17. called and faithful who were
with the Lamb, they are the same here. The Church now is more pure in worship,
and shining in holiness; and the most pure are most zealous in following of
Him: for, this honor have all His Saints, as Psalm. 149. 2. They are called
Armies, for their multitude, strength and discipline. 3. They ride, and that on
white horses: He has all His Soldiers mounted as well (as it were) as
Himself, they share with Him as certainly of the victory, as He does overcome:
It is good being on the Lambs side, and at His back. But there is no word of a
weapon amongst them all: for, they need none, because He goes foremost and
fights, and they but follow as a company in triumph. It is to let see also,
it is not the Soldiers, but the Captain, and His weapons that get the victory;
for, righteousness or fine lin^n is their defensive armor; and for offensive,
they have none mentioned here, although from Chap. 17. and the scope, we may
gather that they are also to be made active in this war, yet the victory
depends not thereupon: holiness and faith is the best armor folks can put
on.

His own weapons are set down, ver. 15. in three, 1. A sword going out of his
mouth, which is the word whereby He subdueth Nations to Himself. 2. A rod of
iron, Psalm. 2. signifying both Authority, ( Psalm. 110.2.) and power to crush
gainsayers, and to put His Laws in execution against wicked opposers that yield
not to the Word, them He strikes with the rod of iron: for, rule He must. 3.
There is a wine-pr^sse of Gods wrath, as Chap. 14. and Isa. 63. and that He
treads, that is, He easily (and now at this time) abundantly executes
judgment Himself, where the former prevails not. And seeing He treads
alone, Isa. 63. few arms will serve these that are with Him.

Suitable to this Soveraignity and Power He has a name, ( ver. 16.) on his
v^sture, that it may be visible (as it were, in His Colors legible) and on his
thigh, that is, graven now most observably upon all His ways and motions, as
Chap. 1. It shall now be known He is Lord of lords, and King of kings, that is,
most Sovereign, and will now be seen and acknowledged to be so, for He takes
it on Him.

Lastly, verse. 17, 18. This battle is set out by one standing in the sun, that
he may be conspicuous, crying to all fowls, to come, and to eat, all sorts of
great and small: which does set out, 1. the certainty of this defeat. 2. the
greatness of it: the slain shall be so many, that fowls shall eat them; it is
borrowed from Ezekiel. 39.17. Also it may set out a clear and confident incitation
of Gods Ministers to stir up others to go about the execution of this judgment
with confidence of victory, as if they were invited to prey upon dead men; and
possibly also by this, many that are not mounted like the Lamb, nor clothed in
white, and are not following Him, nor walking on His account, shall yet upon
hope of gain to feed (like ravenous fowls upon others ruin,) engage into this
fight, and be made use of (though following their corrupt ends) for a time to
execute Gods justice against this beast, who preferred his own interest to
Christ's.

This is the Lambs preparation; now follows a word of the contrary party.
There is the beast and the Kings of the earth and their armies, to with, some
Kings yet sticking to the beast, that did lament the whores destruction, and
with them others without the Church, of late engaged to side with the Pope, who
is now made to flee from Rom^. The beast here is only mentioned (though, Chap.
16.13. and in the following verse, the false prophet be added) to show they are
but one, though diversely represented. All these are gathered against Christ (so
it is constructed) and His people. How this gathering proceeded, and whence it
came, is not spoken to here, because it is insisted on, Chap. 16. 13, etc. as
also the place whereto they are brought; only now both Armies and their
Captains are marked to be in the fields.

The event follows, ver. 20. and 21. in three steps, first, in respect of the
opposite Chiftain, 1. he is taken prisoner, 2. he is condemned and cast alive in
the lake from whence he came. The party overcome has two names, yet is one;
The beast here is that first, Chap. 13. the false prophet is that second
Ecclesiastic beast, or second consideration of the former: for, these same
things are attributed to this false prophet, which were the properties of that
beast, Chap. 13.11. therefore they are one, as was shown there; and their joint
death shows in all things an identity. They are only named as distinct, 1. to
show that that grandour of Rome, which has long stood, and after that City is
burned, does yet pretend some pre-eminence by the surviving of its last head
the false prophet, (who still, though banished, keeps up the name of Romish
Pope,) shall now both fall together, Romes Empire in that series and the Pope
they shall go together into destruction, and there shall be no such Empire of
Rome under any form after that, as has formerly been, but the body and head
(in a word) shall perish together. 2. To show that both that civil grandour
signified by the first beast, and that religious deceit and hypocrisy, whereby
it was maintained, shall now be at a further end than when the whore was
destroyed, no Popes nor avowed spreading of Popery are to be after this in any
such measure. Thus they are captivated who kept still liberty in all former
defeats, and are ensnared, as it were, unawares when they looked for no such
thing, but on the opinion of the Popes perpetuity were confident: the word, in
the Original, implies some surprisall: they are cast alive in the lake; this
is their judgment, to set out the abhorrency which the Lord has at them and
shows at their end, as in the case of Korah, Dathan, etc. to show there is a
judgment after this to them; for, he pursues them still till it end them. 3.
To show, that there is now no regresse to them after this defeat; for, it is
irrecoverable to the beast by the sixth vial, as it was to the whore by the
fifth, before, Chap. 18. he came from the pit, Chap. 13. and 17. and he
returns to it here.

2. This victory is set out in respect of these that escaped this sort of
judgment, verse. 21. all that adhere to the beast, it is like, perish not now;
some by Christ's Word are either win, and so their enimity is slain and they
made to submit; or, by it they are condemned: the former (as to many) is not
unlike Christ's conquest, Psalm. 45.

The event is set out by the satisfaction that these who love prey shall have;
the slaughter and spoil is answerable to what was denounced, verse. 17. and 18.
These that follow duty, even on corrupt ends, may sometimes get a fill and some
success; but these that did ride on white horses, had a more noble design:
this one sword of Christ does all the business, and they have enough to be
witnesses.

So the series of Antichrists destruction looks thus in the three last vials;
the fifth overturneth Rome, yet he himself has some being and makes some new
stickling or sh^fting for help in his last essay: after that he is taken by the
sixth, and there is then neither seat nor beast to sit in it; yet possibly
there may be some remnant of adherents to that Babylonish superstitious way,
regrating the overthrow of the beast by the sixth, as they did of his seat by
the fifth, Chap. 18. which in this sense may be judicially slain by the sword
of Christ's mouth, although the execution of it be suspended: these are fully
overturned by the seventh vial, when great Babylon comes in remembrance before
God, possibly in the days of God and Magog, such old principles concerning
Rome are revived, but they are soon banished.

There is a great objection against this, because the destruction of Antichrist
seems to be reserved for Christ's second coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and here he is
cast in hell, which some think cannot be before the end. Before we answer, we
take it for certain, that this judgment of the beast is not at the last day:
For, 1. it is under the sixth vial, and it is the seventh that brings the
end. 2. It is a judgment wherein Armies of Saints are employed and his word is
made use of in this ruin, which cannot be said of the last judgment. 3. In
this judgment of his casting in the lake, there is a difference put between
him and his followers who are otherwise judged, verse. ult. and their casting-in
suspended; there is no such difference in the last judgment. 4. There are some
events yet behind this, the devil is not fully overturned till the seventh vial
cast him in the lake, which is by the judgment of the great day, and yet the
beast is in the lake before him: therefore this judgment is before the last,
by which the devil is casten, where the beast and false prophet are before him,
as is clear from Chap. 20. verse. 10.

Now for answer, 1. It is not absurd to say, the final end of Antichrists
kingdom shall not be before the end, his kingdom being complexly considered;
yet it hinders not, but both himself and his seat may be overturned before.
2. That place, 2 Thessalonians. 2. may look to the destruction of Antichrist, not at
Christ's last coming, but at His coming to that judgment of the whore, as it is
called the great day of God, Chap. 6. when He came to be avenged on heathen
Emperors: and the destruction there, (2 Thessalonians. 2.) is, 1. piece and piece and
not at once. 2. It is by the breath of his mouth, that looks to the shining
of the Gospel, whereby he is ruined, as here by the sword proceeding from
Christ's mouth. And so, 3. the brightness of His coming will be His coming in
the Gospel, and taking to Him that great power which Antichrist has long
usurped; and that agrees well both with the scope there and here. And, 3. if
any should urge further, that in that place (2 Thessalonians. 2.) two distinct steps
are set down, 1. To consume him by the Spirit of His mouth; but the second, his
destruction, is reserved to Christ's second coming. Answ. It will prove no more
but this, 1. That Antichrists fall shall begin long before it end. 2. That it
shall be fully completed at the great Day. 3. That beside whatever come upon
him now, there shall also be a reckoning with him then. We deny none of these,
seeing the Word says not it is only so; for, our opinion is not excluded, which
says more, to wit, he shall be judged at his particular judgment and at the
general judgment also: and although it be ordinary in the Scripture to design
the last day for the time of persecuters destruction and the Saints outgate,
because both are at that day perfected; yet can it not be argued, Therefore
there are no foregoing strokes or deliveries; so, neither can it be in the
present case, beside, it being in the close of the sixth vial, and after the
Jews conversion, which will be not long before the end, it may there be so
expressed.

For that, he is cast alive in the lake, it is certainly not properly to be
understood, as if he should never die, but is an allusion to that of Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, to show the greatness, dreadfulnesse and irrecoverablnesse
of that doom that shall come on him: and considering this special and eminently
stated enemy of God and Jesus Christ in His Kingdom, and Gods visible taking
course in this world with other more open enemies, it is like, that the jealous
God who is avenged, as is clear, on his seat before men, will even in this
world, though he spare him long, singularly show His judgment on him, beside
what He will do in the last Day, which also in part contributeth to His Glory
and His peoples comfort, as any other temporal judgment does, which yet is
not so much foretold for these ends as this is.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. ANd I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.


THis Chapter has always been accounted amongst the darkest of this Prophecy,
the Lord, as it were, minding by this close to stay the insolency of men's
humor, and to teach the necessity of sobriety in the use-making of His Word.
Hence it is, that many both of old and of late (and that neither of the
grossest nor most ignorant of Divines) whom God has made use of singularly in
the opening of His Truths, have yet, notwithstanding, stumbled at this: in
which Angust. de Civitat^ Dei, lib. 20. cap. 5, and 6. professes himself once
to have been somewhat miscarried; so that it will become us, with trembling to
undertake it, and also ye would with sobriety aim at the search of the truth,
but not expect the satisfying of curiosity in it. It is Gods goodness that He
has given us the necessary Truths of the mystery of godliness in more plain
expressions; yet, since this is a part of the Word which God has given His
Church for edification, and seeing also it wants not encouragements to stir up
His People to pry with sobriety into it, We cannot therefore shun the essaying
of it, looking to Him (without prejudice) who has in His providence led us to
the opening of this Book, and hitherto has in some measure helped us in it.
The great ground of mistake is, (as in other dark Scriptures also) because the
expressions are odd and unusual, therefore we are apt to conceive some strange
thing to be contained in them, such as is no where else laid down in plainer
words; and our curious and itching humors are ready to foster that, taking
occasion thereby to exercise themselves; and when we come with this prejudice
to dive into them, we are often answered according to the idea which we have
followed in our own hearts. It is necessary therefore, that with humilty we
prosecute this search, it being to such that the Lord reveals His secrets.

Concerning the division of this Chapter, there need be no question; We may
take it as containing, first, some notable events to fall out in the Church of
Christ before the end of the world, which are two, 1. An eminent binding of
Satan, having contemporary with it an eminent reign of the Saints; 2. an
eminent loosing of Satan and hazard of the Church.

The second part subjoyneth to that the consummation of all things by the last
judgment, in which Satan shall be utterly fastened up in his prison for ever,
and the Saints, being freed from all difficulties, are brought to the enjoying
of their everlasting kingdom; Or, take it thus, as it sets out the upshot of
all former Prophesies in the last judgment. There are, 1. some things going
before the last judgment, and that immediately. 2. The description of this
judgment. 3. What follows is in the execution of the sentences thereof; both
are one thing.

Concerning the scope also, we take it to be thus, 1. generally, to set out the
last Catastrophe and close of all the Churches troubles, and her enemies ruin
and malice, they end happily for her, but miserably for them. 2. More
particularly, it is to show her outgate from her grand enemy the Devil, who is
the first enemy, and continues with the last. It is especially his binding and
his loosing and his final overthrow that is aimed at here, (what concerns the
whore, beast and false prophet, being in the former insisted on) and the
Churches condition in reference to this enemy is occasionally set out. 3. And
yet more particularly, it is for the explication of the seventh vial, which was
( Chap. 16.) poured-out in the air, the devil's universal kingdom, but summarly
touched there; here it is more fully set out: for, the dragon's destruction is
insisted one here, which was the object of that vial. Beside, in the former
Chapters it being told what became of the whore, Chap. 18. and of the beast,
Chap. 19. there being nothing of this enemies overthrow till now recorded, but
of his action in the sixth vial, It follows therefore, both in order and
series of this explication subjoyned to the former, and also by necessity of
the matter, that this is added for supplying what was defective concerning the
overthrow of this enemy, and explication of the seventh vial, which is no where
explained as the rest are, if it be not here: and the coincidency of the
matter, the dragons final overthrow, and expressions about the last judgment,
common to this with the seventh vial, such as the heavens passing away, etc. do
evidence it especially to belong to the clearing of the seventh vial. Yet, 4.
we add, that we are not to restrain it so, as if both these events were fully
contemporary with the seventh vial; for then the continuance of this vial would
be disproportionable to all the rest, as being longer than they all. Beside,
that vial, including especially Satan's last overthrow, it is not necessary to
extend it so far, but so much of it must be applied to the seventh vial, as was
not comprehended under the former six, but all now is put together when it
comes to its height, and reckoned in a sum, even as the Churches low condition
( Chap. 11.) was reckoned, and put in a sum together of so many days under the
sixth trumpet, when it came to its height, although it had begun under the
trumpets preceding. That therefore follows not, but though that be
especially the scope, which it is levelled at, yet it is not only, but so as on
that occasion for more full clearing this victory over the devil, a more full
view of his former practices contemporary with former prophesies, is set down;
and this beginning is drawn down from a prior period of time, that all being
set together, this last may be the more full and clear and observable. And yet,
5. we take it not to set out the history of the devil from his first restraint
by the Gospel, and so to be contemporary with that of Michael's casting him
down from heaven (or from civil power) in Constantines time, Chap. 12. but to
begin the story of the dragon here where it left there: thus the devil that is
thrown down from civil power and open persecution, we heard he had great fury
when he was put from open working by avowed idolatry and persecution to a more
secret underhand way; we heard also what way he took then, 1. By spewing out a
flood after the woman, which was dried up. 2. By going to make war with the
Saints, which he attempted and prosecuted by a new lieutennat the Beast, and
had such success by him, that he was again, upon another account, worshipped,
Chap. 13. and that by the whole world, except some few, and made war with the
Saints and overcame them. Hitherto we have never heard how he was restrained,
or what became of him after his reign by the beast 1260 days. To clear that,
this is subjoyned, even to tell what became of the Dragon, as he had formerly
told what became of the beast; and so this Chapter is not contemporary with
Chap. 12. but is to be subjoyned to it, as the next restraint which followed
upon him, who then was loose and in rage. This appears, 1. by observing the
expressions; for, there he is cast down by the Angel of the Covenant Christ,
out of heaven to earth; here the Angel descends out of heaven to him, (as it
were, pursuing him) which supposes him to be down before. 2. There he is loose
and making war with the woman, who is made to flee; here he is bound up, so
that the Saints do reign in the mean time. 3. This here is his last great
binding, preceding his loosing in Gog and Magog before the end of the world:
Either therefore we must say, Satan has no binding after that, but is still
loose to the end, which is false; or we must say, that his binding in reference
to that loosing, is not set down in this prophecy, but that only tells that
he was loose, but not how he was restrained, which stands not with the scope;
Or, we must thirdly say, that it is done by this Chapter, which will further
appear afterward: and indeed it were hard to say* that one event should be
twice expressed in so different expressions, and yet that such a concerning
event, as Satan's binding after his liberty and dominion in Antichrist, should
be passed over in silence. Beside, if it were a repetition of the same victory,
Chap. 12. or of the Gospels victory over Satan's kingdom, or that of Gog and
Magog, a repetition of the prophesies concerning the Pope or Turks, Then these
last explications, or visions, would be much more obscure than the former of
the same events, which is contrary to the way of this Book, as is acknowledged
by all, and contrary to the manner of repetitions of the same thing used by
Daniel and other Prophets, the last whereof are always clearer than the former.
And that Satan gets the same names here that he gets, Chap. 12. it is not
to show, that it belongs to the same time; but rather to show, that it is the
continuation of the story of that same enemy, which, as to the event of that
rage of his, was defective there, but is supplied here.

For clearing this, consider that there is a fourfold loosing and raging of the
devil mentioned in the Word, and there is a fourfold victory of the Church over
him in opposition to these, also spoken of, and the last is still the greatest.
His first dominion we may call personal, when he kept all the world in
gross darkness, worshipping him directly in temples, and he giving responses
and answers in them, possessing men personally and corporally, (as he did in
Christ's time) leading the world at his will. He is bound in this respect by
Christ's birth, preaching, miracles, death, ascension, and sending forth the
Apostles and the Gospel (like a white horse conquering, Chap. 6.) whereby the
prince of this world was judged, Satan casten from heaven like lightening; many
corporally possessed, were dispossessed and freed from his dominion, and the
devil chased from his audible answering in oracles, as formerly he had done.
His known answer given at Delphos to Augustus his Legates, who were sent to him
to enquire concerning his successor, about the time of Christ's birth, is by
many cited to this purpose, Me, puer Hebraeus, superum Rex, linquere tecta
Haec jubet, and ditis cacas remeare sub umbras:
Ergo silens aris tu nunc abscedito nostris.
An Hebrew child, King of the heavens high
To leave these Temples has commanded me,
And to be gone, to darkness, and to woe:
Thou therefore silent from our altars go.


After this no audible answer was given at these Oracles. Thus Satan is bound
from the beginning of the Gospel to the end of the world; for, Christ shall
have a Church, even among the Nations and Gentiles: and thus Christ has
overcome him, and so spoiled him, that he shall never prevail against the
Catholic Church, Matthew. 16. This is not the binding here, because this is a
binding that is eminently applicable and agreeable to one particular time, so
as it cannot agree to any other before nor after. And it would seem that as it
is clear, that Satan is loosed after it, before Christ's second coming; so it is
clear that Satan has been (as to this binding) loose before it, after Christ's
first coming, except we say, that all the time between Christ's first coming and
His second, shall be taken up in these two, to wit, 1. a thousand years
restraint upon Satan, and then a little times liberty, upon the back whereof
comes the judgment: but the length of time interveening and the various and
frequent ups and downs of the Church show, that there are more periods in her
case, and the great liberty of the Church (and so the binding of Satan, which
is still contemporary with it,) spoken of to be in the latter days of the
Gospel, at least after the first thousand years, will not admit that: These
thousand years therefore must not begin either at Christ's birth or death, or
yet at the destruction of Jerusalem, or sending of the Gospel to the Gentiles;
(beside that it presupponeth Martyrs as antecedaneous to it) and therefore it
must begin after these periods.

There is a second dominion Satan has yet, even when the Gospel is preached,
and that is by his guiding the public magistracy of the world, whereby he
condemned Christians, persecuted and destroyed them, and obstructed the public
and avowed profession of Christ in an united Church Way, (at least in a great
part) and kept up still Temples and idol-worship, and that as countenanced by
Authority. Satan is put from this, Chap. 12. where we have the story of his
casting from the throne, before which time he is seen as loose in heaven, that
is, in person of the Emperors, as a bloody Dragon ready to devour the child,
(as formerly, Chap. 6.) he rides, as it were, on the red, pale and black
horses, till by the sixth seal answerable to, and contemporary with, Chap. 12.
he is in all these respects defeated, the public and avowed worshipping of
idols overturned, and the public profession of Christianity countenanced by
Authority; in which respect, ( Chap. 12. ver. 10.) it is called the Kingdom of
our God, and power of His Christ, which certainly infers a good condition to
the Saints with it.

His third storm and loosing, after he comes to the earth, is by more subtle
means prosecuted in the first six trumpets by the beast, Chap. 13. and in the
end of Chap. 12. which is contemporary with the first six trumpets. His
restraint (as to that loosing) is by the seventh trumpet, wherein his dominion
by the beast, such as formerly he had by the heathen Emperor, is overturned,
and answerably to that liberty of his, (spoken of Chap. 12. and 13.) here is
set down, in this third explicatory prophecy, Satan's third restraint in
opposition to that dominion of his by Antichrist: and this prophecy will be
found contemporary with the seventh trumpet and the vials from their beginning,
which succeed immediately to the witnesses ascending up to heaven, and to the
end of the woman's flight and abode in the wilderness, and to the forty two
months of the beasts reign.

The fourth and last liberty and dominion of the devil mentioned, is this of
his stirring up Gog and Magog, and his restraint, in reference to this, is the
last judgment. Now, seeing his binding here cannot be the first, as is said,
nor the second, Chap. 12. this presupposing the beast in being, (as appears
by these who reign in this time) nor yet the last, It must necessarily follow
therefore, that it is the binding, spoken of in the third place, which is
contemporary with the beasts overthrow, in whom he was formerly worshipped, and
fain would have sustained that worship, but was bound up from it, and could not
help himself, as Chap. 18.

Taking this then to be the binding of Satan, following upon that rage of his,
Chap. 12. ver. 13, and 17. the scope will be to show what came of the devil
after he had brought that design to a great height, Chap. 13. So that if it be
asked, what became of him after he had raged forty two months against the
woman, having made her flee to the wilderness, and against the witnesses,
having made them prophecy all that time in sackcloth? It is answered here, I
saw, says John, him again taken and bound up from his liberty, as the beast
was from his; and I saw that Church, which by and under the beast he had
persecuted and made despicable in the world, brought again to an honorable
condition (wherein he could not impede them) having again an honorable public
and avowed profession of the Gospel in greater number of professors, purity of
doctrine, holiness of life, spirituality of worship, and vigor of discipline,
with much less outward disturbance than formerly: which restraint of his and
kingdom to them continued a long time, till God in his secret justice permitted
him to make a new onset before the last judgment by Gog, which follows that
assault of the devils by the beast, thereafter the Lord pursues and
overturneth him and his designs everlastingly; after which he shall never have
a link of his chain loosed to the disturbance of Christ's Church. This is the
sum, which will be more clear in the particular explication of the words, and
in that which follows.

That we may the more clearly proceed, the great controversies in the words may
be drawn to three heads, I mean in so far as concerns the first event of
Satan's binding, till verse. 7.

The first, is, concerning the events prophesied of, that is, 1. What is meaned
by this binding of Satan. 2. What by this dominion or reign of the Saints, of
what nature and extent it is; which is also called living, and the first
resurrection.

The second head, is, concerning the persons to whom this kingdom is promised,
1. Whether to dead or living Saints. 2. Whether to Martyrs only, or to others.
3. If only to Saints without any hypocrites. 4. If to these who suffer in
themselves personally or in others.

The third head, is, concerning the time mentioned of a thousand years. And, 1.
If the time of the Saints reign be contemporary with, or successive unto the
thousand years of Satan's restraint; and so, whether they be one, or two
distinct times. 2. If these thousand years be definit or indefinit. 3. Whether
it takes in all the time after Christ's death, or otherwise. 4. And mainly,
whether these thousand years be applicable, and in the scope of the Prophecy
and intent of the Spirit to be applied unto any time wholly past, or wholly to
come; or, to the time which is presently current.

The first and last head and last particular of it, do mainly decide the
questions incident here, and make way for the right understanding of this
Chapter. The first head opens what is foretold here, the second to whom, the
third when it is fulfilled.

Concerning all which we shall put by, 1. some things which we conceive more
clearly to be truths and less controvertible; 2. Some things more obviously
false, and which cannot any ways be conceived as intended by these words in
this vision; And so, 3. the things controverted will be fewer, and we shall
have more ready access to speak of them.

The first thing we lay for truth, is, That whatever be meaned by Satan's
restraint here, it is not to be understood absolutely and simply in all
respects, but comparatively and in some respect, so as notwithstanding thereof
he is still deluding, deceiving, tempting and carrying many to hell, and not
wanting instruments to disturb the Saints peace; (though he get not to that
success he would be at in the means he uses, nor yet to that readiness of
instruments and means he has formerly used) for there are many dead, and
continuing so as yet, ver. 5. he has Gog and Magog, many yet without, and
possibly also within the Church, in whom he reigns, though he prevail not
with them so as to bring them up against the camp of the most high; and his
full binding is reserved till the last day, when he is cast in the lake, and
when he gets his final judgment, Jude 6. And therefore ( Mat. 8.) he
pleads that his time was not come, fully and simply to be shut up. Beside,
that that warning (that the devil goes about seeking whom he may destroy, 1
Pet. 5.8.) concerns Christians till the end of the world, they shall have a
tempter of him till then, against whom they shall still have cause to watch.
Therefore he is not simply bound up in hell; but, in his raging among men,
restrained, and that eminently in a great degree: for, as Satan is said to be
bound, when he is cast out from having absolute dominion over a man, Mat. 12.
though he continue to tempt and trouble; so, in respect of the Church he is
bound, though he may be troubling them, as he may do a particular person; yet
gets he never such absolute and full dominion over them again, in that
respect he is restrained and bound; even so here.

2. We think here is understood his most eminent restraining after Christ's
birth till His second coming; and therefore Christ's victories over him being
always the longer the greater, it is like to be the last great restraint of
Satan, to wit, after Antichrists (at least, begun) ruin, which may be in
sundry respects shown to be greater than any of the former, as having
somethings of all the former restraints concuring together in it, and that in
an eminent degree: However, that it is most eminent, is clear by these
evidences, 1. that he is bound and sealed (in some measure) not only cast from
the throne to the earth, but kept from that liberty which formerly he had on
the earth, The expression signifies certainly a very great restraint. 2. The
Saints peaceable reign, shows him to be eminently bound; for, that they are
now in more respect than at any other time, it is from this, that he is more
bound up: and therefore this effect or concomitant thereof, to wit, their
reigning, must of necessity be from a more than an ordinary binding. 3. That he
may, and must be restrained, and said to be so in a greater measure and in a
more eminent manner than agrees to him, or can be said of him either before or
after that, It is therefore a singular eminent binding, which differenceth this
time and event from any time or state of the Church before or after it.

3. Concerning the Saints reign for a thousand years, We take it for granted,
1. that it is contemporary with the former; so that both Satan's binding, and
their liberty and reigning, is for the same thousand years, which is clear, 1.
by the repeating of them with the same article in the Greek, (...), that
thousand years, that, that, wherein Satan was bound; so after he has told that
Satan's case is to be bound that time, he now tells what the Churches estate
during that time is, without which, the narration had been defective, as to the
Churches comfort, had it not been added, that as during that time Satan was
bound, so therein the Saints had a joyful liberty. 2. This reigning of the
Saints is set down as an effect of his binding; and they are mentioned
together, to show how the one had influence on the other, the restraint of the
one importing always liberty to the other: And it will be unsuitable to apply
the Saints reign rather to the time of Satan's loosing, than of his restraint,
it being certain, that as his kingdom and reign has influence on her
disturbance, so has his binding on her peace. Beside, it will be hard so to
lengthen the world as to make two thousand years to pass after this binding
before ever Gog and Magog come, or to make them fall within the time of the
Churches reign; and it wants not inconveniences to make them fall together,
that are mentioned as successive. We must therefore lay aside that opinion,
which makes these thousand years, of Satan's binding and the Saints reign,
successive.

A second thing clear of this reign, is, that whatever it be, it is on earth,
and that not immediately before the last judgment; for, Gog interveeneth before
the resurrection come, and they, even these that did reign, are beset with Gog
and Magog, who comes not to besiege heaven. 2. It is a reign or good condition
that Satan's binding has influence to increase, and his loosing to diminish and
disturb. Therefore it is not in heaven, to wit, of the souls of Saints, or
Martyrs, who are dead; for, the devils binding has no influence on that. 3. It
is such a good condition as is capable of hazards and interruptions by enemies:
therefore it is on earth. It holds forth then a good condition of the
militant Church, and that in a particular limited time, which is not agreeable
to it at other times; it cannot therefore be understood of suffering Martyrs,
they being glorified in heaven after their sufferings in that time; for, this
is no peculiar thing to any one time, but always and in all times a truth.

Thirdly, As it holds forth a good condition, so it would seem eminently to
hold out the best that they can expect on earth for degree, length of time, and
kind of dispensations. This is clear, 1. by the expressions of sitting upon
thrones and reigning, especially being compared with what went before of the
woman's fleeing and the Prophets prophesying in sackcloth; this says, it is an
honorable condition and settled, opposite to that. 2. By this, that they are
styled Martyrs, or such as were spotless in keeping their garments clean,
which signifies much holiness; and their living with Christ also denotes the
same. 3. That they have a camp, and look as if all formerly dead were alive
again, it signifies number, they are numerous, all of them are put together,
and, as it were, both these killed under Emperors and the beast Antichrist,
they arise now in this new state of the Church. See Chap. 7. ver. 9, 10, etc.
4. That Satan is bound so strictly, and that they reign and live peaceably, it
shows purity and peace in a great degree. 5. For a thousand years, it shows
it is the longest time that has been; before, the Church was seen overrun with
persecutions, after, with heresies and Heretics and their favorers, after
that immediately with Antichrist, Now this flourishing reign shall be longer,
the last then being the longest, most un-interrupted and complete dominion,
this must be it, all things considered.

Fourthly, It is some good condition peculiar to some one time, not such a
reign as believers always have even when Satan is loose and Gog and Magog comes,
but something eminent that is not common to other intervals of the Churches
condition, but is more than has formerly been, or will after it be; for, as it
is on the one side the devils eminent restraint, so, on the other, it is the
Saints eminent reign, so as it was not in such case before these years began,
nor yet is to be after they are expired.

A fifth thing we say concerning this reign of the Saints, is, that what ever
it be, it is not absolute, either for holiness, purity, peace, or length of
time: which appears, 1. because so they reign as Satan is restrained, and his
restraint being but partial, so also must their reign be, seeing their absolute
reign is reserved for heaven after the last judgment, as his damnation is, it
being only in heaven where that which is only perfect is, and what is imperfect
is not done away to believers, 1 Cor. 13. till they come there, either in
holiness or outward or inward peace. 2. It appears from this, that while
believers here reign in the world, in it is the devil, their own corruptions,
many hypocrites (that being proper to the visible militant Church, till the
last day separate all these who offend) and there being yet many dead in the
world, who have not gotten victory of the beast, and there being also enemies
without, as Gog and Magog, that want not enmity, but opportunity, It is
therefore clear not to be an absolute freedom that they enjoy, though it be in
some extraordinary measure and manner, yet onsets upon, and wrestlings with
them are not wanting, and that with some success, though God graciously
disappoint as to the event, and suffers it not to get to an height; yet all
His children have their own crosses, and are to look for them to the end of the
world. And although this be rejected by Alstedius, in his Diatriba, as axioma
vulgatum but not probatum, and says, these warnings belong to the primitive
times; yet who shall consider (that the Scripture joyneth following of Christ,
denying of our selves and taking up of the cross together, as Mat. 16.24. and
elsewhere, and makes it a mark of sons and of love to be chastised, Heb. 12.
and a piece of our conformity to Christ the head, Romans 8.28. and a consequent
unto Godliness always, 2 Timothy 3.12. and many other places) will find it not so
easy to reject it, except we would wave perpetual duties, such as denying of
our selves, etc. and deny that there were such need or use of crosses to
believers, who will certainly have corruptions in them to be mortified to the
end of the world, and so need the rod for promoving of that.

A sixth thing I suppose is clear, that what ever it be, it is not literally to
be understood and properly as the words sound, but figuratively and
spiritually. The particular making out of this will follow in the opening of
the words. Yet this we may in general say, 1. that they are figuratively to be
understood, not as the letter properly sounds; for, that the devil is bound
with a chain, cannot be proper, but to show that he is keeped-in, like a
violent mastiffe in a chain, by Gods sovereignty; so thrones, the souls of
these slain, their living and their resurrection, is figurative, as the rest
who continue dead, signifies not properly these who continued in the grave,
but these in nature; for, it is said of all men, contradistinctly from these
living, the rest of the dead, etc. yet the last judgment is not come
(therefore many lived a natural life then, who did not live thus, but as all
men are divided in regenerate and unregenerate, so here they are divided in
living and dead to that same purpose) So souls sitting on thrones and reigning
with Christ cannot but be figurative, as that also of the resurrection, there
being in the Scripture but one acknowledged, that is proper, which this is not.
2. I say they are to be understood spiritually, which confirms the former,
that is, this Dominion, reign, living, and resurrection of the Saints, must be
spiritually understood especially and chiefly: for clearing whereof,
understand, that as there is a natural and proper life, Dominion and
Resurrection, so there is one figurative and spiritual which agrees to all
Christians. 1. There is a spiritual slavery and bondage to sin, death, Satan,
etc. Romans 6. we were servants to it, led captive by the devil at his will, sold
under sin, and its reign, Romans 7. So there is a spiritual dominion to be free
from that, made Kings unto God, Rev. 1.6. and Chap. 5.10. reigning on the
earth. 2. There is a spiritual death, Ephesians. 2. and 1 Timothy 5.8. and so there is
a spiritual life, Gal. 2.21. 3. There is a Resurrection spiritual from the
death and dominion of sin, that is it, Ioh. 5.25. The dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and live: and this is the in-bringing of many to the Gospel,
or the breaking out of it, which is called a Resurrection, Romans 11. as there is
a Resurrection universal in the great day mentioned, ver. 12.

I say then, these words here, are spiritually to be understood especially,
though not only, as is clear: For, 1. this dominion and reign is on the earth,
Therefore it is not proper, but figurative, seeing clear Scripture promises no
such earthly temporal Kingdom to Saints, but warns them to be always looking
for the cross and affliction, which could not be if there were a thousand
years freedom and temporal reign. 2. This is a dominion common to all Saints
as Saints; for, the world now is divided in dead or unregenerate, and living,
that is, Believers, and all these living are Martyrs, and such as have not
received the beasts mark, (which is the character, Chap. 13, 14. and 17. of all
the Elect) whereby is understood all true Believers; But no temporal Kingdom
is promised to all Saints as Saints, but what is spiritual is promised. Ergo,
etc. Yea, there can be no other; for, if all the Saints were temporal Kings,
whom should they command? who should be their subjects? yet, without any
confusion, spiritual dominion will agree to them all: neither can it be said
they are to govern the Reprobates, who continue dead: For, 1. that would imply
a distinct discernable separation even hereaway, as if no hypocrite could
lurk. 2. The Text supposes the Church visible and these without to be
separated, as having their own Rulers, which appears in Gogs undertaking
afterward, who is not subject to them. 3. There behoved to be many Kingdoms, if
every Saint had one now, when they are multiplied and the wicked fewer. This is
a reign especially of souls, and it is not for naught so expressed here, as
there is a soul-merchandise hinted at by this expression, Chap. 18.4. So these
live and reign as the most part of the world, are dead and in bondage, and
enjoy not that resurrection; But that is spiritually to be understood, they
were dead in sin and not raised thus to reign, Therefore so must the reign of
Saints and their life on the contrary be spiritual; for, in this only they are
singular. 5. It is a dominion at this time as common to all Saints, so peculiar
to them and common to none other; But, no question, many Reprobates have yet
dominion in the world, and so live without the Church: for, Gog and Magog have
their own Magistrates then, and are said to come against the Saints, and not to
rebel against them, which would have been true if Saints only had born
dominion and rule over these: and when the devil goes out to the four winds,
it supponeth great and large territories to be even then without the Church,
which certainly wanted not temporal rule. 6. It is such a dominion as Christ
has; for, they reign with Him; as therefore His Kingdom is on earth, so is
theirs; But His Kingdom is not of this world, but is spiritual, Therefore so
is theirs: for, this, to reign with Christ, speaks not any new way of Christ's
reigning, but speaks a new accession to His Kingdom, of others coming-in to
partake of it with Him; and is certainly to show what sort of Kingdom this is,
which the Saints shall have, and to contradistinguish it from that dominion
that is worldly. 7. It is such a reign on earth as all the Saints have in
respect of kind, though not for degree; for, there is but one Covenant and
Kingdom, and the same promise is made to all under the New Testament; But that
is spiritual, They all ( Chap. 5.10.) so reign on the earth. Ergo, etc. 8. It
is such a reign, as it is a Priesthood, so are they Kings, as they are Priests.
See verse. 6. These partakers of this Resurrection, are Priests to God; But
their Priesthood is spiritual, and not again of off^ring outward sacrifices,
So must also therefore be their dominion and kingdom. 9. Certainly spiritual
mercies are the best, and the Churches condition that flows and abounds
most in these, must be the best condition: seeing then this is the Churches best
condition spoken of, It must therefore be especially understood spiritually;
for, what is commended here, is not as simply commendable to men, but as
commendable in a Church, and peculiar to her as such.

Object. If it be said here, Then nothing peculiar is promised to Saints, or
Believers in this time, (seeing that dominion agrees to Saints at all times)
which seems to be absurd, Therefore something more must be here.

Answ. That is granted, that something more is here, as is said: For, 1. now
Saints not only reign singularly over their own lusts, but jointly in visible
Churches, and in a Church Estate, having all the Ordinances of Word, Sacraments
and Discipline amongst them, and these in more purity, power and fruits than
for any time before, and in longer continuance. The stamp of Gods authority on
His Ordinances shall be more sensible now, than before. 2. Though it be not a
temporal thing that their reigning consists in, yet shall they have more
temporal freedom than formerly; the devil shall not mar the course of the
Gospel neither by open violence, nor by Antichrists deceit, but still there
shall be Churches either in kingdoms where they shall have law and allowance
for their profession, or amongst enemies, and their enemies shall be restrained
from being able to put them in such doleful conditions as they have formerly
been into; thus the Gospel shall be countenanced with public authority, which
was Chap. 12. And beside, they shall have freedom against Antichrists dominion
with a more full performance of promises of the Spirit, which they had not then.

A seventh thing concerning this dominion, is clear, that it implies as more
spiritual, so more temporal, peace and freedom than at any other time (putting
the continuance of it and all together) and though it does not mainly and
especially, yet, in some measure, it does take in outward peace in their
condition also: which appears, 1. from Satan's eminent restraint, which has
influence also on the Churches temporal peace as well as spiritual, so it
follows in some part as the other. 2. It appears from the event after his
loosing, their temporal peace is then marred, therefore they had it by the
devils restraint in some measure, otherwise they reign when Gog is high, as
before spiritually in a good measure. 3. The pointing out of this reign, as
having a more continued eminent honorable profession of the Gospel, not common
to other times; and it being opposite, probably, to the Saints suffering times
also when their Prophets were in sackcloth, and the Church forced to flee; It Is
like, it holds out a temporal freedom suiting with these ends and freeing
them from the bondage they lay under before; for, if in suffering times, Saints
still reign spiritually, Then that new engagement of Gog and Magog would not
interrupt it, and so it would be a reign not for a thousand years only, but for
the length of the world, for so they still did reign; Therefore it is not
purely and only spiritual. We shall more particularly speak of it according to
these grounds in the Lecture following.

Only now from what is said, we may gather, as to the events, that these cannot
be expected from the text, which, both of old and of late, men have been
fathering wrongfully on this place; as, 1. That Christ should come to the earth
personally, and that all the Martyrs and Saints should reign a thousand years
before the Resurrection, and have all sorts of pleasure, even unlawful, as
drinking, polygamie, etc. This was invented by Cerinthus, and still counted an
heresy by the Fathers, even by these called Chiliasts or Millenaries by
August. de civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 5, 6. Concerning the Millenaries errors
about the thousand years, see Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 22. where he
shows Cerinthus his heresy, who added sacrifices and ceremonies also. A
second error different from the former, is, That some profess to expect such a
reign with Christ on earth, yet so as not to enjoy carnal sinful pleasures,
but lawful delights, wherewith (they say) the earth shall then abound: of such
an oppinion was Iraeneus, Justin Martyr, Lactantius, and many of the Fathers.
This flowed from Papias, supposed to be an hearer of John the Disciple, (which
made his opinion the more to be received) but he was not. See Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. ult. He also fell into other faults by following tradition contrary to the
Word, which is a native consequent of that principle. 3. There was another
opinion allowing the Saints Resurrection and Kingdom before the last day on
earth, but abounding only in spiritual delights; of such Augustine professes
himself once to have been, and so it is like also were many of these Fathers
called Chiliasts. This was still accounted an error rather than an heresy; but
yet there is no such kingdom here.

Again, neither do these opinions spring from this text; As, 1. that before the
Resurrection, which shall be general, the Martyrs (the text says all Saints)
shall arise a thousand years and reign with Christ, but in heaven; This is
Piscator's opinion on the place.

2. Some bring not Christ down personally; yet plead for a resurrection of the
Martyrs and a reigning of them with the Saints on earth a thousand years before
the end of the world, as Alstedius does in his Diatriba de mill annis Apoc.

3. Some go on more grossly, and add to that, that Christ in His personal
presence (which is not spoken of in the text) is to reign with them on earth;
Thus Henry Archer, and some others of late. All these thwart with, and are
contrary unto the grounds formerly laid down.

4. Others also that begin these years too soon, or expect too great a temporal
kingdom, or, an absolute universal freedom to come, may see the groundlesnesse
thereof from what is said.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 1. And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, etc.


IT would follow that we should lay down somewhat more particularly to show
wherein this good and excellent condition of the Saints here spoken of
consists, as it is holden forth according to the preceding grounds; by which
we may see it is no uncouth nor strange thing, that is here spoken of, though
(as the manner of this Book is) the expressions be strange-like; and this
prejudice being once admitted, that some peculiar mystery, and unheard off in
any other place of the Scripture, is contained here, it has occasioned the
many mistakes about the meaning thereof. In sum then, we conceive this place to
hold out a flourishing and good condition for some time, of the Church-militant
in the days of the Gospel, in these six, peculiarly agreeing to that time and
going together, opposite to six things wherein the low condition of the Saints
consists.

1. In pure Ordinances and an abundance of the knowledge of the Gospel: for, if
that be a special thing wherein and whereby Christ does reign on earth
Himself, this being the rod of His power, Psalm. 110. verse. 2. It is suitable,
that this be the first thing of the Saints reign, who reign with Him when He
reigns, even as the Church is made to flee, when the purity of Ordinances is
obscured.

2. It consists in the power of Ordinances upon Professors, by bringing them
out of the bondage of sin to the liberty of the sons of God, which is to reign
and to be free indeed. And it would appear, that much of this good condition
must certainly be in that dominion over sin, opposite to that natural slavery
and death by it, under which the most part of the world lies, Therefore is the
word blessed and holy is he that is partaker of this resurrection, ver. 6. and
for this they are called Priests unto God, and opposed to the dead world, ver.
5.

3. It consists in the plurality and abundance of Professors their embracing
this Gospel, many Nations setting their face toward Zion, and joining
themselves to the Lord. This, Chap. 11. is given as a special evidence of
Christ's reign when the Nations become His: and thus their reigning is opposed
in respect of their multitude to the fewness of the sealed ones who were
before, Chap. 7. (the two last parts being compared together) when they were
shut up in the Temple, Chap. 11. ver. 1. and 2. Then neither Christ nor they
seemed to reign; but when the Temple is again opened at the end of that
Chapter, then begins their dominion; even as their former purity and light
is opposed to the darkness and errors that went before, as Judah is said to
rule with God, Hos. 11. ult. in respect of Ephraims bondage in error.

4. It consists in a visible, bold, public profession of these Saints by a
Church State, not only worshipping privately, as when the woman fled to the
wilderness, but openly as when the Prophets put off their sackcloth, and are
taken up to heaven, when there are Nations together, and the Temple open, and
Religion avowed and Discipline exercised. Then they reign; this is opposed to
their former lurking.

5. It is in outward freedom, sometimes they are persecuted, and are not free
to bear office in military or civil employments under heathens, to buy and fell
under the beast, Chap. 13. Now, either God gives them favor in the eyes of
Rulers, or restrains their malice by some counterballancing thing, or turns
them to be worshippers of Him, as He did Constantine: Thus they reign when they
have law for them. In which respect, ( Chap. 12.9.) it is said, the Kingdom of
our Lord is come, when heathen persecution is stopped and Religion is
countenanced, and Kings become nursing fathers to the Church; all the Saints do
not become Magistrates, but God makes Magistrates Saints or friends to them
who are so.

6. The sixth thing wherein this good condition consists, is the length of
time it continues, which at least is a long time, beyond any former cessation
and peace they have ever had, It is a thousand years. In these we suppose the
good condition here holden forth to consist, the particulars whereof will
appear more in opening of the words. We would only understand it with these
caveats, lest we extend it too far in our expectation beyond what the Scripture
in this place gives warrant for: and these three extremes are to be guarded
against. It is not therefore, 1. an absolute freedom in an height of
superiority in temporal or spiritual privileges, but in a good degree, being
compared with the Churches condition at other times. It is the most free and
longest time of the Churches peace with greatest light, holiness and number of
Professors; but cannot be extended so as we may warrantably think that there
should be no crosses nor hypocrites nor offenses amongst the people of God
during that time. 2. That good condition comes not instantly to an height, and
to the chief top of it, but by degrees from lesser to greater, from a day of
small things to greater: for, even as the Churches low condition under
Antichrist and her prophets prophesying in sackcloth, and Antichrists dominion
came not to an height at once (though all these conditions be accounted for
such a definit time, to wit, from their beginning and first working, till they
come to their height) so is it here, The Saints good condition, is to be
reckoned from the beginning and rise of their reign, though it come on by
degrees to an height. 3. We would not think, during this time, but that there
may be some partial interruptions of this good condition, and seeming, if not
real, (in part at least) declinings from it; for, that is not understood in
any condition, that it shall continue always alike, the Church may have
difficulties now, as Antichrist had opposition during the time of his reign;
But it is meaned, 1. that, during that time, enemies shall never universally
eclipse the face of a visible Church, as at other times, so as to make her flee
to hide her self: and that in the upshot, the Saints shall ever be gainers even
here, though for a time they may be straightened and wrestle, yet it shall not be
now; as Chap. 13. where the beast makes war and overcomes them, but, as it
is, Chap. 17. the Lamb, with the chosen and faithful that are with Him, shall
make war with the enemy and overcome in end, though they want not enemies even
then, It is not then wholly uninterrupted and constant. This being the truth of
the good condition holden forth here, we may see how unwarrantable it is either
with some of old, or others of late, to abuse this place unto an absolute
dominion; and that we may be put from the expectation of such a strange thing
from this Text, (though the expressions be strange) and that, what ever be
meaned by it, yet we may be sure no such uncouth thing (especially temporal)
is contained in it, as men dream of. We would have you considering, beside what
is said before, these three.

1. Consider that this, what ever it be, is contemporary with some of the
principal Prophesies going before; it being an explicatory vision, it must
belong either to the time of the seals, trumpets or vials: for, the seals begin
after Christ, and continue till Antichrist begin, (underhand at least) to
work; this is certain. 2. The trumpets follow, and continue till Antichrists
begun fall; this is also certain. 3. That the vials succeed the trumpets and
carry on Antichrists ruin, and the state of the Church to the end of the
world, is also cleared before, Chap. 11. and Chap. 16. So that for the period
of this vision, the devils final overthrow is the same with the period of the
vials; for, the sixth overturneth the beast, and the seventh vial brings with
it the next more universal overthrow to the devil, which can be fixed at no
other term, but the end of the world, when the devil is cast in the lake, where
the false prophet was, which knitteth the casting down of these enemies
together in an immediate successive way, as the last two full victories which
Christ shall have; which confirms what is said. Now, this being truth, it
must follow then, that these thousand years are contemporary with one of these
prophesies, seeing they go before the end of the world, and are at some certain
time, Therefore we must understand so this kingdom and dominion of the Saints,
and binding of Satan, as must be agreeable and competent to one of these
prophesies, and the events foretold in them; But if we will look through all
these prophesies, we will find the Church having enemies and the Saints having
their difficulties: under the seals there is open persecution, under the
trumpets there is Antichrists tyranny, and under the vials (look but the fifth
vial, Chap. 17.) these Kings war against the Lamb: and see the sixth, Chap. 16.
there are in much vigor against the Church, the beast, false prophet and
dragon, sending out unclean spirits, that with many do prevail to bring them up
to battle against the Lord. See also the seventh and last, the devil is not
yet taken till the end, he has a fresh loose not long before it, by Gog and
Magog. Now, if so be, where will this absolute dominion of the Saints for such
a time appear? This one consideration well grounded, will overturn that
conceit; for, this dominion is either contemporary with these, and so not
absolute; or, it is successive to these; which to say, 1. does contradict that
truth, that the vials bring the end. 2. It contradicts this truth, that by
this vision, that prophecy of the vials (especially the seventh) is explained,
otherwise the seventh vial is left without any particular event. 3. By this the
world will be lengthened long, we being yet but about the beginning of the
fourth vial, three vials being to come, then a thousand years after that and
Gog and Magog before the end, it would seem exceedingly to lengthen these
days, which for the Elects sake are shortened. We conclude then, it is such a
good condition as must consist with some of the difficulties of the Church,
mentioned in the former prophesies: for, though the Saints good condition here
only be set down, yet are we to read the state of the enemies in some other
place, it being ordinary in this prophecy to set down first one event, as it
is by the vials told what is become of enemies, and then to set down another
contemporary with it, as here, how it was with the Saints.

2. For removing this strange thought, we would consider the Prophets manner of
prophesying good to the people of God; How do Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel,
Ezekiel, Zechariah speak of the Jews estate after the captivity? and how do all
speak of the days of the Gospel in general, as the weak shall he as David,
their horns shall be iron, and their hoofes brass, and they shall thresh the
Nations, they shall lie down and none shall make them afraid and many such
like? Yet if any would draw from them a temporal happiness; or an absolute
freedom, would not the event (the best commentary) confute him? Take the
prophecy of Daniel, wherein often it is said the Saints shall take the
Kingdom, which is no temporal thing, nor this intended here, as appears, in
that it is a Kingdom not for a thousand years but for ever. Now, it being
certain that such manner of speaking and expressions, are usual to the
Prophets when they set out spiritual mercies or temporal deliverances that
are but partial, and in their events have been inferior to what the
expressions literally Bear (though they be in themselves great and glorious)
and this being clear all along this prophecy, that John follows the
expressions and manner of the Prophets in other things, Is it not then safest
to expound the events prophesied of by him in such expressions, by the events
prophesied of by them in the like? so that the applying of their prophesies to
the events wherein they were fulfilled, may be a commentary to clear what sort
of events are understood here.

3. Consider John's way in this same vision: certainly some things, yea, many,
are not to be applied according to the letter, but in a spiritual way to be
understood, as these expressions ( ver. 6.) of the first Resurrection, must be
necessarily meaned of rising from sin; for, it is a Resurrection opposed to the
sinful dead world, which continue dead and did not rise. 2. It is such a
Resurrection, as upon which, freedom from the second death does flow; but that
is not a bodily Resurrection, but a spiritual: for, many at the last day rise
bodily to contempt, Dan. 12. which shows that that place speaks of the last
Resurrection. And, 3. it is such as the want whereof makes men liable to the
second death, and it is not the want of the first bodily Resurrection according
to the Millenaries themselves, (for then, seeing, as they say, none arise first
but Martyrs, none should be saved but Martyrs) but the not being born again,
that secludeth from heaven; and that expression concerning the privilege which
these that are raised here have, They shall be Priests to God, must either be
spiritually understood, or we must, with Caerinthus, bring back again the
sacrifices, and ceremonial and typical worship, contrary to the whole strain
and series of the Gospel. And seeing the former part of that 6. ver. is
necessarily figuratively and improperly to be understood, why not the latter
part also, that they shall reign with Christ? We conclude then, that here there
is no absolute temporal Kingdom promised, but such as we have before hinted at.

We come now to speak of the second head wherein the question lies, and that
is concerning the parties who are partakers of this good condition, which has
also sundry branches.

1. It is questioned, whether our Lord Jesus shall come personally to reign
with the Saints on earth? We answer negatively, there is no ground to expect
our Lords presence personally and visibly to converse on earth with His people,
though we will not say, but there is in this time an eminent measure of His
presence by His Spirit and Power in His Ordinances, and manifestations in His
dispensations more than ordinary; that is not controverted. But that personal
presence we deny, on these grounds, 1. Because the Scripture is silent of it,
and knitteth ever Christ's personal coming again and the last judgment
together, as holding that out to be His errand. If it be said here, They are
said to reign with Christ, Therefore He must be on earth. Answ. It follows
not, no more nor when it is said, Genesis 5. Enoch walked with God three hundred
years, or, that we suffer with Christ, Romans 8. or converse with Him, Therefore
He is on earth suffering with us or walking with us; yes, the very contrary
follows from this place, that He is not on earth: which may be cleared, 1.
thus, So Christ reigns with His Saints and they with Him, as they do other
things with Him, that is, suffer with Him, and walk with Him, etc. But that
implies not a personal presence, but a spiritual, Therefore so does this.
And indeed Saints reigning, being in their sense (and in a part truth) opposite
to Saints suffering, must not then suffering with Christ be opposite to reigning
with Him? And so to reign with Christ, will imply, 1. a spiritual presence of
Christ with them; 2. a common interest and account of dominion, as there is a
common interest and account in their suffering. Thus to reign with Him,
differenceth their good condition from the good of worldly men's conditions,
even as to suffer with Him differenceth the nature of their sufferings from
wordly men's crosses. 2. It is clear from this, that it is not said simply they
reign, but reign with him: the peculiarnesse of the dominion for these thousand
years, is not on His side, but on theirs; for, He reigns before and after;
only for these thousand years, the Saints, who did not so reign formerly, are
admitted to reign with Him: therefore as His reign is ordinarily, so is it now:
for, there is no change on His side; but ordinarily it is not personal, but by
His Spirit and Ordinances, Therefore it is so now, and no otherwise.

2. Either this personal reign of Christ, is after the day of judgment, as
the old Chiliasts thought; or, it is immediately before it, or during it, as
these that would have Christ continuing, as it were, His judgment that long
time, as Tyllingast and others of late. But the Text overturneth all these, 1.
It is not after the day of judgment: for, Gog and Magog are before the day of
judgment; yet Gog and Magog are after these thousand years, Therefore it
cannot be expected after it. 2. It is not immediately before: for, 1. Gog and
Magog interveens, and the dominion of the Saints is interrupted before that. 2.
At the day of judgment, Christ is not on earth, but comes in the clouds from
heaven. See 1 Thessalonians. 4. ver. 16, 17. the Lord Himself shall descend, Therefore
He is not on earth; then shall we that are alive be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so He is there, and we
shall be for ever with Him: Where both these are clear, 1. That at the day of
judgment, Christ is not on the earth, Therefore are the Saints caught up to
meet Him. 2. It is clear, that He and they return not to the earth, but they
abide in heaven for ever with Him: for, their continuing with Him for ever, is
expressly subjoyned as the fruit of their being caught up, and so supponeth that
it is not to be on the earth.

3. We argue (for preventing an objection) thus, At Christ's personal coming
before the end of the world to reign, He either continues in the world till
the end, or He returns again to heaven till the time of judgment; But
neither of these can be found: not that He abides on the earth after the
thousand years; for, 1. then He would be longer on earth than a thousand years.
2. He must continue to reign, (which stands not with the definit time of the
Saints thousand years dominion) or He must be straitened and encompassed by Gog
and Magog with the Saints; and this were to make Christ suffer again
personally, which cannot stand with the state of His exaltation. Beside that,
this would suppose Him to be on earth (contrary to what is said before) at the
day of judgment. Neither can it be said He ascends and returns: for, 1.
that would make three comings of Christ, whereas the Scripture speaks but of
two. 2. It would divide His second coming from the ends which the Scripture
gives of it, that is, to subdue all His enemies and fully to deliver all His
people. Heb. 9. ver. 27, 28. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but
after this the judgment: So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many,
and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time, Without sin,
unto salvation. Where these are clear, 1. That there is but a second coming
again of Christ and no more. 2. That that perfecteth the salvation of His
people. 3. That there is no interveening coming between His first coming and
this. Now, all this would be left undone, if He should before the end ascend
again, and leave the Saints in a new difficulty, which comes upon them at the
close of the thousand years.

I might further add multitudes of absurdities that this infers, as, 1. To
what end comes He? Is it for His peoples comfort temporal, and will He leave
them then in a new strait, or continue with them, and not prevent it? 2. How
converseth He on earth? either He must still be in the company of all His
Saints, and so cannot be in one place, contrary to the nature of His true body,
or He must be sometimes with some, and sometimes with others, and that
consists not with this, that they all reign with Him a thousand years, if to
reign with Him be to have His bodily presence, some must always want it: for it
cannot be so on earth with the Saints, not yet made in their bodies spiritual,
as it will be in heaven in the enjoyment of His presence. 3. By His descending,
He behoved either to bring all the Saints from heaven to an earthly glory, to
eat and drink again, contrary to the Scripture that says they shall be like
the Angels; or, He must leave them in heaven, and so their felicity, by wanting
of His bodily presence, (in which the happiness of heaven in a great part
consists) is, however it be, impaired. 4. Let it be asked, what comes of
Saints for these thousand years, when He reigns on earth? either they live
all that time, which none can expect, or else they die, and then by death they
are not to be with with Christ, (which being with Him, makes the Saints
willing and desirous to be loosed, Philip. 1.21.) but are for a time to depart
from Him: And so in sum, Christ's being here on earth, proves neither for the
comfort (simply at least) of Saints in heaven nor in earth: We would therefore
much improve the waye^ of presence we have, (to be at a higher degree in these)
and contentedly suspend the enjoyment of Christ's personal presence till we get
it where He is.

It will not remove those absurdities, to say with one, to wit, Tyllingast, 1.
That this personal coming of Christ, is the same with His second coming to
judgment, and that these thousand years and what follows, is the day of
judgment, as it were, continued and current, Nor, 2. to say, That the Saints
continuing on earth, during such a time, does not mar their glorious condition,
more than it does to Angels to be abroad in their employments. To the first we
say, That at Christ's coming He comes in flaming fire with all His holy Angels,
the powers of heaven are shaken, faces gather palenesse, and men's hearts fail
them for fear, etc. And it is certain that this insurrection of Gog and Magog
against Christ's Church, is after these thousand years: Now is it credible, that
during the time of judgment, while Christ in such glorious majesty is sitting
as Judge, that there can be heart in any creatures to essay, much less in any
measure (as is here supposed) to effectuate such an undertaking against Christ
and His Saints as this of Magog is? especially if we consider, that the same
Author makes the destruction of the beast to follow Christ's personal coming,
as the first act of His judgment: and to suppose such an interruption, (or
mutiny against the Judge) as this, is not consistent with the nature of Christ's
judicial procedure.

To the second, although we say not, that it is inconsistent with the Angels
glorious condition to serve their Master any-where by executing His commands;
yet, is it never said, that Satan is loosed on them, and that they are
encompassed, as it is said here of the Saints, who are after these thousand
years straightened, they, as it were, having the defenders part and the wicked as
the stronger party pursuing them (therefore is their state then differenced
from their good condition preceding:) and can that consist with a glorified
condition? We may press this opinion, thus, If all the departed Saints be
bodily to be raised and to reign with Christ these thousand years, Then all the
dead reprobats are at the close thereof bodily raised and joined with Gog and
Magog in the pursuing of the Saints and encompassing of them: for, the wicked
live so after the thousand years as they did not before, and their following
condition after that time, is opposed to the former during that time, as is
clear. That the wicked also after that time prevail and the Saints suffer, the
opposing of the Churches estate after that time to its good condition during
that time, does also confirm: for, all on earth are then divided in these two,
the holy City who are encompassed, and these who do encompasse. And seeing these
wicked reprobate cannot be comprehended under the first party that suffers,
They must therefore be comprehended under the last who for the time prevails:
and so the pressing of this bodily resurrection and reign of the Saints upon
earth, will infer also a bodily resurrection and reign of the wicked reprobats,
which will be a sixth monarchy, hitherto not mentioned. And therefore if this
last be absurd, and so to have no ground from this place, we must account the
former to be such also.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 1. And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.


THe second thing questioned concerning the parties reigning, is, whether they
that reign thus, be such as have formerly lived and died, and after death are
made to reign? Or, whether they be such as have not yet seen death? Answ. We
say these that reign with Christ here are not Saints departed, but such as
never yet died, living Saints, members of the militant Church. We shall first
confirm the negative, to wit, that they are not dead Saints, that is, such as
once lived and died, and thereafter are brought to this life again; which is
three ways expressed by several Authors, 1. not such as have been Martyred
and brought again to live on earth with their bodies, as the old Millenaries
conceited: For, 1. that makes all this literally to be understood of the
resurrection, which we show to be spiritual: and if this be a spiritual
resurrection, Then it is not corporal; But that it is spiritual, may be thus
made out, It is a resurrection that agrees to Saints that never died bodily,
Therefore it is spiritual. The antecedent is thus proven, This resurrection
agrees to all who are then living with Christ; But the living Saints must at
that time be living with Christ, or else they must be comprehended under the
common reckoning with the dead world, which cannot be; or, we must say there
are no Saints in the militant Church then, which is false, this being certain
that the end is not yet come. 2. This clears it, that it makes folks free of
the second death, and only that does it, as is said. 3. It crosses the scope,
which is to show the state of the militant Church on earth, whereof dead Saints
are not members. 4. It is such Saints as may be in their dominion encompassed
and straightened by Gog and Magog; But it were hard to bring Saints from heaven to
that condition. 5. How should they live on earth a spiritual life not eating
nor drinking, or a natural life again in these? both which are absurd. 6. This
would make a resurrection and judgment beside the one universal judgment and
resurrection, against the Scripture: that, 1 Thessalonians. 4. speaks of all living
then, and the dead that die before, to go together to meet Christ. 7. What
comes of them after the thousand years reign expireth? it is they who did
reign who are encompassed; But that cannot be said of Saints raised again: For,
1. then they would be longer on the earth than a thousand years. 2. They would
be interrupted in their reign (this lasts but a thousand years) Therefore it
is not such who reign. 8. If it be of such, it must either be before or after
the day of Judgment; neither of which can be, as is cleared.

2. Again, others say that it is Martyrs rising again a thousand years before
the general resurrection, but enjoying a dominion in heaven not on earth, (as
is Piscators opinion.) This cannot be: For, 1. It is against the scope, as the
former. 2. This dominion is of all Saints then in being (as we shall hear)
Therefore it is not peculiar to Martyrs. 3. This dominion and these who reign
here, are interrupted in their dominion, which can be said of none in heaven.
4. It is shown before to be on earth. 5. It would be also more than an thousand
years reign before the general resurrection, or else they must be again
suspended in it, which is absurd.

3. Neither can it be applied to Martyrs and Saints living under Antichrist and
other persecuters, who being dead are said to reign by their souls enjoying of
Christ in glory (as Paraeus and ordinarily Interpreters do apply it) which is a
truth that these Saints do reign even after their death; But it cannot be
applied to these who reign here, 1. because that reign is in heaven; this
meaned here is on earth. 2. That reigning of Saints departed, is continual in
all times; this is peculiar to these thousand years. 3. That of Saints in
heaven cannot be interrupted; this may be. 4. It agrees to Saints in their
most suffering condition, even that of Gog and Magog; for even then they
overcome and reign, so this is a peculiar good condition, and
contradistinguished from the Churches former hard straits and is interrupted,
as it is afterward, verse. 7. by that of Gog and Magog. It must necessarily
follow then, that they are living Saints on earth, and then in some more than
an ordinary flourishing condition. Concerning whom we are to enquire, 1. If it
be all Saints then living, or some few only? 2. What these contradistinguished
one from another are? who these Martyrs, and who these others are? 3. How they
continue for a thousand years to reign, if in their own persons, or in their
successors?

And we say, 1. they are living Saints, who never yet did see death, not
Martyrs formerly killed, but who then shall be followers of the Martyrs faith
and practice, and keep themselves from pollutions, such as are ( Chap. 14.)
called virgins, who are here meaned: For, 1. it is on earth, as is said. 2. It
is of all Saints then living, thus contradistinguished from the rest of the
dead world. 3. It is not the same individual persons, who live and reign all
these thousand years, but they in their successors, The Church being one body,
dies never, even as the witnesses continued all the space of one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, and died and rose again in their successors; so it is
here, one generation succeeds to another. Now, if it were Martyrs restored to
life, Then, 1. it would be peculiar to them, which is here common to all. 2.
Then they would live still and be in new hazard by Satan's loosing, which is
impossible; for, it is the same Saints that are encompassed by Gog and Magog,
who formerly did reign, when Satan was bound, Therefore it is living Saints
continuing in a succession for many years, They who in their life did reign,
suffering after death in their successors by Gog and Magog, even as their
predecessors who suffered in their life, yet after death reign in their
posterity: The one expounds the other, and shows that both the reigning of
Martyrs, and suffering of these Saints, must be verified in their successors:
for, all who live and reign, are partakers of this resurrection; but many
living Saints, who never died, must either be partakers of it, or they must be
among the dead, Therefore it is a spiritual resurrection to living Saints.

Again, the Martyrs reign here would be then either alone, or with others; and
none of these can be said without absurdity: Therefore it is the living who are
understood. Add, they must live and reign who did not so reign before,
Therefore it is not they.

Beside, this reigning agrees to such as it can be interrupted in, and be at
one time and not at another; which cannot be said of Martyrs glory, which is
always alike, Therefore cannot this be applied to Martyrs in glory, nor yet on
earth in their own persons, and therefore it must be in their successors.

Fourthly, Neither can it be said (as Forbes does) that this reign of Martyrs
is in respect of their good account in the Church after their martyrdom, in
which respect, some apply their receiving white garments under the fifth seal,
saying, that they that were reproached before in their deaths, are afterward
honored in their memories, which they begin at Constantine's time, when the
public profession of Religion became honorable. This, I say, cannot be said
as intended here: for, 1. This is not peculiar to a thousand years or definit
time; for, in the Church, that was always honorable. 2. Those who reign here,
are Saints on earth, and all Saints and Martyrs under Antichrists tyranny,
which was not begun then, this application makes it peculiar to some. 3.
Beside, Martyrs under Antichrist after that, were as much liable to reproach as
these formerly were under heathens, and therefore that cannot be applied here.
4. Add, that these who reign here, are the same who afterward are encompassed
and straightened by Gog and Magog; But that cannot be the fame and good name of
Saints departed, but living Saints themselves in their persons, Therefore it is
not that which is intended here.

These being on the negative part then laid by, we come to the affirmative: and
seeing it must be living Saints, who at the time here designed shall be members
of the militant Church, It is, first, questioned, whether all the Saints then
living are to partake of this good condition, or some only? that is, if it be a
special privilege of Martyrs or sufferers only who shall suffer during this
time? Or, if it be common to all? Answ. This good condition whatever it be, is
in some degree, and in its kind, common to all the Saints, who then shall be
living, not so much distributively to all and every one of every kind, as
generally to Saints of every kind, as collectively making up one body, of
whatever sort and degree they be, if they be Saints and Believers: even as the
low condition of the Churches suffering, will not prove, that every individual
Saint suffers, but that in common the Church has a suffering estate; so its
good condition will not prove, that all have it alike so, but that generally
they have a flourishing condition in common. And that it is thus to be
understood, appears, 1. In that these who live here, etc. are
contradistinguished from the dead: now, all living Saints they must either thus
reign, or they must be comprehended under these who continue dead, seeing all
the world is distinguished in these two; But none of them can be amongst the
dead, Therefore all of them must partake of this good condition. 2. It is for
this end, that not only Martyrs, but such as have not received the mark of the
beast, nor worshipped his image, are mentioned; and by these no other can be
understood, but such as in following the Lamb have kept themselves free (as
virgins, Chap. 14,) from the common snares and sins that others are taken with
and given unto. Hence, ( Chap. 13.) these are given as the properties only of
those who are written in the Lambs book of life, and so mentioned here as the
properties of all the elect Saints to whom this belongs. 3. The privileges
here mentioned, are common to all, as to reign with Christ, to be blessed and
holy, freed from the second death, to be Priests to God, etc. These are common
to all Saints, Therefore so is that good condition also that has these in it.
From which we may see how unwarrantable it is from this to apply any singular
felicity to some few Martyrs, or others, which is common to all.

The second thing to be enquired in the positive, is, Whether these living
Saints that are raised to reign, be the same individual persons that did
suffer, and so now reign for a thousand years? Or, if it be to be understood of
the Saints in their succession, as the Catholic Church in its continuance from
the beginning unto the end. This will answer an objection, where it is said,
That those who were set on the thrones, were those formerly beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus. Now, those beheaded, we say, are not in their own persons
raised again and set on the throne, but in their successors in the same faith
and profession the generation preceding reigning in the generation succeeding,
as the generation succeeding suffered in the generation preceding; even as in
common speech we say, The Babylonians, Romans, etc. governed the world for so
many years, though the same individual persons lived not so long. Or, as it is
said in Dan. 7.18. the Saints shall take the kingdom which shall never have an
end, imports not, that in the days of the Gospel (of which time that
speaks) no Saints shall die, but that the Saints spiritual reign shall never
be interrupted, and that there shall be a continual succession of a Church and
of Saints; so here, we take not the same individuals to continue but their
race, as one kind or stock (to speak so) the Church being one body, as the
Babylonians, Romans, etc. are one Empire: Saints therefore here, are not
personally or individually to be understood, but successively and in their
general acception, as one body; so that during this time they shall have a
visible profession, and there shall always continue a visible Church State in
the world. So it is neither therefore Martyrs raised again, nor Saints living
still all that time, but generally in their successors, This being the scope,
to show the estate of the Church in general and not of individual Saints. This
may be confirmed, 1. from what is said, If they be the same, then Martyrs dead
must live again, (this being a good condition to the Church on earth) and this
is contrary to what has been proven. 2. Then these Saints so raised again,
must only be the Saints on earth at that time, for all partake of this. 3. Then
these Saints must again in their own persons be encompassed by Gog and Magog:
for, it is these Saints that are encompassed who did reign, verse. 9. and
therefore so must they that reign be expounded to be the former sufferers, as
they are accounted afterward the besieged; But that cannot be personally
understood, Therefore neither the former; for, then were they not to continue
only a thousand years on earth, and to live so long only, but much longer: both
which have many absurdities with them, as that whoever died during that time,
would be known not to be an Elect; and whoever lived that long, would be
certainly known to be so; then also these who were born after the beginning of
these thousand years, would not live so long in this reign as these who went
before: it must therefore certainly be understood as it may in its continuance
agree to all Saints, as well as in the events, which may well be in succession,
so that what one wants in these who follow, he has it in these who went
before. And thus, generally, it sets out the visible Church in her good
condition during that time; for, it is still the same Church which reigns. We
understand it then, thus, that as it is said of the Prophets, ( Chap. 11.) that
they died and rose again, which yet is not to be understood of the same
individual persons, but of their followers and successors in that spirit and
cause (as John Baptist was successor to Elias, and in that respect is called
Elias;) So the slain Saints now are said to rise, when the face of a visible
Church, which was long eclipsed, as if it had been buried with these Martyrs,
does now in the same truth and cause show it self again in new professors, as
if these old Martyrs had risen again to continue that Church-face of purity and
worship, for which once they suffered. And this phrase of rising again, is in
this sense not unusual in the Prophets, as, 1. when they would signify a
restoration from a low condition, that is mavelous and such as men would
think no less impossible than to raise the dead, as, Ezekiel. 37.11. 2. When the
restoration is numerous and to make up an hopeless sad condition by such a
new comfort, as Jeremiah in his 31. Chap. ver. 18. speaks to Rachel, mourning
for her children. 3. When it is in the same truth, profession and cause, as is
said of the Prophets, Chap. 11. so it may be of Professors here, the time also
being one. 4. When men have the same bold spirit to testify and suffer, as if
these old Martyrs had risen to preach down Antichrist, who for a long time had
had peace. Thus was John accounted and named Elias, Matthew. 17. and here
Martyrs, both under the heathen persecuters and under Antichrist, are named. 1.
To show the Churches freedom from both these tyrannies, that now, these who
were undone by both formerly, may boldly profess that truth for which they
were persecuted. 2. To show the numerousnesse of Saints now as if all were
risen. 3. To show what time it belonged unto, to wit, that, after both. 4. To
show what parts and courage these Saints should have, and how fitted they
should be both against the open persecution and secret designs of Antichrist.
5. To show that they who now come to profess the Gospel, are of one and the
same Church with these who went before, it being still one woman who traveled
under heathens, that fled under Antichrist, Chap. 12. and now returns in her
seed to sit upon thrones.

The third thing to be enquired here, is, what Martyrs these are, whether these
suffering under heathen persecution, or these who suffer in the time of the
beasts tyranny, (which to these of this opinion, is the same time of these
thousand years,) or, such as have suffered both under heathen persecuters and
Antichrist, preceding the beginning of these thousand years? We take them to
be such whose sufferings are bypast, before these thousand years begin, and
not such as are to suffer under it what ever they be, as appears, 1. they are
said to be once slain, and to rise again before this reign begin, which could
not be if their sufferings had not preceeded. 2. They are said to reign a
thousand years, which shows they begin all together to reign: and therefore
their suffering must go before its beginning. 3. The time of their reign is
expressly distinguished from, and made successive unto, the time of their
suffering. Therefore are they not to be confounded, or their reign made to
begin before their suffering. 4. This condition is marked as the outgate of a
former strait, and what former strait rather than this, the Saints suffering
under Antichrist? therefore that suffering must go before it. 5. The suffering
which immediately follows the thousand years, is, Gog and Magog: now, Gog and
Magog belongs not to Antichrist, but goes immediately before the last Judgment,
and comes after the thousand years; Then, these who suffer here, must either be
after the thousand years, which cannot be, or during that time, which
confounds the Churches good condition and her ill; or, it must be before, and
it being none of the former two, must therefore be the latter. 6. Three states
of the Church are clearly holden forth here, 1. a suffering state under
Antichrist. 2. A good condition during the restraint of Satan, it being ill
before. 3. An ill condition after his loosing again, by Gog and Magog:
therefore as that of Magog follows the thousand years, so that of Antichrist
must preceed; for, these thousand years are put in the midst, and distinguished
from both. 7. This reign agrees so to Saints and to such Saints as it did not
agree to them before these thousand years, nor can do after. But if these who
reign be contemporary with Antichrists dominion, Then Saints would reign so
both before and after, and so would not suffer and be in a strait. 8. If (as
many think) the killing of Martyrs go before this reign, so must also these
killed by Antichrist; for, both are equally installed into this reign, at its
entry. Beside, this opinion would confound the Churches suffering condition
with this reign which is peculiar to some one time, and differenced from the
former, as has been showed. Hence follows, 1. that Antichrists supreme
universal reign, is to preceed these thousand years. 2. That then Antichrist
is not to be expected a few years before the end of the world; for, no other
Antichrist there is, but this beast that persecuteth, before it begin.

Lastly, It is enquired here, if reasonable or senseless creatures shall be
partakers of this good condition and change? and how far it shall extend? for,
of old, many, as Lactantius and others of late, Buroughs on Hosea, lay these
two principles, 1. That the earth shall abound in extraordinary fruitfulness,
that the rocks shall drop honey, and the earth be free of storms, etc. 2. That
the Saints shall chiefly and largely share of all those temporal things. But
we say, 1. as there is possibly more peace now, so God may make abundance of
all these things the rifer in the earth, as not being wasted with troubles and
persecutions as formerly. 2. That God may bless pains, so as to have
extraordinary increase, (comparatively with former times) is not impossible,
especially if applied to the Jews, their land may be brought back to its wonted
fruitfulness, to be as once it has been, though now it be interrupted. 3.
That the Saints may enjoy more of these (as being less persecuted or plagued)
than formerly, and as having more liberty for industry and public employments,
These may be granted. But that there should be an extraordinary fruitfulness
put in the earth, as without pains or industry to bring forth, or with pains
more than at any time it did since the fall; or, that, 2. the Saints should be
all rich and none poor; yea, that chiefly they should enjoy the riches of the
world, these we account false and groundless, and without the least warrant
here. And as they are without ground from this place, so are they (as would
seem) directly against it and other certain grounds, as, 1. that what is
promised here, is especially spiritual. 2. That this promised here, is a
peculiar mercy to the Saints; but fruitfulness of the earth would not be
peculiar to them, many wicked men being possesso^^ of a great part of 'it. 3.
The delivering of the creature from bondage is reserved for (...) ^^y, when the
sons of God shall be manifested, which is at the last judgment, Romans 8.21, 22,
23. If then there were a delivery before that, it needed not groan so, for that
time. 4. Beside, the promises of the Gospel being spiritual especially, it
would be but a diversion to our carnal humors to have such an occasion as
temporal abundance to hunt after; and it is the sibnesse of our affections to
creatures, that makes many profess more delight in such a Kingdom than in
that of Grace and Glory, which are uncontrovertible. Neither can any think,
that the Saints are wronged by this; for certainly, spiritual things are ever
preferable to carnal and temporal things.

The second thing is as groundless as the former, to wit, that Saints then
should abound in that affluence of all these temporal riches: for, 1. Christ's
Promises and Covenant, under the Gospel, run not on these terms, nor are they
of that kind. 2. The Lord has said, that the poor shall be always amongst His
People, and that there shall be always objects of charity to the end of the
world. 3. The cross is spoken of to wait on Believers to the end; and
certainly, poverty is no little part of their cross and conformity with
Christ, and a cause of many other crosses to them, which abundance of the
things of the world usually keeps off, as contempt, reproach, straits, etc.
4. The things of this world are accounted still a portion for these of this
world, Psalm. 17. that God, as it were, allows them a more large share of
these things than He does the others, to whom (as to young heirs). He has
reserved a better heritage. 5. It were hard to place this good condition of the
Church in that which for many ages has been the condition of the men of this
world. 6. If this were promised to them, much riches, power, etc. then might
they with a good conscience pray for it, and aim at it, as they may do for
things necessary, to wit, health and peace, etc. yet can it hardly be thought,
that Believers are warranted to pray to be rich, and to have a temporal
dominion, we being commanded, ( Heb. 13.5. and 1 Timothy 6.) to be content, if we
have food and raiment. 7. If abundance of outward things were a part of this
good condition promised, Then were it generally and equally to be applied to
all sorts, whereof yet all, young and old, master and servant, rich and poor,
(if such be supposed to continue during that time) are not, nor cannot be
capable. 8. This opinion gives too much way to carnal lusts to let out
themselves on creatures, and therefore is so well entertained by such pallats,
(as Eusebius says of Caerinthus, that being delighted in these things, he
molded a kingdom agreeable to them) But what do these taste to a spiritual
man, being compared with pure Doctrine in the Church with Spirit and power
amongst hearers, and with these other things wherein this Kingdom consists?
If any ask, but what ill is in that last opinion? Answ. Beside that it is
against Truth, and wrongs the Word, to father any thing on it which it will not
own, and so proves an untender meddling with the holy Word, to which nothing
should be added, It does, 1. alter much the nature of Christ's Kingdom and
promises to His people, which are ever spiritual. 2. It does draw affections
from things heavenly and spiritual to earthly, and instead of exercising and
engaging their faith to a spiritual dependence on, and delight in God Himself,
it does rather awake their carnal humor to warm with, and to be desirous of,
these supposed brave things that are expected, it being easier to engage our
carnal part than our spiritual. 3. It often occasioneth want of sobriety
among good people, that while they should be taken-up in thinking much of the
Gospel, and blessing God for what they enjoy of it, and desiring the
furtherance of its spiritual success, they are by this brought to a lesser
estimation of their present condition, still expecting and desiring these
strange things. And hardly get these opinions place, but they carry a sway
beyond the simple Gospel-promises and privileges in men's estimation, as if
these Saints were blessed beyond others, that are brought to heaven any other
time, beside that it does readily engage men in an untender pursuit of earthly
things, as if from these supposed promises they had right and allowance so to
do.

LECTURE IV.
Verse. 1. And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.

2. And he laid hold on the dragon that hold serpent, which is the devil and
Satan, and bound him a thousand years,

3. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon
him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should
be fulfilled: and after that, he must be loosed a little season.


THat which rests now to be cleared, is the time, which is six times repeated
in this first part of the Chapter, and said to be a thousand years: and this
leads to the third thing proposed.

Concerning it, there is the less hazard what be concluded, if these strange
events (formerly rejected) be eschewed: Yet, these things concerning it, we
take for truth.

1. That, simply considered, it points at some peculiar definit time of the
Church under the days of the Gospel, and takes not in, nor belongs unto,
all that time betwixt Christ's first coming in the flesh, and His coming again
to judgment. For, then, 1. It would not answer the scope, which is to point out
some peculiar thing belonging to one time and not to another. 2. It is expressly
differenced from the time following it, wherein that peaceable estate is marred
by Gog and Magog, and not unclearly contradistinguished from some loosing or
liberty of Satan against the Church before his apprehending here, ver. 1. This
therefore (which is also Augustins judgment, de Civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 6,
and 7. with many Schoolmen) we think not safe. 2. Whatever definit time it be,
this is certain, it designeth a long time simply, and comparatively the longest
time of a prosperous condition against enemies, that the Church of Christ is to
have in the days of the Gospel; for so certainly the often repitition of this
number of a thousand years, does import. 3. Whether it be definitly taken for a
thousand years, properly so understood, is more questionable: Although there be
no great absurdity so to take it, (if they be placed in their own room) as, for
the most part, Interpreters do; yet, I think there is no necessity in it, 1.
from what is said of times generally, Chap. 11. 2. Because this vision is as
obscure in all things as any in this Book, and it will be very unlike then that
this time only is literally to be taken, whereas in all this Prophecy no other
time by any judicious Interpreter is so literally understood, even those who
make them most definit, do yet make them improperly and prophetically to be
understood; and, to say all other expressions in this vision are figurative,
and only the time (which continually to all is improperly set down formerly)
shall here be literal, is not very consistent with the strain of this
Prophecy: for, where days and years and months are formerly mentioned, no
sound Interpreter can take them literally for so many and no more; and what
reason can be given of altering the common strain in this obscure place? 3.
And, that ordinarily some give it for a rule, that broken times are definit
(though they be not always literal) as three years and an half, etc. yet whole
times are ordinarily indefinit in the Scripture, as Psalm. 90. a thousand years
in Thy sight, are taken for a long time; and a thousand generations for many,
Psalm. 105. and ten days, Rev. 2.9. According to this rule then, an indefinit
acception, will sure best with this place. If any object, or ask, why this time
is so often definitly repeated? It may be answered, 1. Because usually by a
thousand, a great number or long time is set out in Scripture, as we have said
before. 2. Because ordinarily a good condition is set down in a long time, or
in expressions setting out a long time, whereas difficulties are mentioned
under hours, days, etc. (See Chap. 17.) and this is done for the Churches
comfort: But this cannot infer, that so they are for so many years peremptorily
to be understood: for, 1. It is not ordinary to the Scripture in reckoning of
times to be so peremptory, even in historical places, as by comparing of
Scriptures is clear. 2. That number, three years and an half, forty two
months, one thousand two hundred and sixty days, time, times, and half a
time, in equivalent expressions ( Chap. 11, 12, and 13.) is five times set
down; yet no judicious Writer will count them therefore literally to be
understood, even those who make them definit; though it may be observed, that
Papists who make the former time literal, yet make this, that is as often
repeated, indefinit.

The greatest question concerning the time, is in the particular application
thereof to a certain beginning and close, which is questioned even amongst
those that in other things agree, to wit, Whether it be wholly past, i.e. begun
and ended? Or, 2. if fully to come, as not being as yet begun? Or, 3. if
current, that is, begun, but not ended? In all which there is diversity. Those
who make it fully past, begin at four periods, 1. some at Christ's birth, and
end at Pope Sylvester the second a Magician. 2. Some at His death, and end at
Benedict the third, suffocated by the devil. 3. Others, at the destruction of
Jerusalem, and so end it in Gregory the seventh, or Hildebrand. 4. Most begin
it at Constantine's reign, making this contemporary with that of Satan's being
cast from heaven, Chap. 12. this is also ended, anno 1300, in Boniface the
eighth, when the Wars against the Waldenses began. Prideaux, de mill annis
Apoc. does thus sum those of that opinion.

These that make it fully to come, are of four opinions, 1. Some (as the old
Chiliasts) make it after the day of judgment. 2. Some make it after all the
vials, including the day of judgment, as Archer and Alstedius. 3. Others put in
under the seventh vial, after the beasts destruction, in an interval before the
end of the world, and the arising of Gog; so does Mede and some others. Lastly,
some make it, as it were, to be a current day of judgment all that time, and to
follow upon Christ's coming to judgment, thus Tylling ast: the former also in
their explanation, would seem not much to differ from this.

These who make it running, are of two sorts; 1. Some begin about the year,
1300. when the Waldenses arose, and when (according to their account) the
thousand years of Satan's binding from Constantines time, expired; this is
Brightmans opinion, who makes these two of Satan's binding and the Saints
reigning to be successive; but this ground at the entry is rejected. 2. Others
(only Cotterius I find alleged for this) begin at Luthers days, 1517. How to
decide here is difficult; yet, having laid the former grounds, there is the
less hazard, considering well the nature of the events, which make these
thousand years famous: neither is it useless to enquire in it, not only for
clear applying of this Scripture, but for understanding all the controversy
about it; for, if it shall be found, that all of it, or a part of it, is past,
it will serve much to clear the nature of all, and be the best refutation of
many errors about it, and will help to stay the gadding expectation of
stupendous things to come.

That we may proceed, these two generals are certain, 1. That these thousand
years belong unto, and are contemporary with some of the former principal
Prophesies of Seals, Trumpets and Vials, which continue the series of events
from the beginning to the end. 2. Then this is certain, that the binding of
Satan, here mentioned, with the kingdom following thereupon to the Saints, must
relate and be subjoyned unto some one of these notable loosings that are
contained in this Prophecy, which Satan has against the Saints, and must be
contemporary with some victory they have over him after these. Now, four of
these are mentioned, Lect. 1. In all which, Satan's liberty preceedeth; his
overthrow in part follows, and then the Churches good condition is subjoyned.
The first is his keeping the world under darkness and Idol-worship; from this
he is removed by the white horse of Christ, conquering in the Gospel, Chap. 6.
2. He is loose after that, in persecuting by the red horse, Chap. 6. and
seeking by the red dragon to destroy the woman and her child, Chap. 12. where
he is overcome and casten to the earth. 3. He is loose under the first six
trumpets, by raising Antichrist; and ( Chap. 13.) by warring with the Saints in
him; by the seventh trumpet ( Chap. 11.) the victory is obtained, and the
everlasting Gospel preached, Chap. 14. The last is his loosing in Gog and
Magog, in which he is overthrown, at, or a very little before, the end of the
world. Now the question will be, to which of these overthrows we may apply
these thousand years of his binding? and so whether it contemporateth with the
seals, or trumpets, or vials, for to one of these or some part of them,
certainly it relates; and so may we know whether it be past, presently
current, or to come? For clearing whereof, we shall, 1. see what light this
place gives of it self to the timing of it. 2. We shall show it is neither
fully past, nor yet to come fully. 3. That it is current under the vials,
beginning with them at the binding of Satan after his third loose. 4. We shall
give the scope and co-herence of this Chapter on it.

And, first, here, concerning the close or expiring of these thousand years, we
may gather, 1. that it is a little (how long, none can tell) before the end of
the world; for, Satan's loosing ( ver. 7.) goes before the end, and these
thousand years expire before that: therefore these thousand years are not to be
expected after the day of judgment, neither at it or immediately before it. 2.
It is clear, that it is the last great binding before the last interval of
Satan's last loosing, which preceedeth his final binding: for, after this
immediately Gog is loose, and Satan is not again restrained, but finally
judged. Hence we may gather, 1. That this good condition of the Saints, is the
last they are to have on earth, seeing nothing follows it but Satan's loosing
and final judgment. 2. That when this must end, Gog and Magog succeeds; and so
hardly can we say, that these thousand years are expired, Except we say, 1. Gog
and Magog is come. 2. and that be applied to such an enemy as continues for a
little season, in comparison of the good condition that the Church has had for
a long time before that. 3. If so, we must say, there is no freedom to the
Church to be expected after this, such as she has had before (for, nothing
comes after Gog and Magog) which seems contrary to the nature and tenor of
this prophecy, especially of the vials, which increases Satan's binding and
overthrow, and their reign, still to the last.

Again, for the beginning of these thousand years, it is clear here, 1. That it
cannot begin at the entry of the Gospel, except we say there is but one
interval of the Churches peace under it (contrary to experience) and so divide
all the time of the Gospel in these thousand years, and the little persecution
of Gog and Magog, which cannot be granted, for the former grounds. 2. The
binding supposes a loosing to go before it, and what loosing? it seems clear
by the raising of some Martyrs for the testimony of Jesus Christ's whereby it
appears, that the great persecution of the Church, even by Antichrists is to
interveen betwixt Christ's first coming and this good condition of the Saints,
it being ordinary that their suffering condition goes first, and that their
reigning condition and Satan's binding comes thereafter. Beside, 3. It is the
last good condition before the end, contradistinguished from her hard condition
going before.

From this second, we may proceed then and say, that it is not fully past, Not
only from the former considerations, but also, 1. because that would make the
Churches low condition and her good condition to be confounded (which yet are
expressly distinguished) if that reign fall either contemporary with Antichrists
or heathenish persecution. 2. It presupposes the Antichristian tyranny before
its beginning, which cannot be if all the thousand years shall be past already.
See ver. 4. 3. That which belongs to the Churches best condition on earth, is
not yet come, to wit, 1. Antichrists ruin, 2. the fullness of the Gentiles, 3.
the incoming of the Jews, which are certainly to be looked for; and to make
this good condition (which relates to her best condition on earth, as has
been said) to be already past, would separate it from all these excellent
events, which cannot be done. See Romans 11. ver. 12, 13. where the Jews
in-coming is called the riches of the Christian world and life from the death,
which, not upon the matter only, but in expressions also, suit well with this
place.

From all which then we conclude, 1. that these thousand years are not, nor
cannot be contemporary with the seals or trumpets in the first two special
periods of the Churches condition, she being in both these, low; therefore must
it belong to the time of the vials, which follows the other. 2. We may
conclude then, that this binding of Satan or good condition of the Saints, is
not that victory of the Gospel, merely spiritual, by the white horse, Chap. 6.
Nor that over Satan in Constantin's days, Chap. 12. (both which agree either
with seals or trumpets) much less is it that of Gog and Magog at the end yet
to come: It must needs follow then, that it is the third binding of the devil
by the witnesses rising, Chap. 11. the Gospels spreading after Antichrists
begun ruin, Chap. 14. that is understood here, there being but four in all.

This then we take for certain, that it belongs to the prophecy of the
vials, God having shown in them the down-bringing of her enemies expressly, but
leaving the Churches condition to be gathered by consequence; here expressly he
shows the Churches good condition, contemporary with that: which may further
be made out, 1. The Churches good condition must be contemporary with the
lowest estate of her enemies; (for their falling and her rising, and contra,
are still knit together) But the vials hold out the longest series of
judgments against her enemies, and the most full, Therefore it belongs to
them; for, during the seals, she is persecuted by heathens, during the trumpets
by Antichrist, in the vials the Lamb and these that were with Him prevail.
Secondly, The great things belonging to the Churches good condition, as, 1. the
removing or restraining open enemies. 2. The fullness of the Gentiles. 3. The
in-calling of the Jews, belong all unto, and fall under the vials (as may be
seen by the exposition of Chap. 16, 17, 18, 19. preceding,) Ergo, this good
condition, (being the Churches best estate) falls under them also. Thirdly,
This good estate of the Saints, and this binding of Satan, contemporary with
it, is the last freedom and greatest that the Church has before the last day,
But that is under the vials. Ergo.

It remains now therefore only to enquire, if the beginning of these thousand
years be to be reckoned from the beginning of the vials, or to be restricted
unto the seventh after Antichrists fall, as the learned Mede does? We say, it
cannot be restricted to the last, but must take in more, even them all. We shall
first confirm the negative part, then the affirmative. 1. It is not to be
restricted to the seventh vial; for, then it would make this reign to be a very
short time; or, it would make the continuance of the seventh vial
disproportionable exceedingly to all the rest: for, Gog and Magogs opposition
certainly falls under the seventh.

These thousand years then, according to this, would interveen betwixt the
sixth and that opposition, which apparently would be no long time; or, it will
fall in the other inconvenience,

2. We grant, that it may be under the seventh at its height (as, under the
sixth trumpet, the Churches low condition was at its height) yet, not only in
it, because the Churches good and ill conditions are not counted by their
highest degrees, but by the kind and series of their estate good or ill. Hence,
the Churches low condition is not astricted to the fifth or sixth trumpets
only, but it is reckoned for one thousand two hundred and sixty days, (which
takes in all the trumpets) because the same strait which came to an height
under the fifth or sixth seals or trumpet, is to be reckoned from the first,
where it began, and from which it did still grow from one step to another till
it came to its height, it being all but different degrees of one condition and
not diverse conditions: for, that same Antichrist is stricken at by the first
vial, though not overturned wholly (at least) till the sixth; And that Gospel,
is preached and professed under it, which grows still, till it come to this
height in a continued victory.

3. If we pass the first vial, it will be hard where to fix its beginning,
there being still a graduall difference only amongst them, Therefore these who
do pass the first vial, profess unclearnesse here, how far to bring on the
sixth trumpet with the vials, and where to begin this time; and indeed if we
leap over the periods set by the prophecy it self, we will not easily settle:
thus, Mede, otherwise most accurate and particular in applying this prophecy,
is yet put to this stand here, upon the former ground.

4. We have seen, that Antichrists destruction falls under the sixth vial;
then Christ and His Armies ride prosperously, and so does the Jews conversion
fall to be then also, as the same Author interprets it; And are not these
events and effects of Satan's binding, and the Churches reign? so, by the fifth,
the whore is destroyed; and ( Chap. 17. and 18.) all Kings are bound up from
impeding it: there the Lamb makes war and overcomes, so do the called and
faithful that are with Him, Chap. 17.18. which belongs to the fifth vial,
the effect whereof is a proof of this: And this certainly must belong to the
Saints good condition, and it is opposed to that, Chap. 13. where they were
overcome, and it intimates a change on their condition. This then is the first
confirmation of this, that these thousand years are to be reckoned from the
beginning of the vials, thus, If these thousand years can begin neither after
the vials are begun, nor yet before they do begin, Then their beginning must be
together, even as almost they end together; But they cannot begin before the
first, as is said, nor yet after the first, Therefore they must begin with it,
seeing at the beginning of these vials the Gospel began to spread, and
continues through them all to the last interruption, all of them carrying
judgments of the same kind. 2. The third binding of Satan, after his liberty
and tyranny against the Church, begins by the vials; But this restraint
here mentioned, is that third restraint, ut supra, Ergo, it is to begin then.
3. This binding of Satan, and good condition of the Church, is to follow
immediately after the Churches return from the wilderness, and the expiring of
these one thousand two hundred and sixty days, Chap. 11. and 12. and 13. of
Antichrists height: for, here the thousand years begin, when the Martyrs are
raised, and when these, who were persecuted by Antichrist before, do get
liberty; But the liberty that the Church has under the vials (beginning at the
first) is that which follows upon her low condition in the wilderness and
Antichrists height, immediately, and by it the Saints get breathing and liberty
to profess the Gospel again. Ergo, it is that that is meaned here. 4. The
reign of the Saints, and the good condition of the Church here, certainly is
contemporary with the rising of the Prophets and their taking up to a
Church State, Chap. 11. after the 1260. days are expired of their prophesying
in sackcloth; for, if when she suffers they prophecy in sackcloth, and their
low condition set out her low condition, why must not their good condition
denote her good condition also? These cannot be separated, but when the
Prophets die, in some respect the Church dies, and when they arise and live,
the Saints again must arise and live; But their ariseing and living, and being
received to a public profession and preaching again in their successors, is
at the beginning of the vials, as was showed, Chap. 11. Therefore this of the
Saints rising and living, must begin then also, seeing Prophets and Saints make
but one Church, and the one cannot rise without the other, they not being an
organized Church, but together. 5. This reign or good condition of the Saints,
must necessarily be the same, and contemporary with that estate of the Church
on earth after Antichrists height, set out by the seventh trumpet, Chap. 11.
But the vials in their rise, progress and close, are contemporary with that
seventh trumpet, as is cleared in Chap. 11. ver. 15. Therefore they must begin
together. 6. These thousand years are contemporary with that palm-bearing
company that are mentioned, Chap. 7. (cleared also and acknowledged by Mede)
for, they succeed the sealed company going before (who are contemporary with
Antichrist under the trumpets, as was said on the words; But these also begin
and go along with the vials; for, immediately they succeed upon Antichrists
begun ruin, Therefore these thousand years must be so also. And as there were
then, after the 6. Chapter, two principal prophesies to follow, one holding
forth the Churches strait condition, and the other its enlargement, So was
there a touch of both given by that seventh Chapter in two parts, as was there
cleared. And if there be but two states following, one of the sealed one
hundred forty and four thousand, which expireth under the sixth trumpet before
the vials begin, an other of the innumerable company that follow: we cannot
therefore reckon five or six of the vials to that strait condition of the
Church, but must take them all in under the Churches enlarged condition, which
is opposed to the former: for, all the vials must either belong to the last
good estate of the Church in the last part of that seventh Chapter; or, many of
them must be comprehended under the first part, and be contemporary with that
sealed company; But the last cannot be: for, 1. that sealed company and
sealing, speaks a height of strength in Antichrist, and an hiding of the
Saints, contemporary with her being in the wilderness, whereas the vials speak
judgment against her enemies and the Churches return. 2. That sealing expireth
when the Church comes to have a public profession, and multitudes flock in to
her, at which time the vials do but begin. Therefore by this it appears that
there is a mistake in contemporating the six first vials with the sixth
trumpet, it being certain that the sixth trumpet contemporateth with this
sealed number of one hundred forty and four thousand. Now, if the vials all of
them succeed that shut-up and straited condition of the Church, Then must they
be contemporary with that enlargement, set out by the palm-bearing company, and
so with these thousand years. It is also there observable, that the low
condition of the Church under Antichrist, and her sealing is reckoned from the
sixth seal before ever the seventh be opened, though Antichrist be not in the
vigorous pursuit of the Saints, till the fifth trumpet; so that enlargement,
which is contradistinguished from it, ibid. is to be accounted from Antichrists
turn, and the removing of that strait, for which the company of one hundred
forty and four thousand were sealed, which begins by the first vial, though
it comes not to its height till the sixth or seventh: there is one reason for
reckoning both alike from their first beginnings. Beside, to show that these
vials or any of them cannot contemporate with the sixth trumpet, the sixth
trumpet and they are of diverse matters; that trumpet speaks Antichrists
tyranny against the Saints and his prevailing; the vials, Antichrists ruin and
Gods judgment on him. 2. We can hardly give contrary effects to one trumpet,
it is not suitable to any other of them. 3. This would make the vials (which
are one principal prophecy) contemporary with an other (at least in part with
that) of the trumpets, whereas no more the vials can contemporate with the
trumpets, than the trumpets with the seals, as is said in the preface on Chap
6. As for that which is said, that Antichrists Kingdom is shaken, Chap. 11.
before the seventh trumpet blow, Answ. It may be answered, that it appears
that Antichrists height there, is when the witnesses are killed; for, then he
insulteth, and in the exercise of his tyranny and dominion is in the highest
degree: there is no more there mentioned but their rising, Antichrists fear,
and a part of the great Cities falling, which is mentioned, not to contemporate
these events with the sixth trumpet, but to show what is the connection betwixt,
and the march and term differencing the sixth from the seventh, that when the
one (the sixth) ends, then the seventh begins, which is then at the same
hour, when the witnesses are raised up; then the second woe is past, and the
third comes quickly, there is such connection betwixt them, as is more fully
cleared, Chap. 11.

By all which it appears, that these thousand years, beginning at the end of
one thousand two hundred and sixty days, mentioned, Chap. 11. fall to begin
about the year, 1560. and so are running, being in part past, but in their
vigor to come, as the vials carry on by steps the casting down of enemies, and
bring on the flourishing of the Gospel. I see no great absurdity in this, but
some conveniences: for, 1. It shunneth the mistakes that are in the first
opinion, which say, that all is past, wherein many, who truly think that the
Scripture seems to hold out a better condition to come, cannot acquiesce:
this is granted here; for, the vials are on the growing hand and these events
are coming, which does confirm the ground laid. 2. It avoideth that absurdity
which follows the other extreme, which says, that all is yet to begin: For,
1. this continues the Churches condition no longer than the vials do, it being
certain that the fourth is almost but begun, (if we be that length) there will
be yet even by the reckoning of the vials and the events to be fulfilled under
them a considerable time to the end, though not necessarily so much as would
be, if after six vials these thousand years were to begin. 2. This preventeth
the fear of expecting any strange and uncouth events during that time: For, 1.
this gives ground for no more but what suiteth with the vials, and what is
otherwhere clear in this prophecy, and grounds formerly laid down. 2. If for
some years the Churches of Christ have been under this good condition, we may
then gather, that no strange thing is to be expected: we may expect a further
degree of holiness, number of professors, extent of a Church, etc. but that
is not the thing which any will conceive to be dangerous: for, if the Church
thrive when enemies are brought down, then the more they are brought down the
more her good condition grows, and that is necessarily inferred from the
series of the vials.

There want not objections from both hands, as, 1. did not Christ and the
Saints reign after His death by the Gospel? Ans. Yes, and shall do so
continually; but the question is about the peculiar reign mentioned in these
words. See Chap. 11.12. and 17.

Object. 2. Then the world is yet long to stand, and the Church to have a long
good condition. Ans. That is not absurd (for we definite not how long) but that
both follow, is certainly cleared before.

Object. 3. from the other hand, The Jews are not yet come, in therefore it
cannot be current. Ans. The Jews in-coming belongs not to the Saints good
condition simply, but to its height and fullness, which we grant: we take that
in before it end, but cannot suspend the Churches good condition until it be,
because it is by the Gentile Churches flourishing condition, that they are to
be provoked. Beside, Antichrists height belonged to the Churches low condition,
yet is not her low condition of the 1260. days to be restricted in their
beginning to his appearing and height, but to his preparatory working, as often
it is said.

Object. 4. Men cannot think that these are the thousand years they live into.
Ans. This proceeds from mistake and prejudice concerning the events; only
they believe it not, because they expect some uncouth thing all that time. 2.
It cannot be strange to these who say it is past; for, they place as ill and
worse times under these thousand years: Nor again, can it be any absurdity to
such as are sound in the nature of this Kingdom; for, in a great part, we enjoy
and have enjoyed in many places since Antichrists begun ruin, in a good
measure, all these six things, in which properly this Kingdom consists, as,
1. purity; 2. power in saving souls; 3. discipline and visible
Church-profession; 4. many Professors in respect of what was before; 5. much
peace almost where there is a Church, it has had for a time, law for its
peace, and has not been persecuted on that account so as formerly; 6. a long
continuance of all these, though with other difficulties, such as are not
inconsistent with this condition. There are troubles, but they take not away
visibility from the Church so as before, and things of this kind are
warrantably to be expected from this word. Therefore it is not absurd, to apply
it to our time in its beginning.

Object. 5. But Satant is loose under the sixth vial, when he stirs up all
to war against the Saints, and Antichrist is not defeated before that. Ans.
This good condition of the Saints, is not only in their peace, but in their
victories; though the devil and the beast fight still, yet they loss ground,
Chap. 17. verse. 14. and to fight and overcome, is not a great impediment of a
good condition; and this is opposed to their former conditions, not in this
that they shall not have enemies, but that they shall fight and overcome them,
(I mean rightly understood) and it shall not be as it was Chap. 13.8. 2. The
binding of Satan we show was not absolute, and this shows only that he was
not kept from essaying something to be an occasion of Gods praise in the
Church, and yet it says that he was much restrained and weakened, this being
the last essay of the beast after many defeats, which also succeeds not well
with him, and is but like Pharaoh's following of Israel to the red Sea, wherein
was the Churches victory and not his.

We may then knit the scope (as in the entry, to this 20. Chapter) thus, John
being now to show the devils last overthrow, beginning where he left, Chap. 12,
and 13. where he is cast down and for a time rages and gets up a new
worship in the world by Antichrists means, when open persecution failed him, It
might be questioned, what came of him then? It is answered, I saw, says he,
(after he had done much hurt to the Church) the Angel that had cast him from
heaven to earth, pursue him there, and take him by his power, and restrain him
from that dominion and deluding of the world by that beast Antichrist as he had
done, and that as strongly for a long time, as if he had been kept in bonds,
during which time I saw that Church, which was by Antichrist persecuted and
spoiled, and these Saints that durst not before be seen, brought to a pure,
free and peaceable profession of that truth which was formerly born down.

We come now to go particularly through the words (which may be more easily
done) according to the former grounds: they contain two notable events, but
contemporary, 1. of Satan's binding, 2. of the Saints reigning.

That of Satan's binding, has these circumstances in it. 1. The description of
the party that binds Satan, ver. 1. 2. His executing that errand and actually
binding him, verse. 2, 3 -- 3. Some things added for clearing the end of this
binding, and that for such a definit time, ver. -- 3.

The party is first called an Angel, which we take to be Christ, called
Michael, Chap. 12. 1. Because it is He that destroys the work of the devil
and is the stronger man, who is still contending with him for His Church. He (
Chap. 12.) did cast him down; He ( Chap. 6.) did conquer him on His white
horse; He ( Chap. 19.) defeateth him in his lieutenant the beast, which is a
part of the same event. 2. Because it is Christ who carries the keys of hell
and death, Chap. 1.18.

2. Again, He is said to come down from heaven: this is to distinguish it from
that battle in heaven, Chap. 12. where ye heard the devil was cast to the
earth, and, as a serpent, poisoned many there; Now, Christ by His power,
follows and puts a restraint on him in respect of that link he had loosed
after his former down-casting.

3. This Angel is described by two things, 1. He has the key of the
bottomless pit; this signifies sovereignty and power: it differs from that,
Chap. 9.1, 2. For, 2. that was a star, falling down, not coming down. 2. That
was one who got the keys, this has them as his due place; that but got them
for a special use. 3. That opened the pit and sent out locusts and spirits,
this shuts it; and it is like, a respect is had to that loosing in this
binding, this here being the restraining of that dominion, which Satan usurp^d
there, and so these thousand years must be reckoned from the shutting of the
pit of Antichristian errors, and liberty of His Ministers through the earth, as
that of the opening of the pit shows their beginning: and this shows, that
as Antichrist was gain^ng ground before the pit was opened, so may he have some
being for a long time after the begun shutting thereof.

4. He has a great chain in his hand. The devil is in some chains always, Jude
ver. 6. under some restraint. This shows, 1. the power of the Angel. 2. His
errand to link up the devil from his former liberty, as men chain mastiffs. 3.
It shows the devils malicious nature that must be bound. And, 4. his
subordination to Christ's sovereignty, who effectually restrains him.

The executing of his errand follows, verse. 2. and 3. He lays hold on him
by His power, as one in fury and anger He grippeth him. 2. The party gripped
and bound is described, just as Chap. 12. To show, 1. that it is the same devil
that was cast down to the earth that is now further bound. 2. That we may have
some help to knit this story of this serpent to the foregoing story of that
same party. 3. He binds this serpent, tieth him up, as it were, and that for
a long time, even a thousand years. 4. He casts him in the bottomless pit,
or abyss, which he feared, that is, put him not only from Magistracy and open
persecution, as before, Chap. 12. but also restrains him from such underhand
dealing as he had before, and discovers him and his working in a considerable
and great degree beyond what was: and he shuts him up and seals it, as
Dan. 6. and Mat. 26. to show the certainty of that restraint and the
superiority of the Angel over him that He shall no more suffer Satan to go by
his order and march set to him, than one shut up in prison can go forth either
by violence or subtility.

2. Two ends, or reasons, are set down to clear the Angels proceeding, 1. He is
bound that he should deceive the Nations no more, that is, kept from having
such influence to delude the world as he had done before, who first made them
all Heathens and Idolaters generally, then after that made them all ( Chap. 13,
and 17.) to worship the beast and himself in him, so that there was scarce the
face of a visible Church. Now, he shall not get that liberty so universally to
delude Nations (for, Nations are collectively to be understood here, all
Nations) and eclipse the face of Christ's Church as he had done. Nor, 2. ever
after that shall he get the world so generally to ignorance, superstition,
idolatry and persecution against the Godly, as formerly he had done.

Thus deceiving no more, is not to be understood simply, but with respect to
such extent and success, and is here added to signify a new restraint put
upon him, beyond what is in his casting to the earth, Chap. 12. where though he
was put from open persecution, yet did he follow, and that not without
success, a new way by deceit, Chap. 13. but now is he restrained in a great
measure from that also; so it is qualified as to the event. 2. It is qualified
as to the time, that is, during the determinate time of his restraint of a
thousand years: But after, says he, he must be loosed a little season; this
respects what is following concerning Gog and Magog: he was not restrained
finally, but for a certain time (it would seem yet indefinite, for if it were
just a thousand years, then might one precisely know the time of this event
before it come, if they can reckon the beginning of the thousand years) for,
says he, when it expireth, God will give him liberty to exercise His Church
(possibly she abusing this good condition, when Antichrist is away, therefore a
new scourge is provided) but for a little season. Little, 1. compared with the
former loosings. 2. Little, compared with this time of the Saints peace and
good estate. So that when after the Church shall enjoy liberty a long time from
Antichrists persecution, a new trial is to be expected to her before the end
come. By which also it appears, that that reckoning of the thousand years
cannot begin at Christ's birth, or death; for, then it would not be a little
time after its expiring to the end (there being yet so many of the vials with
their effects to come) and although all the time of the Gospel be called a
short time, yet that is not as compared with a definit time, but with eternity;
whereas here it is called little comparatively with the thousand years going
before.

LECTURE V.
Verse. 4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given
unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither
his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their
hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

5. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were
finished. This is the first resurrection.

6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: on such
the second death has no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ,
and shall reign with him a thousand years.


THese words contain the second event contemporary with the former, to wit, the
good condition of the Saints during that time of Satan's binding. What was their
estate during these thousand years? I saw, says John, them sit on Thrones, and
they lived and reigned a thousand years.

In this we are to consider, 1. the persons whose condition is set forth. 2.
The condition it self, 1. generally set out, verse. 4. in the beginning and end
thereof. 2. They are described by the condition of the rest of the world
opposite to it, verse. 5. 3. It is set out in that wherein their happiness and
difference from others consisted, ver. 6.

Although the relative they be in the words placed before any antecedent, yet
we take they that sat, or, were set, on the thrones, not to look to Judges, as
if they were different from the persons afterward described (as a party
complaining, or pleading, are from the Judges) but we take them for one, to
wit, they sat on them, or some sat on them, That is, these that were beheaded
for the witness of God, etc. for, their sitting on thrones, is after expounded
by living and reigning.

2. They sit to whom judgment is given, that is, for whom, and in whose
behalf, as will after appear. Now they are, 1. The souls of them that were
slain for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, that is, (as is
cleared before) the successors of these Martyrs who professed the same truth
with them; so the witnesses raised, ( Chap. 11.) are the same with these who
were killed, and John is one with Elias, Matthew. 11. and 17. It is then Martyrs
who suffered for Christ, 1. by heathens, 2. by Antichrist: for, to that end,
that is added, These who had not worshipped the beast: to show, 1. that the
cause of their Martyrdoom, was adhering to Christ, and shuning Antichrist. 2.
To show the time they belong to, to wit, heathen persecution and Antichrists
tyranny. 3. They are partakers who neither worship his image, nor receive his
mark, that is, all who keep themselves free, Chap. 13. and so were by that
obnoxious to his persecution (as all such were, ibid verse. 17.) all these now,
to wit, serious and honest professors of the Gospel, are understood here; for,
all such, whether actually Martyrs or not, were comprehended under these
descriptions in the Churches low condition. Chap. 13. now they are of the same
extent, while he speaks of the Churches good estate.

The good condition they are made partakers of, is sundry ways set out, 1. by
the preparation made to it, I saw thrones, etc. Where three circumstances are,
1. He saw thrones, that is, whereas before, such a thing was not visible, now I
saw way made for a good condition to the Church, and thrones (which are an
evidence and sign of ruling and soveraignity) set for them; this is not
literally to be understood, but meronymically for the thing it signifies. 2.
They sat, or were sit on them, that is, these Martyrs and confessors, who
formerly had scarce a seat to sit on, had now thrones, a good, free and
thriving condition, unto which by God they were exalted, as the witnesses in
their successors were, Chap. 11. 3. Judgment was given them. Judgment is
taken sometimes actively, for power and ability to Judge, Psalm. 72.2. sometimes
passively, for a righteous sentence past, Psalm. 94. judgment shall return to
righteousness; sometimes righteousness, or a good cause or innocent person and
justice are separated: sometimes God makes them meet, and justice is upon the
side of a good cause or innocent person, and so it is here, that is, these that
wanted justice and had none formerly to decide in their favors, now the case
is altered, and they get law and men's justice for them, which formerly stood
against them, (See, Chap. 13.) that they might not buy not sell: Now, (as it
were) their long lying appeals before God, crying for Justice, are called, and
sentence passed in their favors, even when they are gone. In which contest,
because these Martyrs began it, and its one decision for all; and because men
thought the Martyrs had no more a hearing left them, Therefore is the sentence
especially, as it were, intimated and decided in their favors, out of honor
and respect to them who were past, and also to these who were present, as being
successors to such and accounted one with them. See, Job 27.2. and Isa. 26.18.
where judgment is taken thus, and by this sitting on the throne they are
declared to be so, If otherwise we take judgment, it will be the same that
reigning is afterward, or qualifications fitting for reigning, such as are
promised to Solomon, Psalm. 72.2.

This good condition is set further out in it self, in the end of the verse, as
that which followed this preparation, in three things, 1. They lived, I take it
to be all one with what is said, verse. 5. To rise again; for, there this life
is called the resurrection, and the dead, their not rising is called they lived
not again, i.e. in prosperity. Hence these phrases, Let the King live for ever;
and, among heathens, non est vivere vita, sed valere. This life includes, 1.
that they enjoyed a spiritual life and had fellowship with God in Christ such
as others had not. See Gal. 2.20, 21. I live, not I, but Christ lives in me:
this is included as being opposite to the rest of the dead world. 2. To live
includes a comfortable, life even in opposition to external discouragements,
and dying daily by hazards. Paul, in that respect, says of himself, 1 Corinthians.
15. he died daily, and so it is understood, I live, if ye stand fast, I have
enough, I am cheerful; this living must be here taken-in, as it is opposite to
these Martyrs former dying, while yet they lived spiritually, and is opposed to
the troubles following, when after the thousand years they cease to live so,
which cannot be understood of spiritual or heavenly life only, which is always
the same. 3. They live takes in not only living separately, and (to speak so)
individually in some persons (which might have been in the saddest times) but
in a Church Estate and a public combined profession. So the Jews in-coming is
called life from the dead, Romans 11. and the Jews restoration, Ezekiel. 37. a
raising up again of dry bones; and thus here, their living is opposed to the
Churches fleeing formerly, wherein she had not the public liberty of
Ordinances, but was shut up in the Temple, Chap. 11. ver. 2. 2. By reigning is
understood but a further degree and qualification of the life mentioned, being
opposed to the same three straits, as their life is, especially to the
suffering and reproached condition which the Saints and Martyrs formerly had.
Now, when the Church is revived and gets new life after such a deadly
condition, it not only lives, but reigns, that is, enjoys these in a good
measure of abundance and freedom in respect of what they had. That as the
former is called life from the dead ( Romans 11. their present condition being
compared with what it was) so this is reigning opposite to slavery, as Dan. 2.
the Saints are said to have the Kingdom in respect of their freedom under the
Maccabees, in comparison of their former straits under Antiochus.

The third thing is the time, a thousand years: which shows, that this
freedom is to be of a long continuance, at least comparatively with any other
time. This is, in sum, the meaning, during that time of Satan's restraint, the
Church had a good free condition in respect of what she formerly had for a long
time, so that these, who for their honesty were martyred universally by
heathens and Antichrist, are now brought, in Gods providence, to a free
profession of the Truth, and some light and shelter provided for them until
this time expire.

From which it appears, 1. That these reigning here, are the whole Church and
professors of the Faith sincerely, and not some few only.

2. That Antichrists height and tyranny must go before the computation of this
time, they being such who have suffered by him that are now admitted to reign,
and therefore the words cannot bear to be applied to a suffering condition of
the Church outwardly, and a good condition spiritually; for, then it must set
out her most difficult strait, wherein most Martyrs suffered under Antichrist;
But that cannot be, seeing the first thousand years do not reach that time; or,
it must set out her condition after that time is past, and that immediately
after the turn.

3. It follows then, that the computation is to begin when the Church gets
a living and being in any good condition and freedom after Antichrists height:
For, 1. their killing goes before. 2. Their living follows next. Hence are
we to account them living, after the interruption of Antichrists universal
kingdom, wherein none were admitted in any part of the world by Law to have
life or being, but such as had his mark. See Chap. 13. and 11. which will fall
under the vials and begin with them, as is said: for, at their beginning began
the Saints to have visible Church-profession allowed them, as Chap. 11. for,
though at that time Antichrists kingdom has not a full end (till at least the
sixth vial end) yet it cannot be said they live not, nor have a visible
Church-profession till that time. So we are to term this beginning at the
change of the former time, when the Church and Saints lived not so, even as
after Constantine, the Church suffered much by Heathens here and there, yet
still that persecution is brought no further than his time, because there in
its height it was interrupted and stopped. Hence also we may gather not only
the contemporating of the thousand years with the vials, but of the vials with
the seventh trumpet by the same reason: for, the thousand years contemporate
with the seventh trumpet (as is granted by Mede) and therefore with the vials
the contemporary of the thousand years, according to the rule, Qua convenient
uni tertio, inter se convenient. As also, we may gather the succeeding of the
vials to the one thousand two hundred and sixty days of the Churches flight
immediately; for, if the Churches condition under the vials be living and
visible reigning in part, then it cannot be fleeing, but supposes her return,
and so must immediately succeed to that, as is formerly said.

4. It must follow from this, that Antichrists beginning must be reckoned
sooner than many do, and that that opinion of Papists three years and an half,
is but a groundless conceit and dream, opposite to this word, which supposes
Antichrist to be much sooner in the world.

In their good condition particularly they are said to reign, not simply, but
with Christ: which shows, 1. He and they reign on earth together, that so
when He is interrupted (as it were) as Chap. 11. so are they. 2. To show the
nature of their Kingdom, that it agrees with His in time, when He reigns, so
does it in the things wherein His reigning consists; so that in what respects
Christ, as Head to His visible Church and King to them, is said visibly and
eminently to reign, so are they according to their several relations, He as
Head, they as Members, that is, as He reigns in purity, and power of
Ordinances, and multitude of Professors and liberty to be worshipped; so do
they by partaking jointly of all these in and with Christ. So to reign with
Christ, differs, 1. from reigning simply; 2. from Christ's reigning with them,
as if He took share with them; No, but He admits them to share with Him. 3.
It differs from Christ's reigning in them, which is merely spiritual and always
continual; This is in an outward enjoying of the Ordinances visible (as
fellowship invisible) and a freedom in these, and their reign is more or less,
according as Christ's is, Therefore must necessarily consist in enjoying such
things as these by which He reigns.

2. The good condition of the Church and Saints, ver. 5. is set down by the sad
condition that all the rest of the world were in, All that time they lived not
again: and that it might be known what life they lived not again, it is added,
This is the first resurrection, not the second, which is common both to good
and bad, Dan. 12.1, 2.

There are three things in the first part of the verse to be cleared. 1. Who
these rest of the dead are, who are opposed to these who lived, ver. 4. In a
word, It is the successors of of these heart enemies and persecuters, who had
still a succession of the like in the world. They are all by nature dead that
live in the world, Ephesians. 2. But some continue so, 1 Timothy 5. as the widow that is
dead while she lives; and ( Matthew. 8.) let the dead bury their dead. So here,
they are accounted the rest of the dead, even all who are opposed to the
successors of the Martyrs, as all contradistinguished from the Martyrs who
formerly were dead, but now live.

2. It is said they did not live, that is, enjoy the former happy condition of
the Church, or did not come to that way of persecuting the Church actively as
they had done before and were to do after these thousand years. In which
tyrannizing over the Church, consisted the life of their predecessors the
persecuters, as these, that are Saints now, died in their predecessors the
Martyrs; so contra, these wicked did live and reign in their predecessors the
persecuters, while the Church was martyred, but now are as dead men bound up
and restrained from acting that life in a great measure (as if they were not
living) and thus it seems to consist with their living after the thousand
years are past, which is not as if they were converted, but letten loose again
to their old exercise; these that were hypocrites before, vent now their enimity
more; and wicked men formerly restrained, now aim to bring-under again Christ's
Church.

3. From this we may expound what is said till the thousand years expire, as
the term of their deadness: for, 1. it is not bodily rising again (for yet
the resurrection is not come) nor spiritual rising again; for, the number of
Saints is rather fewer after this resurrection and the thousand years are past,
than more, but as there is a life of grace and of the Saints, so is there a life
of corruption and of the wicked and wickedness, which may for a time be
restrained. Now, after the thousand years wickedness and wicked men live, that
is, do break out in their enimity against the Church to persecute again by Gog
and Magog, as if personally they were risen, and persecution (that was almost
seeming to be dead) is revived. Thus, seeing Satan's binding has a term, and
the Saints reign a term, it is suitable also that the death of these wicked
men, here understood, have a term also, which can be no otherwise than this.
Hence these three are still observable, 1. Satan's loosing, the Saints dying,
and the persecuters living, before the thousand years. 2. Satan's binding, the
Saints living and the persecuters dying, during that time (not simply, but in
part;) so after the thousand years, Satan is loose again, the Church in hazard
again and her good condition interrupted, and so the persecuters they get life
and heart again, which is like that healing of the wound, Chap. 13. of the head
of the beast, not in the same person but in a successor with the same
principles, and the giving life again to the image of the beast, verse. 13, 14.
and so the Saints their living and dying, will answer well to the persecuters
dying and living.

If any object, that these dead, are supposed to be dead before the thousand
years* Ans. Observe for clearing it, his manner of comparison; for, the world
preceding that time, is, as it were, divided in these two, Martyrs and
confessors keeping themselves free, and persecuters; both these are spoken of
as dead. Again, the Church or generation succeeding, during these thousand
years, are looked upon as the raising again of that former generation: now,
says he, The difference between this generation and what went before, shall be
so great, that men would think that all the former Martyrs and honest
Christians were brought to life again, they shall be so many; But for the
persecuters that lived in their times, they shall not appear so as they
formerly did during that time, in which respect they are said to be dead, and
not to rise, because once they were numerous, and now it is not so: and though
this cannot universally as yet be said; yet, in this and other Nations, blessed
be God, If it be asked, what has become of former sincere Christians? It may
be answered, they are living again in their successors: But if it be asked,
what is become of the Pope, and open persecuters that once prevailed here? It
may be said, they are dead, and not arisen, but are in their graves; and, by
Gods blessing, may not that which in so great part is fulfilled in some
Nations, be in due time extended to others? and so here, the rest of the dead,
imports no more but that they are found in a dead state during these thousand
years, and that they do not again recover what they lost by it, till these
thousand years were expired: and thus they are rather supposed to be living
before it, and interrupted by it, which again they recover in their successors
Gog and Magog, when it is finished; and this we conceive does answer the scope.

This is called the first resurrection. It is, 1. applied to spiritual living
again, Ioh. 5. 23, etc. and is opposed to sinful death or death in sin, and so
resurrection to glory is distinguished from it. Thus all Saints at all times,
rise as they are made to believe, and this is personal, and cannot be fecluded
here. 2. Resurrection is taken oftentimes as of Churches and Nations, as Romans
11. of the Jews in-coming and conversion, and Ezekiel. 37. whenas the Church
spreads so, as if a Nation were born in one day, Isa. 66. or, as if all the
former Saints, which were lost as to men, were again, like Rachels children,
restored, as it is Ier. 31. verse. 15, 16, etc. This is after an eclipse, when
visibly the Church was decayed almost, and has again multitudes brought out of
that darkness to the profession of the truth formerly obscured. And so we take
it here. 1. It is called the first resurrection, in opposition to the general
death and darkness over the Church in Antichrists time, which being as a
death, this may well be called a resurrection. 2. It is called a first, as
distinguished from the general resurrection to come, when God shall raise good
and bad, Dan. 12. and bring them to judgment. These both meet together here;
yet, it would seem, that seeing he speaks here of the Church together, as
living after the death and darkness she had been in, as if her former honest
members were arisen; It is most agreeable to the scope, to take-in especially
the out-breaking of a general profession of truth by Saints in a visible
Church State, yet so as including the former, Therefore it is not called living
simply in respect of the second death following, but living again, or rising,
in respect of what is past, And the first resurrection, as being compared with
that resurrection coming. Hence it is, that this first resurrection is the same
here with living formerly mentioned, and opposed to the death that the rest of
menly still in; and therefore is contemporary with, and peculiar unto, these
thousand years, it being one of the expressions, which sumeth up the Saints
good condition during that time. This, says he, is the first resurrection,
that is, this living, etc.

In the sixth Verse, he subjoyneth two things to this, 1. the qualification in
general of these who shall be partakers of this great privilege of the first
resurrection. 2. The advantages and prerogatives that follow it. Both which
will confirm, that by this resurrection is understood the Churches good
condition, outward and inward sincere reality of grace in all the parts of it.
Their advantages in general, (which is all one with their qualifications) are
two, 1. They are, or, he is, blessed: that comprehends all, he is a happy man
who shall share of this condition and shall believe in Christ. Obj. But (may it
be said) are not all happy who ever believed, why is it so said now especially?
Answ. So are all that ever die in Christ, yet is there a peculiar blessedness
that belongs to some time, as Chap. 14.13. so it is in blessedness here now
in this time. It has to Believers more clearness, more light, liberty and
public profession of the Gospel, and that with fewer temptations and straits
generally than at other times before and after; it is a good time to fall in,
and happy is he who shall have his lot in it, as Chap. 19. blessed are they
that are called to the supper of the Lamb, ut supra.

The second qualification will clear this, And holy is he: that, does hold
forth in general an abounding in holiness during this time, when the Jews
shall be provoked to jealousy, seeing here this is the scope. Think not that
all who shall profess during this time, are pertakers of this resurrection,
No, that is a singularly happy man and blessed, and a singularly holy man, he
must be and he shall be, so qualified and fitted for it, in more holiness than
ordinary. This is not as if all Saints then on earth, were more holy than
others that were before that time, or shall follow after; but that, in
general, holiness shall at that time be more rife in the Church; and
therefore that reigning of all Saints must not be so understood, as if all
individually should flourish in the world, but that generally their condition
should be better than formerly. Or, take these words generally, to show the
effects of that resurrection, or what they are the better that partake of it
(for, both may be) they are blessed singularily, and holy: which shows, 1.
wherein their blessedness especially consists, to wit, in holiness, that is
their happiness, which is more than any outward liberty to deborde. If it be
asked, what singular thing of holiness is spoken of in that time? Answ. The
degree, it is like, will be more eminent. 2. the extent more universal. And,
3. it will be much now when hypocrites abound (as always they do when Religion
is in request) to be holy then, hypocrisy and prosperity being greater enemies
to grace than open profanity and persecution: But he that partaketh of this
resurrection, he is both happy and holy together.

The advantages more particularly are expressed, and they are three in number.
The first is negatively expressed, on such the second death shall have no power.
This second death was spoken of, Chap. 2, and it follows, Chap. 21.8. In a
word, it is to be casten in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, that
is, hell. If any say, so we here make three deaths or four. 1. Spiritual. 2.
Natural or temporal death, which comes on all. 3. Eternal death. And, 4. We
have spoken of a general death or deadness in respect of the defections of
Churches. Answ. Look to every death, and put it with its own
contradistinguishing member, and there will be but two, as, 1. a spiritual
death of the soul in sin; and, 2. of wrath in hell. Again, a temporal death of
the body common to all; and, 2. an eternal death of soul and body, that is the
second here. 3. There is a general deadness in the Churches great eclipsing
under Antichrist, and the woman's fleeing, and the witnesses killing; and there
is a second death fore-against that of the general passing of the sentence
against all the wicked together. However, these that are partakers of this
resurrection, they cannot partake of any of these. Hence it appears, 1. what
their prerogative is; it is freedom from hell, they even then are not always
kept from the first death, but from the second death. 2. It shows it is not
a bodily resurrection here (for, many such are not necessarily kept from
hell) but spiritual in faith and holiness with fruits.

The second advantage, is, they shall be priests of God, and of Christ: that
was ( Chap. 5.) Priests to God, here it is of God. I conceive the scope is the
same, to show their advancement to serve and worship God, as Priests in a
familiar way. Or, it may be Priests of God, excellent Priests, as trees of God,
harpes of God, etc. when any thing is excellent, so it is called. However, the
words imply, 1. that is a great privilege to get God worshipped and to be true
worshippers, as it was to be high Priest. 2. That Believers are eminently
admitted to this freedom at this time by this resurrection: for, 1. there are
two sorts of sacrifices, one, proper to the Law; and another, common to the
Gospel, Mal. 1. pure offerings, a contrite heart, etc. So there are two sorts
of Priests, one by office, that is gone, there being now no proper material
sacrifice; and that is not meant here, this privilege being applicable to
women and children who are not capable of that office. 2. Another, improperly,
in respect of free and full admission to spiritual sacrifices to Him, without
the intervention of any high Priest but Jesus Christ, which may be in
opposition to the plurality of mediators and intercessors formerly had recourse
to. If any object, that these are common privileges to all Believers at all
times, Rev. 1. ver. 6. and Chap. 5.10. Answ. So is reigning with Him. See,
Chap. 5. ver. 10. where Priests and Kings are together. By which it appears,
that these days bring no new thing in kind, but in degree. These shall be
eminently under that time, and more frequent in the Church, and have more to
partake of them than formerly.

The third, (which is before) they shall reign with him a thousand years, so as
ver. 4. and is in place of what is said, Chap. 5.10. They shall be Priests to
God, and Kings; which confirms the answer formerly given, and must be
understood as it agrees with all Believers; for, all of them are Kings and
Priests, which shows it to be spiritual; and if Priests here be parallel to
that, Chap. 5. why not to reign also, only allowing to the Church in general a
more eminent degree of this life and reign?

LECTURE VI.
Verse. 7. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of
his prison.

8. And shall go out to deceive the nations, which are in the four quarters of
the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle ^ the number of
whom is as the sand of the sea.

9. And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the
Saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down from God out of heaven,
and devoured them.

10. And the devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented
day and night, for ever and ever.


WE have heard the first two contemporary events, to wit, Satan's binding, the
Saints living and the worlds lying still in death: now follows the little
loose that was foretold to be given to Satan after these thousand years expire*
when for a time their case is turned, the devil is loosed, the wicked fall
again to their former practice of persecution, and the Saints are straightened:
yet thus it is qualified; 1. It is for a short time. 2. It is not an universal
overturning and laying wast all as formerly, but encompassing, and, as it were,
a besieging and putting to a pinch. 3. A glorious and immediate delivery, God
raising the siege Himself.

This event is set out in these steps, 1. Satan's loosing, and the time when it
shall be, it is, after the thousand years expire, verse. 7. 2. There is his
design and enterprise to stir up Nations against the Church, that has had long
quietness, and now possibly have fallen secure under it, verse. 8. 3. His
success, he gets them together in a great number, and they proceed to
encompasse the holy city, ver. 9. 4. There is the event and result of this
tragedy as to them, and comedy as to the people of God, the deliverance of the
one, and overthrow of the other, and that in two steps, 1. temporal, verse. 9.
the second, eternal, verse. 10. The Dragon is cast into the lake to be
tormented for ever, There being after that no liberty given him to mar the
peace of the Church of Christ, which shows this must be near the end.

This loosing of Satan out of prison, must be in reference to his former
binding, (^ contra) that as he was restrained from engaging the Nations in such
open and universal hostility against the Church as had been, Now his loosing
must be the giving of him some link loose, to be able to bring more of that
about than during the time of his restraint, as appears in the two verses
following, 1. In that he went out to deceive, and more vigorously set about it.
2. In that he did it more successfully than formerly, yet not without a link
upon him; so that his binding is not absolute before, more than his loosing is
now, but comparatively. Secondly, Consider the time when he gets this
liberty, and so of all this event that is foretold. 1. It is clear after the
thousand years expire, and therefore it is yet to come, much of the thousand
years being to pass, for which cause we may be, yea must be, the more general
in the events themselves. 2. We may say, it is not a long time, but, as was
said, a little space, ver. 3. comparatively to his former loosings, and the
Church interveening tranquillity; so this fury of the devil will not be so long
as former outbreakings, and he is soon taken by the Lord, even, as it were,
after rendevouzing, when they are thinking to carry all before them; but how
long it is, cannot be determined, the Lord having kept it in His own hand and
power. 3. This certainly falls within the seventh vial, scing it
comprehends the Dragons overthrow, who outlived the beast, the object both
here ( verse. 10.) and there, being the devils kingdom, and that after the
beasts overthrow. The end following both, and phrases relating to both, will
clear it: we take it to belong to the latter part of the seventh vial, the
Churches good condition probably after the sixth expired, and the seventh
begun, being at its height: even then Satan is let loose, and when he comes to
a height again, he is taken, and the vial, with hailstones from heaven, (as
Chap. 16.) comes upon Gog and Magog, as Ezekiel. 38. and 39. and with fire also,
as here. Fourthly, (Which clears both the former) this is not long before the
day of judgment; for, it is Satan's last loose: thereafter he is in the lake,
not for a thousand years, but for ever; which says there is no more to do with
him on earth, and the judgment also is reserved for him till the last day.
Beside, it being the ^^^^^tion of the seventh vial, the judgment cannot be
long after. And therefore, in order of matter, (as well as of words) it is
subjoyned, and so to be understood. It is therefore probably the last event
preceding the day of judgment though there may be some intervall after this
of Gog, as there was betwixt that Gog ( Ezekiel. 39.) and Christ's first coming;
but long it cannot be, so much of the vial being spent before it come to this.

If it be said, This seems not consistent with what is said of the worlds
security when Christ shall come again, if now there be such troubles. Answ.
Christ's speech, ( Mat. 24*) holds forth security in the profain world as was
in the old, opposite to Noah: And these two agree well to the condition of the
wicked, proud, profain world: beside, trials being ordinary, and battles not so
strange, it may possibly be little taken notice of by many of the Church,
especially if any intervall be, or help be given to contest with these enemies,
men may be more taken up with the one, than the other; yet that peace is best
applied to the world, and, it may be, this event of Gog, is even unexpected to
the Church.

The devils improving this liberty (for he is not long quiet afterward,) is set
down, ver. 8. And it is, 1. set down generally, he shall go out, that is, with
more vehement onsets and temptations, to deceive the nations, that is, to bring
them against Christ and His Church, as if they might prevail over them, or as
if there were some advantage to be gotten by bearing them down, or by some such
thing to engage them to battle against the Saints, wherein is the greatest
beguil of the world. These Nations are said to be in the four quarters of the
earth, 1. for their number, 2. for the universality of this uproar and rage
that shall be on all hands, and from all quarters, raised up against the
Church, who shall be as a City besieged by them.

More particularly they are described whom he deceives, Gog and Magog. By some
Gog is expounded secret, from the Hebrew GAG tectum; Magog, open, from the
Hebrew word MIGAG a tecto, and so taketh-in secret and open enemies: of which I
shall say nothing: Only it cannot be applied to the Pope or Turk, these being
enemies to arise after the thousand years expire; who have a conjunct interest
in fighting against the Church, and that upon an Ecclesiastic account, which
the Turks profess not, their power withal most probably being before this
broken. It seems respect is had, 1. to Magog, whose posterity is spoken of,
Genesis 10.3. of whom, as Josephus, cap. 6.7. Ant. Iud. and others with him, write
that the Scythae are come, and by these are meaned barbarous nations at a
distance brought upon the Church while she has peace in her self: for, their
encompassing seems to hold forth an external force and violence from without.
2. It relates and alludeth especially to that Gog and Magog in Ezekiel. 38.39.
where, as the hurt the Jews got after their peace and return from Babylon, was
by these; and as that stir was bitter, but short by Autiochus, and the last
before Christ's first coming; So in allusion to that, these are the Churches
last enemies, setting upon her after her deliverance from mystical Babylons
tyranny; So these last enemies that trouble the Churches peace, after her
restoring from spiritual Babylon, before Christ's second coming, are called Gog
and Magog, even as there is an allusion in the names and titles, that all the
enemies of the Church of the Gospel get, unto the names of the Churches enemies
under the Law: for, both had three great and especial enemies, 1. of old Egypt,
who oppressed the Church of the Jews in her infancy; in allusion to that, the
heathen Emperor, the Churches fifth enemy ( Chap. 12.) is called a dragon, as
Pharaoh was, Psalm. 74. and Ezekiel. 27. See Chap. 12. 2. Their next great
oppressing enemy was Babylon, that led them and kept them long time captive,
answerable to this Antichrists captivity, is frequently compared to Babylons in
this Book. The third enemy the Jews had after they had gotten a little peace at
home, was the Lagidae and Seleucidae, especially under Antiochus Epiphanes.
These by Ezekiel ( chap. 38, and 39.) are called Gog and Magog: Answerable to
this are these enemies here called so; partly, because they follow the peace
and outgate the Church has after her delivery from mystical Babylon; partly,
as being of the like nature, cruel, violent, etc. yet soon restrained, so that
they never come to vent and execute their malice against the Church as former
enemies did; partly, because they go immediately before Christ's second coming,
as these did, as the last enemies before His first coming. And this we think
the safest reason of these names Gog and Magog, without enquiring for any
further mystery in them. More particularly, the end of his gathering them, is
set down, to battle: he minds it against the Church, but God turns the
battle against them: I take it not for one singular battle, but to war against,
to oppress and persecute the Church openly and avowedly.

Lastly, their number is expressed to be exceeding great, even as the sand of
the sea, alluding to some places where that expression is used, Judge. 7.12. 2 Samuel 17.11. Whereby it appears, 1. what number of wicked are in the world,
even in the Churches best time. 2. That if they were not restrained, the Church
in her best estate would be little in comparison of them. 3. That they want but
a loosing, and soon are stirred, as afterward follows.

The success follows in two steps, verse. 9. First, he prevailed so with them
that they went up on the breadth of the earth. Not only used he endeavors, but
many were engaged, and almost the face of the earth was covered with them, they
were so many. 2. They come so far without resistance, that they compass the
camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City. By the camp of the Saints, and
the beloved City, are meaned one thing, to wit, the visible Church. It is
called ( Chap. 11. ver. 2.) the holy City. Then here a Camp and a City, to show
it was not so to be trod on, but encompassed, the strait is not so great now as
then, Chap. 11. only, before, it was in freedom, now it is beset as a besieged
City round about. She is called the Camp of the Saints, 1. In allusion to
Isreal's marching in the wilderness, to show that the visible Church is on her
way and march like an Army. 2. In allusion to wars, wherein the weaker kept
themselves within fortified Camps, and the enemies encompassing, is as setting
on them (as it were) in their fortifications, when they have all the field at
their command. And this suiteth with the scope here, where the Church is
brought to that strait as a little Army entrenched are, when a greater lies
down round about them, as Isa. 1. verse. 8. They are called the beloved City, 1.
In allusion to Jerusalem which was so called, the Saints being a spiritual
City and Incorporation in a Church Estate to God. 2. To show their strait also,
that not only in the fields was the Camp besieged (which was a great strait)
but at home their chief City, as it was in Hezekiah's time, when no other place
almost but Jerusalem was free, and it besieged also.

4. The event follows, ver. 9. showing what came of this. 1. A temporal
overthrow on the devils instruments, fire came down from God out of heaven, and
devoured them. It alludeth to that terrible destruction of Sodom, Genesis 19. or,
to that delivery of Jerusalem, which God wrought by sending an Angel from
heaven to destroy Sennacherib's Army, Isa. 37. when Jerusalem was straightly
besieged; but especially to that of Gog and Magog, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. whom God
is said to destroy from heaven with fire, as it is expressed in the Prophets
words; It is, upon the matter, all one with that of hailstones, Chap. 16. under
the seventh vial, that being an other mean used in Gog's destruction with this
mentioned here. It says, it will be terrible and unexpected, and that wherein
Gods hand will immediately and eminently appear beyond (if not without) all
humane appearance and means. And though the words expressing the judgment, be
borrowed (as John's manner is) from Ezekiel, as also the names Gog and Magog;
yet do they not necessarily tend both to one scope.

The temporal judgment on the instruments of this trouble, is past: follows
now the eternal judgment on the head, the devil, spoken of, ver. 10. he is
taken and cast into the pit: and although he ranged a while after the beast,
yet both meet together now. This judgment is set out, first, by describing the
party judged, It is, the devil, that deceived these Nations: whereby it
appears, 1. that it is the devil himself, the old Serpent, that is bound
here, it being he who especially deceives the Nations and draws them to
enmity against the Saints and Church. 2. That his deceiving (though he be
principal) keeps not off wrath from these that are deceived by him, but the
judgment often first lights on them. 3. It shows, that all the great
projects that the devil puts the men of the world unto, the furthest length
and success they have, it proves still deceit to them. 4. That the Devils
restless deceiving of others, turns to his own judgment in the end; and his
deceiving is marked as an eminent aggravation of his guilt, that seeing these
who were deceived, suffered justly, much more he who did deceive them.

2. This judgment is set out, in showing its nature what it was, or, where it
was, he was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, that is, hell, verse. 14.
compared unto a great lake that is continually boiling with fire and brimstone
for its horriblenesse and painfulness, that being one of the terriblest
tortures we can imagine, it is in such a torment he is cast; a fire for
torment, and a lake for abundance. Concerning which it may be asked, Is not the
devil casten at first to hell when he fell? Answ. From Jude, it is clear he is
condemned to it: Yet, 2. it is clear from the Gospel, that the actual and final
shutting him and them up (for, there are many devils) is suspended till the end
come. Therefore are these words, Art Thou come to torment us, before the time?
Matthew. 8.11. And Jude ver. 6. They are kept in chains, etc. Also in Gods
justice he having a link loose to deceive the wicked world, and sometimes to
exercise His own People till the end come; Now, he is actually condemned to
that place and pain. Schoolmen say he has three judgments, 1. When he was cast
from heaven. 2. In Christ's death. 3. At the day of judgment, when not only the
prince of the world is judged by the Gospel, but punished finally.

2. It may be asked, where it is, (for, that there is such a place, it is
clear,) If beneath in the center of the earth, if in the air, or beyond, or
without the world? Answ. this needs not much be debated, it is, and was of
old prepared for the devil and his angels, and that it is down and beneath, as
to the place of the glorified Saints (it is probable) seeing the Scripture
speaks ever so of it; And that example of Korah, Dathan, and Abirams
destruction, ( Numb. 16.) seems pregnant. It is certainly a most horrible
place, fitted with darkness and torment for the declaring of Gods justice:
this being the devils dwelling, folks would be loath to dwell with him.

3. They ask, whether any material fire be there or not, really to burn? Answ.
Certainly there is a great pain there, even the greatest, as we account of
fire; yet certainly, seeing it is souls especially that are tormented there, and
it is such a fire as the devil is tormented with, who is a spirit, It must
therefore be a fire of far other natural vehemence and penetrancy than ours
is, which now we make use of, it being kindled by Gods wrath without and within
for such an end, if any such material fire be, which may also more directly
affect bodies.

3. This place, or judgment, is set out by its companions, or former
indwellers, It is the lake, Chap. 19. where the beast and false prophet were
cast, and where now they are; the devil, whose judgment was a little
suspended, is now sent after them. And this we conceive is added, 1. To show
that this part is the continuation of what remained in that, Chap. 19. of the
devils last judgeing. 2. To point out a joint partaking of the beast and the
devil, the superior agent, in judgment, even in the same judgment. 3. That
this event of the devils casting in the lake, is posterior to the beasts
destruction, which must be, seeing the beast is there before him; which makes
some, who plead for Antichrists standing till Christ's second coming, find a
necessity here to make the devils judging posterior to his. Neither can the
supplying of any word alter it (which some would be at, to evite this) as where
the beast was to be seen, or was to be cast. For, 1. It is ordinary, even in
the verses before, to omit in the original the substantive ( est, is, are, or,
were) but not so in other words. 2. The scope here, is to show, that it was the
same with the beasts judgment preceding, and therefore relates to it, as a
thing going before indeed; and not only so expressed in words, seeing the events
are different; and this is declared or explained by that, Chap. 16. Therefore
that must be clearer than the other, and so before it in time; Especially here,
seeing the scope is to show, that now the devil, as the last enemy, is put down,
and shareth with those that went before.

4. The judgment is set out in three, 1. It is torment, horrible pain that
affects even the devils. 2. It is without intermission, night and day: there
is no nights ease, not a drop of cold water there. 3. It is eternal; it is for
ever and ever, it never ends, even after thousands of years are expired; when
millions of years are by, it is but beginning. Hence appears, 1. the falsehood
of the errors of those who say, that length of time shall end wrath, and that
devils and reprobates after a long time will be relieved, which was Origen's
opinion. 2. See hence the benefit of the first resurrection now, and aim at it
to be kept from this death. All this concerning Satan's last judgment may, by
anticipation, be set down now for continuation of the story of that event. It
is indeed after the last judgment, when Saints shall judge Angels, 1 Cor. 6.
Hell is a cruel place even to devils: well are they that are freed from it, and
never know it in experience. If it were believed, men would rather put their
head in the fire than sin.

LECTURE VII.
Verse. 11. And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose
face the earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them.

12. And I saw the dead small and great, stand before God: and the books were
opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works.

13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it: and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man
according to their works.

14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second
death.

15. And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire.


WE have hitherto had a view of the state of the visible Church to the close of
its warfare so long as it shall be militant, till her great and last enemy, the
devil, shall be taken and shut up in his everlasting prison, which was hinted
at in the former verse. Now, unto the end, follows a most plain description
of the day of judgment, when all good and bad that ever lived, shall be raised
and brought to appear before their great Judge to receive sentence every one
according to their works. The state of the wicked, (because it is most shortly
insisted on) ^^, in the first place, set down in this Chapter. Then the state
of the godly and their happiness, is more fully insisted on in the two
Chapters following. So, in short, the state of the Church seems to be, 1.
spreading under the first seal, as to the thriving of the Gospel. 2. Persecuted
under the second, third, fourth and fifth feals. 3. Delivered temporally by the
sixth. All this is Chap. 6. This is the first period. 2. Then begins Satan
to work underhand till he bring Antichrist to an height, and by the Turks
overrun a great part of these that carry the name of Christians; that is under
the first six trumpets, with the prophesies contemporary with these. 3. By the
seventh trumpet and first vial, judgment begins on Antichrist; the case
turns and is carried on during the vials and the thousand years, wherein
Babylon is destroyed, to wit, Rome, by the fifth vial, the Pope fleeing from it
to new help; and the Turks are destroyed by the sixth; Gog and Magog are letten
loose and stirred up by the devil under the seventh, whereby they temporally,
and after some little intervall, he eternally and all the wicked are judged by
the judgment of the great day; which was, as to him, hinted before (that the
story of his ruin might be together) but here more fully set down.

That this describes the last judgment, is almost past controversy, even
amongst these who apply the Chapters following to a state of the militant
Church, and it is clear not only by the native context and series, which is not
to be interrupted, especially where the things do so well agree: for, having
spoken of the devils last judgment, which by Jude is called the judgment of
the great day, it is consentaneous therefore to understand this of such a
judgment whereby he is so judged. Beside, being now at the close of the
seventh vial, which brings the end, and the expressions and judgment, both
in the verse before and following, jumping with these of the seventh vial, such
a judgment as closes that vial must be understood, which can be no other but
the last; But the expressions are full, and the matter and circumstances so
convincing, that they leave no place of doubting, being so like Dan. 12.1, and
other places, where the day of judgment is spoken of: for, at what other
judgment are all the dead judged, all the reprobate sent to hell, the Elect
delivered, death and hell cast in the lake, etc. which are all expressed here,
to what other judgment can they agree, but to the last, whereof they are
particular properties? as in the explication it will appear.

This judgment is notably described in these four, 1. In the preparation for
it. 2. The parties. 3. The manner of accurate proceeding, and the sentence. 4.
The execution thereof, as to the wicked here, and as to the godly, Chap. 21.
and 22. Let your ears hear of, and your eyes behold, this judgment, as that
before which every one of you will, before long, appear, and so frame your
selves to be suitable to it, as if with John you saw this great court fenced,
this judgment set, and the sentence pronounced, the like whereof never was,
nor shall be.

There are four things in the preparation, 1. A great white throne, and one sat
on it. This makes way for what follows, that we may know that it is a great
thing that is meaned here, it alludeth to Dan. 7. There is a throne, to
signify majesty, glory, and stateliness as well as Authority; for, when this
Judge comes, He shall come in power and great glory, as in the glory of His
Father, and with all the holy Angels, with the found of the Archangel in the
clouds, etc. all shows that never was there such a glorious Parliament holden
nor ridden, or so royal a throne set.

It is called, Secondly, white, as He was on a white horse, because of purity,
and holiness; judgment and justice are the habitation of His throne, Psalm.
89. and righteousness goes before His face: there is no wrong nor injustice
there; as also for its shining gloriousness, its power and majesty is
infinitely pure, spotless and incomprehensibly glorious.

It is called a great white throne, for the same reasons: The thrones of the
Kings of the earth, even Solomon's golden throne, are but petty, not to be
accounted footstools to this; when this is set, these will evanish; He that
sits on this is a great King, and a great God above all gods.

The second thing in the preparation, is, that one sat on this throne, he saw
him that sat on it: it was not empty, but one was on it, whom he saw; he names
Him not, possibly, because he had no name every way suitable to Him: for, His
name, is ( Chap. 19.) such as none knows, but Himself; or, because it is
without all controversy who this Judge is, an article of Faith to Believers,
the Son of man who shall come in power and great glory from the Fathers right
hand to judge both the quick and the dead, He is called ( ver. 12.) God, before
whom they stand; to show that this Judge is so, and then will appear to be so,
Howbeit, as man, visibly He will here proceed, and shall be seen by all, even
by these who peirced Him; they shall behold Him coming in this glory. See, Mat.
25.1 These. 4. Rev. 1.7.

The third thing preparatory, or going before, is, before, or from whose face,
the earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them. This
is the great consummation, and the universal change that shall be on all
things, when the fashion of this world shall be changed, and it shall depart
like a scrol, and the elements melt with fervent heat: What this is, may be
spoken to, Chap. 21. verse. 1. But certainly here is such a change as was not
before this time, even that spoken of under the seventh vial, Chap. 16. that
heaven and earth shall flee away as not to be found, that is, not so as
formerly they were, there being now a change on them.

They are said to flee before his face, to show with what facility and ease
that change shall be wrought. 2. Of what glorious majesty and power this great
Judge shall be, that these creatures cannot abide His presence but do flee. 3.
To show that it is the end, because this consummation, and great change on the
Creation is instantly before the Judgment, when the living Elect shall be
changed in the twinkling of an eye, as 1 Cor. 15. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. now time and
place (as we make use of them) are gone.

The fourth step of this preparation, is the raising of all parties to be
judged: which includes the Resurrection in two steps, 1. that all are again
brought to a bodily life, where ever their bodies were buried or destroyed. And
here we take in the change that shall befall these, who shall be living,
instead of their dying. The second step is their appearing before the
Judgment: for, where the carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered
together. Hence it is said, that the Son will send out His Angels to gather
them from the four winds, and Jesus the Judge shall have them personally
presented before Him; which also in part belongs to the procedour. This is
the order of the matter, though this of the resurrection be subjoyned after the
procedour in judgment, ver. 13.

The second thing cleared in this judgment, is the parties, who is the Judge;
and 2. who are judged. The Judge certainly is Jesus Christ, the Mediator, who
has the keys of hell and death, Chap. 1.18. and is appointed Judge of quick
and dead, Act. 17.30, 31. called God, ver. 12. before whom all do appear: (for,
He is personally to be understood) having these divine Attributes of power to
execute, omniscience to take up, and justice to proceed: He has divine
Authority and Commission for this; He has divine glory, and will appear to be
God in our nature in that day, going about this last and solemn act of His
Mediatory service and Kingdom.

The parties judged, who stand before the throne, are, 1. generally the dead,
all, who ever lived, as after, ver. 12. Under which are comprehended these who
then shall be alive, (as also Enoch and Elias,) 1. because their change shall
be as death to them, in changing their bodies to an immortal condition. 2.
Because they are few and comprehended under the greatest number; for, if the
dead appear, much more these who shall be living.

More particularly, they are distributed in small and great: which takes in
all sorts, 1. Kings and mean ones; none shall escape. 2. Rich and poor. 3.
Mighty, powerful, strong and weak. 4. Old, at the greatest age and statu^e,
and young, who have not attained to their perfection. In a word, all that ever
breathed and had life, none are exempted but all are made to appear.

If any ask, what young ones have to be judged for? Answ. They are under one of
the Covenants either of Works or Grace; if of Works, then have they the breach
of that Covenant to count for, they being the serpentine brood of a
transgressing stock. 2. If they are Elect, they are to be judged by the Book of
life.

For that question agitated, in what pitch every one appears, whether of a
lower or taler stature, old or young, according as they died? we insist not on
it. The Schoolmen decide all to be raised about the age of thirty years, that
being the prime of man's strength, and about the age that Christ was at when He
suffered, which will be found to be thirty three years, and some more, having
entered to His public Ministry in the thirty; but this derogateth from the
mystery of the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. for, though the same body be raised,
ye it will be another kind of body than ever formerly it was at any age. We may
say of the Elect, they shall be perfect, in what ever condition they died (all
that which is imperfect being done away) their person, stature, judgment, etc.
being perfected. And we think that that perfection which consists in
conforming them to Christ's glorious Body, is of another kind than to respect
either age, stature, or the like. We may see from this also, the absurdity of
that Popish conceit, whereby the judged are distinguished in four sorts by the
Schoolmen, one whereof, does judge, and is not judged, being of a degree of
perfection beyond coming into judgment: here none that has life, whether
Elect or Reprobate, are secluded, but all being in these Books, all that are
written in them must appear, and none there are but they are written in them:
and no need there were of this Book of life, if the Elect in it were not also
to be judged: It is true, Believers, none of them shall come to judgment, as
judgment imports condemnation according to the Word, Ioh. 3.18. so no Elect
comes into judgment, yet for absolution they come. It is truth also, that the
Saints shall then judge, even Angels, 1 Corinthians. 6. and possibly the Apostles
and some others may be more eminent in that judgment, Matthew. 19.28. yet that
does not exclude them from being judged themselves (they being among the dead,
now standing before the throne) but includes an affe^^ory a^sent to the great
Judge His sentences, and is a special prerogative put on all Believers that
day, who shall be caught up on the bench with the Judge, when the reprobate,
like fellous and pannelled malefactor^, shall be standing at the bar, while
they sit (as it were) on the steps of the sides of His throne, being caught up
to Him, when others are left, 1 Thessalonians. 4. which also may admit of degrees.

Follows now the proceeding, when God is on His throne, and all the world
standing before Him: It has three steps, 1. generally, Books are opened for
all. 2. A special Book for the Elect, The book of life is opened. 3. Sentence
is passed and pronounced upon all according as was found in these books and
according to their works. In all which there is an allusion to men's proceeding:
where, when men are guilty and brought to judgment, 1. there libels are red,
called, by the Hebrews, books, Job 31.35. 2. The witnesses depone; or, their
depositions, already on record, are made known. 3. The Law is consulted,
concerning the matters that are found, what sentence is due to them, So it is
here: which is not as if Jesus Christ were literally so to proceed, (for
nothing escapes Him) but to show that the judgment shall be as accurate and
particular in the trial, and just in the close, as if all were registrated and
put on record: nothing shall be missed or mistaken in its circumstances, but
things shall be so just in themselves and so manifested and put beyond all
doubt to others, as if an exact register of them had been kept and now
published. In all which, allusion is to Dan. 7. though this Book of life is not
mentioned there, because it is but a temporal judgment that is principally
intended in that place.

Let us enquire, 1. what these books are? 2. What this is to open them, they
are certainly expressed so with respect to men's Courts. And therefore we take
the first to hold out, 1. That there is a book of challenges and accusations,
wherein and whereby all that ever men did, is manifested and brought to their
mind; so Job 31.35. This may be a record of events in the Lords omniscience,
and in the memory and consciences of men, wherein every thing past is made
fresh to them; so is there a book of remembrance (a book containing, as it
were, a diary of all their lives) Mal. 3.16. 2. There is a witness, a book of
the creatures without, who have been abused; and from within, the conscience,
according as it now sees, it excuses or accuses, Romans 2.14. and so is a law
and evidence sufficient to the man. Thus the matter of fact is made out, Ye did
thus and thus with such and such aggravations, the conscience cannot refuse it.
3. The book of the Law is produced, whereby actions are examined, whether
conform or disconform unto it. And so Christ says ( Job. 12.) the word that He
speaks shall judge them in the great day, These are the books: for, these
books in general are in the plural number, because they are more than one,
whereas there is but one book of life: the reason is, 1. because Grace, arising
and flowing from free election, has but one way to all comprehended in it; but
justice, in its dealing with others, takes notice of their several actions
and guilt. 2. Election considers men without any thing in themselves or
respect to the Law, and is no act of justice but of sovereign Grace. Again,
justice considers men as such, and therefore enquireth in their carriage,
looks to proofs, and compares all with the Law, which makes that judicial
process to be more exactly set out by several books.

These books are opened, in comparison of what they were before, to wit,
sealed, neither was it known what was in them. Now, 1. all actions and events,
mercies or rods, less and more, are made manifest, even that which was most
secret, idle words, Mat. 12. every secret thing, good or bad, Eccles. 12. last
ver. 2. As nothing is forgotten, so every thing is known as it is, the
spiritual meaning of the Law, and so the deserving of sin, and all the
aggravations of it are better known, many truths and threatenings believed then,
that were dallied-with before. The 1. is necessary, to perfect the challenge
and libell; the second is necessary, to make all assent to Gods justice, and
know their own deserving, which could not be if they understood not the Law. By
the one, many sins will occur, whereof they never dreamed; by the other, the
least sins will have huge aggravations beyond what they appeared. 3. The
conscience-book will be opened, when blindness is taken away from the sight,
and judgment and hardness and deadness from the conscience; so that these
who looked but on sin before, are now affected and pricked with it, and the
conscience becomes restless and sensible: not only bearing witness to the
truth of such things convincingly, but also with inward pangs, accusing such
things now, and sentencing for them, whereas it formerly sleeped under them, as
Psalm. 51. They are now ever before them, yea within them, Thus all is cleared.
By which we may see, 1. that nothing will be missed in that day, Gods Register
is so exact. 2. That what is secret now, will be revealed then, not only to the
parties own conscience (for which end every one will have their own distinct
books) but even to others, because they also must know and assent to Gods
justice in general why such a one is condemned, etc. which cannot so well be
without the knowledge of their guilt. Beside, this is aimed at by this day, to
make Gods justice manifest; therefore is it called the revelation of Gods
righteous judgment, Romans 2. Hence it is said, that nothing is hid, which shall
not be discovered, even as to others, before Men and Angels: yea, in that place
( Matthew. 25.) the reason of the sentence respectively is given. Neither does
the manifestation of these deeds prove derogatory to the Elects joy, nor that
capacity of knowledge useful to the Reprobate: For, 1. that manifestation
glorifieth God, it being manifested a^ the ground upon which grace is
glorified, and so wrongeth them no more than these known sins of Solomon, Saul,
or Paul, etc. which are not for their infamy remembered then. 2. Their
Repentance and Faith in Christ with the pardon and glory that Christ pu^teth on
them, is also manifested; so that this is furthered by the other, and not
lessened by it: and that knowledge in Reprobates rendeth more to the aggreaging
of their horror and pain when they see others (possibly alike in some things
guilty) admitted to glory, and themselves shut out; when they see the causes of
Gods proceeding, the more knowledge they have, they have the more challenges and
aggravations of grief; so that glad would they be to forget many things which
they cannot then be rid of.

2. When these general books, or records of all men's deeds, are produced,
there is a peculiar book added; like as a Commander, or Judge, who having
produced generally what such a mutinous Army and such a rebellious people
deserved, yet after, takes out a peculiar paper, whereby grace and mercy is
designed for some particular persons that they suffer not with the rest; So
here, before sentence pass, the book of life is looked, because ( Job. 6.39,
40.) all these Elect that were given to Him, are to be accounted for now; and,
as it were, the roll is taken out, to see that the event answer His Commission.
This shows also, that it is not by the former books (of their own reckoning,)
but by grace, that even the Elect are absolved. By this book of life, is
understood, 1. Gods peculiar purpose of and Election to glory of some, beside,
and distinct from others.

It is ordinarily thus expressed, because, 1. He has them designed by name and
s^rname, as in a particular record. 2. Called book of life, because that is the
end of it, why He has written such and such in it, and not others, the effect
following to them, is life: So it is often expressed by a writing or book,
Exodus 32.33. Isa. 4.3. 3. By this book of life, we would not understand
Election strictly, as it respects the end only, but as it comprehends all
conducing to that end, there being but one Election, or book written concerning
the end, life, and all midses leading thereto, as Redemption and the executing
of that Covenant, Psalm. 40.7. as Repentance, Faith, etc. which book contains
Gods purpose, and the several means and steps whereby He has made it
effectual.

Again, these are compared to a book, 1. for exactness; there is no change or
miss can be here, all is on record. 2. To show Christ's faithfulness in His
Trust, who got the Elect to save, Ioh. 6.40. and now produces them all by
name. 3. It is produced to show the rise of the Elects Salvation, and what put
the difference between them and others, and from whom all their Salvation
depends; it is nothing in them, but in Gods Electing grace.

This book is also opened, 1. because now it is known to all who are Elect, and
who not, and never till now; and therefore ought it never to be enquired into,
as to others, it being never opened till then. 2. Because then Gods good reason
of proceeding in this sovereign work of Election in having mercy on whom He
will, (which till this time has been and shall be a mystery) shall then
satisfyingly be clear why He choosed so many and no more, why such, and not
others, this man living in such a time, and not this at another time. Here
reason cannot see, Therefore faith and fear would submit and forbear searching
in some of these things, seeking rather to have the privileges and
qualifications of these here enrolled, and waiting for satisfaction unto many
questions at this day when we shall see Him as He is.

It is an other book, different from the former books, which are common to the
Reprobates, this is peculiar to the Elect: that, of justice and judgment; this
of sovereign grace. If any ask, why the book of life is produced here, and not
Gods decree of Reprobation also? Answ. Condemnation is an act of Justice, God
condemns, but according to and for their works, Therefore there is no need of
that decree: For, He judges impenitent sinners; But absolution is an act of
grace, not going on our deservings, Therefore there is need of this rule, or
book, to proceed by, as distinct from our deservings. Beside, now God will have
Reprobates acknowledging justice, and none shall blame Him for their
condemnation or Reprobation, when their own guilt and Gods decree shall be
manifested together: what ever man cavil now, no weight is laid on that decree
in this sentence as a cause of it, but upon their own sins. On the contrary, He
shall have all the Redeemed knowing, that the weight of all their salvation
lies on His grace and in His purpose, before any thing was done by them.

Now both these being cleared, (1. what men did, 2. who amongst men are
appointed to life) the third thing, to wit, the sentence that is passed on
these dead, follows, They were judged, that is, received their last doom: But
because it is a day of justice, and sundry sorts, both sheep and goats are
judged, Therefore there is not one sentence to all, but two qualifications of
the sentence are added. 1. They were judged out of those things that were
written in the Books; who wanted the written Law, have the Law of nature in
their hearts for a Law, Romans 2.12. who lived under it, are judged by it; who
hears the Gospel, are judged according to it: men's receipts come in to this
reckoning. In short, it is, Those written in the Book of life, are entered in
possession of it according to the Word, Come, ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, Mat. 25. Others are charged with their guilt, and have this
sentence, Depart from me, etc.

The second qualification shows the justice thereof more, that is according
to their works, not for their works: Works here, are (to the Elect) the rule,
not the cause of proceeding: and it imports these things, 1. generally, that
there shall be justice in the sentence, or rather it shall be a just sentence,
not passed on any by guess, or contrary to their deservings, but justly shall
it be past, by a vindicative justice on the reprobate wicked, and by a
faithful righteous sentence of grace on the godly elect: Which is also just,
1. because Christ has paid for them, their debt is discharged by the
cautioner. 2. Because God has promised and engaged to pardon them in that book
of redemption or life, and now He performs and keeps it. Hence it is said,
God the righteous Judge will give the Crown at this day, 2 Timothy 4.8. 2. It is
suitable to folks works, He does in that day good to these who are good, and to
the froward and wicked he pronounces evil, as it is cleared, Romans 2.6, 7, 8,
9. when it is said, He shall give to every one according to their works: it is
then thus distributed. Thus justice has our works, not as the ground or cause
of it, but as the evidences whereby the Elect are differenced from others. 3.
It is proportionable, that is to say, not only glory to those that do well, but
to those that abound in well-doing, great glory; and so it is not wrath only to
the soul that does much ill, but great wrath. Therefore it is said, ( Gal. 6.)
he that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly: for, as a man sows, so he
shall reap, not only as to the kind, corruption from the flesh, or life from
the Spirit; but even as to the degree, less or more according to their sowing,
as in the parables of talents and pounds is clear, Matthew. 25. and Luke 19.4. It
imports a necessary connection betwixt good works and glory; for, without
holiness none shall see the face of God. What is meaned by according, Christ
holds it out, Mat. 25.29. in that necessary connection, that he that has,
shall get more; but not because he has, but in order certainly it follows,
and contra; yet it is freely given. If any retort, that according to works in
the wicked, imports merit, Therefore so also in the Godly. I say, it
imports not, of it self, merit, to say according to works, as appears by
the like phrases, according to your faith be it unto you; and in distributing
the talents, Mat. 25.15. He gave according to their several abilities. Their
abilities may imply fitness in them, and proportionablenesse in distributing
of them: yet none can say, according ((...)) implies merit in these places;
and that it can import no merit properly taken here (though there be justice in
the sentence and it be just, yet our works are not the ground of it) appears,
1. because grace and the book of life is here mentioned as the ground of
proceeding in reference to the Elect. Now, if in as strict justice their works
deserved life, as the wicked deserve death, there were no need of mentioning
this Book so often: Yea, 2. If according to works, were to be taken strictly,
then it were inconsistent with this Book, which makes all to be of grace, and
of a like nature with its rise, even as it is grace: here grace and works are
opposed, if of grace, then not of works; yea, according to works (so understood
as causal) is opposed to this purpose of God, or His election, as 2 Timothy 1.8.
who has saved and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to His purpose and grace in Christ Jesus. Where, 1. he joyneth
saving (which takes in all) and Gods purpose together, and makes the one
grace as the other is. 2. In both he opposes works to grace, which cannot be
understood simply, but as they look to merit; otherwise both take-in works: and
what reason can there be given here why this Book is so often mentioned in this
judgment, but to show that this last step of salvation is of the same nature
with the first, which certainly (as to election) can be called no other than of
grace. 3. Consider that when Christ speaks more fully to this sentence,
Matthew. 25. He mentions some works, as visiting, clothing, etc. which
certainly, as to the condignity of merit, can have no proportionablenesse to
heaven and glory. And if any say, he so accounts them, though they be not
worthy. Answ. 1. Then that is improperly merit, whereas the other properly
deserves hell, Therefore the expression is not alike on both sides. 2. Then it
follows, it is grace that makes the sentence pass on them and not strict
justice, as on the other. 4. Consider here, that all, small and great, are
judged, infants possibly never breathing out of their mothers belly: and can
any say that such cannot be written in the Lamb's book of life, or that they
have done any thing to deserve this last absolving sentence? It must therefore
not be understood to infer merit to them.

To say by Baptism their sin is taken away. Answ. 1. That is contrary to Graces
way and the nature of Gods Covenant to Believers and their seed, baptized or
not; for, it condemns all unbaptized; or, the argument will hold in them. 2.
In Baptism children are passive, it is not their deed, if childrens Baptism
deserve any thing, it must be here accounted on their score who performed it,
not on the childrens, who must be judged according to their own works, and not
to the works either of Parent or Minister; yet if it be considered, that the
judgment passes according to the Book of life, there is clear ground to lay
it on grace and not on themselves or others, and the rule is one to all the
Elect. 5. Consider that these works and books take-in all the Elect, many of
whom have many sinful actions and few good, and even those few are much
corrupted and imperfect. Now, it must either be said, 1. that no Elect comes
here to be judged, but he has more good (at least) to deserve heaven than evil
to deserve hell (which will seem hard to be said of profane men, converted
possibly an hour before death) or we must say there are different rules to
proceed by, in judging the Elect, some by grace and some by works, which is
contrary to the text, that makes one rule for all: and certainly any that is
well versed in these books, will see no cause to plead thus, and all others
shall see it when these books shall be opened; It is the ignorance of these
that makes men so plead. So this according then imports a suitableness and
connection, as is said, but no merit.

Inst. But it is deserving to the wicked, therefore to the righteous. Answ. 1.
This word here may import no deserving, that being (as to the wicked elsewhere
clear) but a connection with, and suitableness of one of these to the other, to
wit, wicked living, and impenitent dying, with damnation. This is enough to
vindicate justice, that he thus proceeds. 2. Although it do imply merit in
them, yet it will not follow, that it does so in the Elect: not only for the
former reasons; but, 1. because the sins of wicked men are perfectly sins, the
good actions of the Godly are not so. 2. Because with the one, God proccedeth
according to the Covenant of works, punishing for want of perfect holiness,
aggravated also in some by their unbelief who heard the Gospel; but God
proceeds not by that Covenant with the Elect, but by the book of like, that
has the Covenant of grace depending on it. 3. Because any sin deserves wrath,
even the least (being a transgression of the Law) but many good works will not
deserve heaven, because they are debts and cannot plead the performance of that
Covenant except they be always and in every thing perfect: for, life depends
not on living well this year or two years, or for this good work or that, but
on a perfect righteousness, which is marred by one sin (even original sin)
though there be never more: for, bonum non est nisi ex omnibus, malum ab
unoquoque defectu. If any ask, why works are mentioned here and not faith?
Answ. 1. Faith and repentance are certainly included, not as works deserving,
but as fruits of the Spirit in the Regenerate, and the want of them is sinful
in the reprobate, who heard and believed not. And certainly according to this,
they who heard are more severely judged; and therefore works here, must be
understood generally, as it sets out ones condition, good or evil, according
to which the judgment proceeds especially as they believed or not. 2. Faith
is not expressly mentioned, because it is employed in Gods purpose of grace
under the book of life, which taketh-in faith as a midse, that it may be of
grace, Romans 4.16. 3. Because it is not justification from sin before God that
is here recorded, (that is past) but the manifestation of that before men, and
it is one thing to justify before God, and another to save one that is
justified, and declare them to be so, and works contribute most directly to
this. 4. Works are especially mentioned in opposition to the wicked, who are
condemned for their sins and want of good works; this stops their mouth and
shows the justice of the difference even before men: yet, upon the matter (
Chap. 21.8.) unbelieving is reckoned to the wicked, even as murder and adultery
is, and so among the works of the Elect must be comprehended their fleeing to
Christ by faith, whereby merit is overturned.

Verse. 13. By clearing an objection, he opens further what was said, which
may be, many are rotten in the grave, (called here hell) are drowned in the
sea, eaten with fishes, etc. (under which are comprehended all desperate-like
deaths, as burning, sowing in ashes rotten heaps of dead bodies together: it
may be said, how can these dead be said to be raised, and judged? It is shown,
that even these same bodies by Gods power are judged with these that live in
the flesh (by which, that which looks most impossible^like is brought about)
even as if willingly the sea and the grave had given up these, which from God
they had only in keeping till this day.

By hell here may be understood (as ordinarily) the grave, (there being one
word for both in the Original) or these bodies (if any be) that are in hell,
such as Korah, Dathan and Abiram and others. But generally this is sure, that
by these places, sea, ^^ll and death, are meaned all places where dead bodies
are ordinarily buried, or extraordinarily crushed and destroyed: they shall all
compear wherever they be.

They are said to give up their dead, that is, not by any faculty in these
creatures, but it is easily, speedily and simply, as if in boxes they had been
kept all distinct, and now they lay them out; which is done by Gods power, as
He made the fish, only by a word, cast out Jonah on the dry land whole. It is
called their dead, or the dead which was in them, to show, 1. an account, as it
were, every one makes of their dead, as if they were answerable for them ^ it
is so accurate, none is missed or kept back. 2. To show, it is the same dead
that are judged, and in the same bodies that died, and were buried or perished.
It is (as Job says, Chap. 19.) he and none other for him; So it is they and
none other for them: the same body, (as it is the same soul) compearteh to get
judgment according as they did in the flesh, it being suitable that the same
body should share with the soul in its eternal condition. Here is a wonder, a
thousand bodies are rotten together, possibly men feeding on others, and living
on others dead bodies, yet now all are put to their own masters, none are wrong
marrowed in the least pickle of dust.

It is added, and they were judged: this shows that this resurrection goes
before their sentencing, and that, as every one arose, and none were missed, so
every one is judged and none misseth a just sentence; there is one rule, as
there is one judgment: for, sin takes impenitent sinners to hell, and none
but the holy (though not for their holiness) are admitted to life. Concerning
this judgment I would only add, 1. That it is not unlike, that as our Lord the
Judge, shall visibly as man appear, so shall He vocally and audibly pronounce
the sentence to the hearing of all (at least as to the main of the sentence,
Come ye, and depart ye, etc.) This the Scripture seems to speak, and it is
not inconsistent with the order of proceeding, and the intimating publicly of
the sentence before men and Angels agreeing to that day, but very suitable to
it: I say, as to the general sentence on the body of the Elect, and of the
wicked respectively. And, therefore, secondly, it is not necessary to astrict
this judgment to such a long time (as some do) as if every ones account and
particular sentence were distinctly and successively to be handled. He says at
once to these on His right hand, and again one sentence to these on His left,
together, Matthew. 25. Particulars indeed are manifested, which are the grounds
of every ones sentence, but that may be done at an instant by our blessed Lord
Jesus by opening the books, much more than the devil could at the twinkling of
an eye ( Matthew. 4. and Luke 4.) show Christ the world and the glory of it.

The execution of this dreadful sentence follows, in the last two verses, as
it concerns the wicked. 1. Consider the parties condemned. Then, secondly,
the judgment or death they are adjudged unto. The parties sentenced, are ( ver.
14.) death and hell, that is, the last enemies of Christ who are to be subdued,
and now generally all His enemies (as may be gathered from 1 Corinthians. 15.16.)
they are all in hell now, none in heaven, the earth is removed, and death and
the grave have no power on the Elect, Therefore there is no service for them in
time, which now is gone, the wicked are in hell, and death goes with them, as
having no more to do here.

By this then, death and hell were cast in the lake, is not meant any proper
judgment on death and hell or the grave; but it holds out, first, that now
all effects of sin and of the curse, as to the godly, are removed; and now all
these go together to the pit with the Reprobate, and the company of the
now-glorified Elect is fully freed from them all, as Chap. 22. verse. 3. which
relates to this. Secondly, That Christ's victory is completed, when death and
the grave, that are amongst the last enemies, are subdued and have access no
longer to trouble or detain any of His people, being now confined within the
lake, signifying thereby both the absolute freedom of the Elect from them, and
the full dominion (to say so) which they shall have over the Reprobate. 2. All
who are not written in the Lambs Book of life, they are casten in this lake,
all that are not elected; In a word, all the Reprobate, all that are not
pardoned through Christ and by grace, not exempted from the deserving of their
works, whether great or small, rich or poor, noble or ignoble, old or young,
more civil or profane, etc. The sentence is seen and may be known in the
excution; They are cast into the lake, wherein the devil was cast, ver. 10.
This is expounded to be the second death: that proves this to be the general
judgment when all the reprobates, put together, are sent thither. In a word,
all these share with the devil and his angles in hells fire: where we may
again see, 1. that the book of life, or way of grace, is that only which
keeps the Elect from this damnation: Yet, 2. that others get no wrong, for
they deserved it; only God pardoned them not, which He was not obliged to do.
3. That there is a good agreeance and connection between election and holiness,
therefore they are judged according to their works: and none can say, let me
live as I will, If I be elected, I will be saved; God puts Works and this
Book together as the rule, 1. To stop their mouths that perish, and to
vindicate even His election in its execution from respect of persons. 2. To
show, that it is yet Grace that saves: let not therefore these two be
separated.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. ANd I saw a new heaven, and a new earth: for the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea.


THe last sentence being past in the former Chapter, and the execution of it,
as to the wicked and reprobate, shortly pointed at: Follows now the execution
of the sentence as to the Elect, in this Chapter and Chap. 22. In the lake were
casten all not written in the book of life; unto this holy City are admitted
none, but such as are written in it: whereby it appears, that they are two
estates and conditions that are opposed, eternal life to eternal death; of
two opposite parties, the one including all the reprobate not written, the other
taking-in all these who are written in the book of life and no other. And so
this is to be looked on as the continuance of the former narration concerning
the execution of the last sentence which he now prosecuteth, as to the Elects
happiness, whereof nothing was spoken in the preceding Chapter. This
happiness is set out, first, more generally in some antecedent circumstances
concerning it, to verse. 9. Then, secondly, more particularly, by vision the new
Jerusalem is manifested to John in a full view, to verse. 6. of Chap. 22. Then,
thirdly, by word the Angel adds some explication to John, till ver. 16. where
Jesus cometh-in Himself, which continues till the close.

Whether this vision belongs to the Church militant or triumphant, is
disputed by many, and by some sober and learned Interpreters, is applied to the
Church militant. Some making it to hold out a state of the Church contemporary
with the seventh trumpet and the thousand years; Others making it belong to the
state of the Church after the vials, when the fullness of the Gentiles and Jews
shall become worshippers of our Lord Jesus; and so to them the former
description of the day of Judgment is but by anticipation set down, and here
John returns again to point out the militant Church in her most glorious
posture. It will be needful therefore to confirm this order and series laid
down for clearing of the scope of these Chapters. 1. Then, the debate here is
not simply, if a more flourishing estate of the militant Church be prophesied
of in this book: for, on Chap. 16.19. and 20. we have seen much of that to be
spoken of, but only whether this vision does further explicate these former
prophesies, or prosecute the description of the triumphant Church after them.
We acknowledge many expressions here to be borrowed from the Prophets, by which
in some holy hyperbolick manner they did set out the spiritual estate of the
Church in the days of the Gospel. 3. We grant that the same expressions in
themselves may in part be applied to the gracious estate of Gods Church here,
and her glorious estate hereafter: yet this we assert, that what is intended by
the Spirit here, as the scope of this vision, is principally, and chiefly (if
not only) to be applied to the state of the Elect after the general Judgment,
and can be properly applied to no state of the Church militant, which we do
thus clear and confirm.

1. From the native series and order laid down, if the judgment preceding be
general to Reprobate and Elect, and the sentence in its execution be set down
in reference to the Reprobate before; Then it will follow, that natively the
scope of this vision is to set out the good condition of the Elect in
opposition to the former; the execution of the Reprobates sentence is first set
down, because more shortly the wickeds condition is past by, and the good
condition of the Elect is more fully insisted on, as making most for their
consolation. And though the matter and order of words do not always agree in
this prophecy, yet certainly it were unwarrantably rejected, where it suiteth
well with the scope as here, when natively a good condition is set down,
opposite to the evil condition going before, and that orderly to supply what was
formerly wanting, to wit, what became of these that were written in the Lambs
book of life, while all others are cast into the lake. This Chapter supplieth
that, showing that they entered into an excellent Jerusalem, out of which (
ver. 27.) all others were excluded: which shows clearly, that the scope here
is to continue that part of the execution of the sentence, as to the Elect,
which was, until now, defective. Beside, it is not like, that the spirit would
insist so much in showing what came of the Reprobate, and what effect the
sentence had on them, and would nowhere show what effect the sentence, or book
of life, had on the Elect, which is nowhere else in this prophecy, if not
here. And this would not suit with the scope of this prophecy, to neglect a
thing of so much consolation and concernment unto the Church at all times, as
this of the eternal good condition of all the Elect, which is the happy result
of all their former wrestlings.

This argument from the series and acoluthia of the prophecy, will bind the
more strongly, If we consider, that there will hardly be found any such
hysterosis or hysterologia in one and the same explicatory prophecy, (such as
this is) for, though an explicatory prophecy may go back over events contained
in a principal prophecy, yet that in one and the same explicatory prophecy,
there is such retrogessing over one event, to set down some other wholly
antecedaneous to it, and having no connection with any thing successive unto it,
as this would be if it did belong to a state of the Church before the final
sentencing of the wicked mentioned in the close of the former Chapter, will not
be easily found.

2. If it were any such good condition of the Church militant, it behoved to be
either before the thousand years, (which none asserteth) or after it, and so
after the seventh vial, which is impossible (because that brings the end with
it;) or, it must be contemporary with it, which cannot be: for, 1. that
thousand years good condition is not absolute. Satan is bound (but not cast in
the lake) and that for a time, only, Gog and Magog are afterward loosed; but
here Satan is laid fast in his prison, and death and the curse are no more
among any of this company. 2. Their reign here is not for a thousand years or a
long time, but un-interrupted, for ever, Chap. 22.5. And certainly by these and
the like expressions, it is contradistinguished from the best and longest peace
that the Church at any time has had on the earth, and particularly from that
of the thousand years. Again, that reign of the thousand years follows but
the first resurrection, this follows the second; that is particular, this is
general. Add, that good condition of the thousand years was applicable only to
Saints of that time (as there was cleared,) but this agrees to all the Elect
living in whatsoever time, and none are secluded from it, but such as are not
written in the Lambs Book of life.

3. This new earth, spoken of here, verse. 1. is certainly in opposition to the
former, mentioned, Chap. 20.11. which passed away; but that passing or fleeing
away of heaven and earth, being antecedent and preparatory unto the last
judgment, it must certainly be the last consummation of all things, and so this
new heaven and earth (and this Jerusalem that contemporateth with it) which
succeed and are opposed to the former earth and heaven, must be after the day
of judgment, and therefore inconsistent with any estate of the Church militant.

4. This new Jerusalem coming down from heaven, is the same spoken of ( Chap.
3.12.) in the promise made to Philadelphia; but that is heaven, Therefore it is
so here. And that all these promises in the Epistles, ( Chap. 2. and 3.) do
look to eternity, the scope (which is to provoke wrestlers to overcome, at all
times) makes it clear, and none will think that that can be any peculiar
condition belonging to a particular state and time of the Church here, which
all overcomers have ever partaked of at all times; It must then be heaven.

5. That which is spoken of this holy city, will not in sundry things agree to
the Church on earth, as particularly, 1. that there was no Temple there, ver.
22. Now by Temple here is understood (conform to this prophecy) one of two, 1.
either some midse or ordinance leading to Christ, which was typified by the old
Temple; and so the Church militant (though called sometimes heaven) yet never
wants a Temple: and under the seventh trumpet particularly, Chap. 11. verse
last, it is marked, that then the Temple was opened in heaven and light and
Religion in the Ordinances flourished: and that seventh trumpet is contemporary
with the thousand years, as all acknowledge: Or, 2. by Temple is understood
heaven it self improperly, (as Chap. 3.12. I will make him a pillar in the
Temple of my God, etc.) because the Temple held out more eminent and glorious
enjoying of God; in which respect, ( ver. 22.) God and the Lamb are called the
Temple here, because by immediate enjoying of them, all Ordinances are
supplied, and the use of them, and all light, Chap. 22.5. is taken away. Now,
by Temple here, is not understood any excellency of immediate enjoying of God;
for, that is in this city: It must be therefore understood of mediate means,
such as the Temple was, the taking away whereof, is a part of the perfection of
that blessed state, whereas the enjoying of these Ordinances fully, is a part
of the Churches happiest condition here on earth, seeing therefore this city
has no Ordinances, and it is a part of its perfection to want them, It can be
applicable to no state of the Church militant, but only triumphant, wherein the
Churches happiness exceeds her happiest condition on earth, more than the
opening of the Temple exceeded its shutting: and it is set forth in this
expression, to show that this is not that state of the Church, mentioned Chap.
11.15. but one succeeding to, and exceeding it, as it did what was before it.

Again, These who plead for Christ's personal presence during the thousand
years on earth, do argue the same consequent from this place, and say, that
Ordinances cease then; for, what need is there of a glass to behold Christ
when Himself is present? so Tylli^gast, etc. Ans. 1. This argument will indeed
conclude against these who disclaim that opinion in that part. But, 2. even
this place will conclude against that presence also; for here, not only is
there an immediate enjoying of Christ the Lamb, but of the Lord God Almighty
also, ver. 22. and Chap. 22. ver. 4. they see His face; and in Scripture there
is no immediate enjoying of God spoken of, but as in heaven, vision being the
form of our blessedness in our Country. Hence this is a second instance, that
this cannot agree to the Church on earth, but in heaven, thus, Immediate
enjoying of God belongs not to the Church on earth, but in heaven; But the
Church in this new Jerusalem, has that, ut supra. Ergo, 3. If we consider also
the parties admitted to this city, we will find that it will agree to no state
of the Church on earth, they are Elect, and only Elect, verse. 27. and this must
be understood of Elect, not only who are so in appearance, but who are such
indeed, ex veri^ate rei: for, they are here so written who are admitted, as
they were not written who were mentioned, Chap. 20. ult. and are not admitted
(the writing of the one being directly opposed to the not writing of the other)
but there, they mentioned who were casten in the lake, are not only these who
seemed, or outwardly appeared not to be written, but these who really were not
written, whatever show they had (for, they were cast in the lake) The
difference betwixt them is not put here in show, but in reality and verity of
deed. Beside, where is writing in the Lambs book taken in this prophecy, or in
the Scripture, for appearing to be so? for so one might be said to be written
in the Lambs book of life, and yet cast into the lake of fire, and so not to be
written into it at the same time, which were absurd. But we shall weigh this
argument more on the words.

6. If all without this city (or, if to be without it, be all one as to) be in
the lake, Then this must be heaven or the Saints eternal happiness, opposed
to the eternal misery of the wicked; But all without this city are in hell,
and to be without it and in hell are one. The first is clear: the city
mentioned (wherein all men's happiness consists) Chap. 22.14, 15. is this
city described here, that has such excellent gates, and the tree of Life
growing in it, (See, ibid. ver. 3.) But to be without this, is hell, compare
ver. 15. Chap. 22. dogs, etc. are without, and not thus happy: what that
condition of these dogs and sorcerers is, is set down, Chap. 21. verse. 8. It is
to be cast into the lake, that is the second death. This then must be eternal
life, which the Elect are admitted unto, that being the life only which is
opposed to the second death.

7. Add, to be a partaker of this City, and to eat of the fruit of the tree of
life that grows in the Paradise of God, is a privilege promised to all
Believers, and is performed to all overcomers, at all times, as Chap. 22.
compare ver. 2. with 14. 1. He is blessed that comes to this happiness. 2. It
is they that do His commandments. So it is a happiness that follows
holiness, and by holiness men come to enter to it. 3. Beside this, to eat of
the tree of life is promised to all that ever shall come to heaven. See Chap.
2. verse. 7. and all the scope here (See Chap. 21. ver. 7. and 22. ver. 12, 14,
15.) holds forth the last good condition, and great encouragement and promise
which is made to all wrestlers; which certainly shows that heaven is intended
here, that being only the last great and common encouragement: for if this set
out the estate of the militant Church, it must either set out what is always
common to her at all times as such, (this none will assert) or, it must
describe some peculiar condition applicable to some time only, but that is not
either; for, if it were so, then the privileges spoken of this state of the
Church, could not be applied at all times to Believers; but they are applied at
all times to Believers under any cross, for their encouragement, Therefore it
sets out no peculiar state of the militant Church, and so by consequence
none at all.

Although it should be said, (as some do) that this will not prove that these
promises are not to be fulfilled on earth, but only that then all Saints that
ever lived shall partake of them: and therefore an Author, of late, makes use
of this Scripture to prove the resurrection of all the Saints before the day of
judgment unto an happy condition upon earth; for, says he, This here spoken
of, is to be fulfilled on earth; but this belongs to all overcomers, to eat
of the tree of life, etc. Therefore all overcomers must be raised and brought
to the earth to partake of it. This, I say, will rather confirm our argument
than elude it. For, 1. that consequence of his goes upon the supposition that
this belongs to the Church on earth; which we deny: These who assert
otherwise, would look, that they strengthen not such a consequent. 2. Seeing
these happinesses are promised to all overcomers, are they not verified to them
at all times? and can any think that souls, immediately after death and
victory, were not brought unto this City, or made partakers of the tree of
life? is that promise suspended till Christ's second coming, when this
Church State shall be set up on earth? Yea, on the contrary, does not this
strongly conclude against it, this tree of life grows in Paradise, but
Paradise is heaven, to which the thief on the cross was brought that same very
night he died, Luke 23? and is he not then a partaker of the fruit of that
tree? If then that was Paradise to which the thief was admitted at Christ's
suffering, then the Paradise in which the tree of life grows, can be no
particular state of the Church on earth: but heaven is that Paradise where the
tree of life grows. Compare Chap. 22.2. with Chap. 2.7. Again, there is no
promise ( Chap. 2. and 3.) made to the overcomers, but are generally such as
are fulfilled to the overcomer after death, and when these (that here are
given) are for that same scope, and some of them intermixed in the same places,
It will be hard so to difference them, as that they did not partake of these
formerly mentioned, until these thousand years did begin: for, this Paradise
was in the thiefs time, Paul's time, 2 Corinthians. 12.4. Therefore ought not to be
restricted to this.

It may also not be without weight to consider, that this being the last thing
described in this prophecy, upon the back of the Churches temporal
difficulties, and also agreeing in it self well to heaven, that it is more
suitably applied to it, than to any other condition, this being the great
result of all the Churches former trials; and it is more comfortable to have
the narration of her estate, at the description of her eternal happiness,
than at any other period whatsoever, showing that Gods care of His people shall
continue till they be in heaven, and so concludes, because their condition is
eternal.

Although I mind not to insist on the objections, but to leave them to the
opening of the words following, and their series; Yet, considering that some do
allege many things for the contrary opinion, I shall say two words in
reference to two sorts of them.

1. Learned Mede, goes about to contemporate this state of the Church here
with the seventh trumpet, Chap. 11. or, (as he speaks) with that intervall
which is to be betwixt the beasts destruction and the end of the world. But, 1.
There is a twofold mistake in the very rise of this Synchronisme, 1. that it
supposes the seventh trumpet to presuppose the utter abolition of the beast,
and so only to contemporate with the seventh vial, of this was spoken, Chap.
11. last ver. and 20. Lect. 4. The second mistake is, that it supposes this
new state of the Church to succeed immediately upon the beasts overthrow, which
it does not till the Dragon be taken and casten where the beast was before him,
as in the former series ( Chap. 20.) appears. Again, beside this, the grounds
upon which he builds this Synchronisme, will not sustain it. 1. Note this,
that the Bride here is the same with Chap. 19.6, 7, etc. because she gets
the same name, therefore is this contemporary with that; for though it may be
the same Church, yet will it not follow, that it is the same Church so
considered and at the same time, because it gets the same name: certainly
Christ's Church at any time on earth, is His Bride, and so is she at the day of
Judgment, Ephesians. 5.27, etc. Yet, it will not follow, that where she gets
these names, she is still to be taken as militant, more than we might argue,
that Church, Chap. 21. is the triumphant Bride, Therefore so is that, Chap.
19.7. The same will answer the second argument also, which faith this is called
the holy city, but ( Chap. 20. ver. 8.) the holy city is compas^ed after the
thousand years, Therefore this holy city was before that time. This will prove
indeed, that there was a Church then, or that the Church, now glorified, did at
such a time suffer, and was encompassed, (for, there is still but one Bride,
one Catholic Church and Family in heaven and earth, Ephesians. 3.) but it will not
prove that the Church, as here considered, was put to suffering: yea, there
seems to be express difference, this is not only Jerusalem or the holy city
that is the Bride, but it is new Jerusalem, to distinguish it from what it was
formerly, such a city as cannot be compassed, therefore are its gates never
shut; such a city as no enemy can molest, or no dog can approach unto, and that
not for a thousand years only, but for ever: all which, are certainly to oppose
it to the Churches militant condition formerly expressed. The other two grounds
which he adds, are suspected by himself. Neither can any think, that because
( Chap. 16.17.) it is said, it is done, which words are again repeated, Chap.
21.5, 6. therefore they belong to one time, it is rather thus, Chap. 16.17. It
is said to be done, because near the consummating, that seventh vial bringing
with it the end, Chap. 21.6. because actually consummated. His last
presumption, because its one of the Angels of the vials that shows it to
John, can conclude nothing, except we say, that God could not make use of an
Angel to show to John His Church triumphant as well as militant: and if this be
conclusive, it may plead to have it contemporary with one of the vials as well
as this; for, no particular vial is mentioned: yea, it is like, all this
prophecy being shown to John by one Angel, Chap. 1. it might therefore plead
for a contemporarinesse amongst all the parts of it; but himself does not lay
weight on it.

A second word is to such as think it belongs to the Christian Church after
the Jews conversion, because of the expressions that are made use of in it. I
shall not insist on all (leaving particulars to their proper place) but say,
however this be applied, it is certainly not literally to be taken; and
therefore, that the Kings bring their glory to it, etc. is not to be understood
of temporal glory, more than by gold or precious stones we must conceive a
material building, because such matter is mentioned. If therefore the
expressions must be figuratively taken, and may as pertinently be applicable to
heaven as to the Church-militant, we are to consider to which they are to be
applied by the scope and other arguments in it self, whereof we have spoken,
and by which we are content that it be determined. And therefore we say, that
the like expressions in the Prophets are not to be made equipollent to these
here, except it be clear that they aim at one scope; for, it is not words and
expressions that we conclude from, but from many things put together, as is
said: for, although the Prophets here and there, dropped some such expressions,
to hold forth the excellency of the Gospel-administration before it came,
beyond what then was; Yet, is there in any of them such a full and heavenly
description put together as this? or can any future estate of the Gospel Church
beyond what was in John's time be looked-for, which will exceed it as far as
the Gospel Church does the Jewish, that John should go so far beyond their
manner in the describing of it? and we are sure that the application thereof to
heaven, has with it a far more convincing impression on the hearts of the
Readers, as finding therein a comfortable relish for their refreshing, which
another application would m^r, beside, that straining of it, will hardly be
eschewed by so carrying on the application thereof.

We come now to speak of the first general description of heaven that is set
down in more general steps, yet exceeding significant, to ver. 9. 1. What John
saw, ver. 1. and, 2. Then what he heard and was told of for confirmation of the
first, in the rest of the verse. Both tend to set out this happiness of the
Saints eternal condition.

The 1. thing he saw, is a new heaven and a new earth. 2. A proof that it is
so, or a reason why it is new, is given, because the former was passed away. 3.
It is particularly noted, there was no more sea. That this relates to the
great change that shall be by fire on all the world, we take for granted, as
being a thing following the great judgment and making way for the Saints
eternal blessedness. It is the very former change, mentioned, Chap. 20. verse.
11. which shows, that this is the continuation of that narration: as if one
asked, what followed then, when the heavens and the earth passed away? I saw,
says he, a new heaven and a new earth: for, the first heaven and the first
earth, etc. are passed away, whereby the succeeding of this to the former is
clear. There are three particulars here to be enquired in, 1. What this passing
away of the heaven and earth is, succeeding to the former, and therefore not
contemporary with it, which is here called the first heaven, in respect of that
which followed. 2. What this new heaven and earth is. 3. How it said there was
no more sea. Of these we are not curiously to enquire; but seeing it is a part
of Gods Word given for consolation to Believers, we shall soberly assert what
we think truth in this.

Therefore we say, 1. that these words speak of a change (even on the universe
itself, literally so to be taken) and that same which is mentioned by Peter, 1
Epist. 3.13. where, when he has spoken of the dissolution of the world by
fire, (which by the Schoolmen is called ignis conflagrationis) he adds as a
consolation, But we look for a new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, of this does the present place speak: where, o^the by, we say,
It is wonderful to us how learned men (as Mede in his treatise de (...))
should apply that place of Peter, to a condition of the Church on earth, seeing
there this new heaven and new earth is expressly said to follow the earth that
now is, and that after it is dissolved by fire, Is there a Church to be in the
world after that dissolution? And wereas he fasteneth that exposition upon that
place of Peter from Isa. 65. and 66. we conceive it were fitter to expound that
place of Isaiah, as the obscurer, by that place of Peter, as that which is more
clear, and so both to speak of the Churches eternal condition properly after
these elements shall be dissolved, if it be necessary to apply both to one
thing.

2. This supposes a great change, such as shall put all in a far other shape
and frame than now they are in; this cannot be questioned; how far and in what
manner, is only disputed: for, that all must be destroyed and burnt with fire,
is granted by all, and therefore justly what remains is called new.

3. We take this for certain also, that this passing away looks but to the
visible heavens, air, earth and water, and does neither extend to that blessed
mansion of the Elect souls (called Coelum Empyreum) or Kingdom prepared for
them, nor yet to the place of torment, where damned spirits and reprobates are
for ever to ly under the wrath of God: for, 1. that place of joy, it is said to
be prepared from the foundation of the world for them, Matthew. 25. Which
expression prepared, being compared with Heb. 11. ver. 10. does not only hold
forth a most excellent glory and singular exquisit workmanship, for which cause
God is said to be the builder and maker thereof, (...): not elsewhere applied
to Him in reference to any other piece of His work, as having given a special
proof of His admirable art and skill in that; but also does ascribe the same to
its first creation, which admits not of any interveening change. Again, this
being the mansion of glorified Saints and the same heaven unto which all the
Elect will be gathered at the resurrection, and still spoken of in Scripture as
one and the same; and it being fully glorious for their satisfying happiness
in the enjoying of Gods presence therein, We can apprehend no change incident
thereunto, beside that it is called eternal, 2 Corinthians. 5. ver. 1. in
opposition to other things that are called temporal. Neither can there be any
effect of sin or of the curse supposed to have any influence on that blessed
mansion. And therefore it not being, as other creatures, made subject to vanity
(no unclean thing entering there) there can be no necessity of purifying it, or
making such a change on it, as on the rest. 2. For hell, it is also said to be
prepared for the devil and his angels, wherein also many Reprobates are before
this last judgment (as by the parable of the rich glutton is clear, Luke 16.)
Therefore it is not a new hell they go unto that day, more than a new heaven.
Neither can any end of renewing hell be given, it being no way to be bettered
(as other creatures are by this change) except we say, as Aquinas and the
Schoolmen, that this consummation puts every thing in its perfection, and
does so to hell also, by transmitting the dross of all the creation, devils,
reprobates, death, etc. unto it, But this confirms what we said.

4. We take it for granted, that there is not a full annihilation of this
universe by this change, so that there should be nothing after it, but heaven
and hell; but a change only it must be, though a wonderful great change. This
all the places, that speak of a new heaven and a new earth, do confirm, as
succeeding in the room of the former. Beside, the phrases holding forth this
change, will import but a change and no annihilation, as will appear: yea, this
exception, that there shall be no more sea, confirms it; for, it supponeth
somewhat more to befall it than the heaven and the earth, which could not be if
the annihilation of all were absolute.

5. The question therefore lies mainly in this, whether that change be
substantial, so that these heavens and this earth being removed, there are new
heavens and new earth again created: or, if that change be but in respect of
qualities, as it is with the body of man, which is raised the same, as to its
substance; yet so as to its qualities, it may be called another, for its
spiritualnesse, purity, glory, incorruptiblnesse, etc. (I mean of the bodies of
the Elect) even as in that comparison used, 1 Corinthians. 15. The corn that
grows up is called another grain than that which was sown, in respect of its
accidents and appearance; so may this earth be called a new earth in these
respects. We conceive this last to be truth, that as the heavens and earth are
not substantially changed, nor annihilated, so the new earth and heaven
succeeding, are the same for substance, but for nature more stable, for beauty
more glorious, for use, free from the abuses sinful men put them unto, and
from the effects of the curse put upon them for man's sin, they are altogether
freed and set at liberty from these. Therefore ( Acts 3.21.) it is called the
time of restitution of all things.

For confirmation whereof, we may consider, 1. These places wherein this change
is most expressly mentioned, as, Psalm. 102.8.16. with Heb. 1.10. They shall
perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment,
as a vesture shall thou fold them up and they shall be changed. Which words
bear out, 1. a total overturning of heaven and earth as to its outward frame:
Yet, 2. that, upon the matter, in its substance, it is but a change, but so
universal and great, as makes it not to be then what it is now. A second
expression, is, 1 Cor. 7. The fashion of this world passes away, the word is
(...), used to set out the change on our bodies, Philip. 3.21. whereby he would
seem to hint, that this change is more on its outward appearance than on its
substance. A third place most plain and full, is, 2 Pet. 3. ver. 10.12. and 13.
The heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall (...) with
fervent heat, etc. See also, verse. 5, 6, 7. where the destruction by fire is
compared with that which went before by water. Where, 1. It is to be gathered,
that that fire melts the elements and consumes them not, even as a goldsmyth
does with me^tal that he has a mind to put a new form or mould upon. 2. That
out of this resulteth the new heaven and earth as a refined ^ump, from which
the dross is taken away. 3. That as there was no substantial change by water,
so neither by fire (though in that respect it is called the old world, and the
other the world that now is) only that made the change to the worse, this of
fire to the better.

For a second confirmation, we would consider that famous place, Romans 8.19, 20,
21, 2^. where the scope purposly is to prove the glorious condition the Saints
have to expect after this, and that such, that even senseless creatures wait
and long for, as being to be made partakers of it at the general manifestation
of the sons of God. Where observe, 1. That by creature in the singular number,
ver. 19, and 20 is understood the universe, as contradistinguished from the
Elect, and such a creature as by the sin of man is made subject to vanity, and
so is not to be understood of the whole creation simply, as certainly neither
of Angels nor of the seat of the bl^ssed. 2. That man's sin had had much
influence on the cursing of this creature, partly with barrenness, tempests,
etc. contrary to its first nature; partly, by making it the theater where much
sin and many changes have been acted; partly, by abusing it against the end
appointed by God to our vain ends. 3. That there is a time of delivering Gods
sons from the bondage of sin they ly under, fully. 4. That the creature here
mentioned, is to be fully delivered from the ^ff^cts of sin and the curs^ also;
Therefore, 1. it is said to be sub^u^^ ^^d^r hope, not for ever. 2. It
expects that and gro^neth for it, not as if it were sensible, but by a
natural inclination to it, and this is so sure as if it had knowledge, it
would groan: so it is said, the high ways mourn, Lam. 1. 3. Because ( ver.
21.) it is expressly said, that it is to be delivered from bondage and to share
of that liberty of the sons of God, and as their change is not substantial,
but qualitative, from the worse to the better; so shall it, in some
proportionable suitable manner, be freed from changes, corruption, etc. and be
in an other way glorious. These excellent privileges waited for by the
creature, cannot consist either with annihilation or substantial change, but
with a qualitative mutation far to the better, though we cannot in everything
satisfy our curiosity about it, neither should we aim at that.

If any ask, what can be the use of this earth? or, to what end it is, seeing
Peter says, righteousness is to dwell in it? Answ. It is enough that God
makes it for His own glory, which was the end He made all things for, Prove.
16. 2. Are there not many things now made, whereof we cannot give the use,
(possibly, many parts of the world never yet inhabited? Or, may there not be
many reasons which we cannot now tell, though we will know in that day His
design in that? Again, are there not many members in man's body, who is raised
with difference of sex, and yet who can tell the use of them, only God thinks
it meet, there being then no marrying nor eating, men living like Angels? But,
3. Will it not evidence Gods power and greatness, and be a standing monument
of that? and will it not be some trophie of the full and final abolition of
death, when the effects of it, as to the creature, are taken away? which it is
like would never have perished either by fire or water had not sin come in and
unwillingly made it to be subject, Therefore some way it is meet that it should
also be f^ed.

The last observable thing in the great change of the world, is, that there was
no m^re sea: for understanding this, we premit, 1. that sea is not
allegori^ally or improperly to be understood for troubles and storms, which
then the world is to be free of, though that be a truth. But the sea here must
be understood properly as the earth and heaven* in the words before, it being
that sea which is a part of this universe. 2. It would seem, that to say that
the sea were new also, would not agree, there being some pecullar thing said of
the sea in its passing, more than is said of the earth and heaven. 3. Yet
hardly can it be said that the fire of conflagration shall destroy all the
element of water, and so dry up the sea, because there is now no use of it:
for, it may be said, 1. that there is no use of the earth either. 2. That that
conflagration purges the elements but annihilateth them not, but brings them
into their perfection, as it does all the world, a great part whereof is the
element of water. We shall, without insisting, lay down th^ee ways how we may
take the words, 1. There was no more sea, because by that fire all the elements
are melted, and made to run together, as it were, in one lump; and so there is
all that was, but not distinctly sea from earth, but all together; that world
to come being a result of their melting and intermixing one with another, when
all of them are purified. 2. But because the heavens and the earth are looked
on still as distinct, it will be hard to confound the water and the earth and
heaven, though it may be probable. It is said, that by sea is not meaned the
element of pure water, but that body of salt mixed waters, separated from the
earth, and put in bounds by it self: which differs also from other waters,
and has a moving fleeting nature, as it is the sea useful for commerce
amongst men. The sea thus understood, say they, is no more: not that all waters
are dried up, but this sea is purified, that it is no more sea having the
properties, uses, and differences which now it has from other waters; and to
this purpose do they make use of Genesis 1. where mention is made of waters,
before eve^^here was a sea. And so they make the taking away of sea, not to be
an annihilating of waters simply, but the reducing of the sea to the original
nature (if not to the place) of the first waters, so that it is not now sea, as
by that first appointment of God ( Genesis 1.9. and 10.) it was. 3. It may be
understood thus, the former heaven and earth were passed away, and there was no
more sea, that is, the change extended it self not only to heaven and earth,
but to the sea also, even although folks would think it less probable that the
sea should be altered with fire; and as they went away, yet not simply, but the
former heavens: so here is to be understood, the sea was no more, that is, the
former sea, but it was changed also. And this we think the simplest meaning,
and may someway be reconciled with what went before; and what is spoken of the
sea here, is the same which was spoken of the earth, Chap. 20.11. only the
change is more palpable on it; for although it continue to be water, yet it
continues not to be sea, it not being of the substance and essence of water to
be sea.

From this great change, we may learn, 1. not to fix too much on creatures,
which are passing, but on God who is the same, and changes not, Psalm. 102. It
is the Apostles advice, 1 Cor. 7.27.29, etc. Mortification is a good study, for
this world passes away.

2. It would press us to holiness, seeing such a trial and change will be, 2
Pet. 3.11. what manner of persons ought we to be, seeing all these things must
come to pass? in all godly conversation, waiting for that dissolving. Assure
your selves it will be, and where will the sinners appear in that day?

It is much disputed by the Schoolmen how the Godly then living, and these that
are again raised, are differenced from the wicked at that time, and what pain
this fire is to them: And here ignorantly and superstitiously they conclude,
that it serves in stead of purgatory to these that were living, or shall be at
that time. But, to leave curiosity, this is sure, 1. that the end of that fire
is neither to pain nor to fire or purge the Elect, it being impossible that
fire material can take away sin (except it be meritoriously, and that cannot
be though they did suffer; for, many suffer then and merit not, but this is
founded on the rotten grounds of self righteousness. Beside, this fire is not
voluntary, therefore (according to their own principles) cannot satisfy, But
the end of this, is the changing of this visible world and the putting an end
to time. 2. It is like, the change of the living Godly, will not be by this
fire, 1. because if Paul were living, he would be changed, 1 Cor. 15. yet would
he not, likely, suffer fire. 2. Their change is done in the twinkling of an
eye, which cannot be by fire. 3. It is not death (for all shall not die) but in
place of death, whereas certainly fire would infer dying, it being a material
fire. 3. However we conceive the order of proceeding at the last Judgment, yet
it is like that the resurrection of the dead Elect, and the changing of the
living, with their taking up to meet the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. (if not the final
sentence on all) shall go before this fire, the opening of the graves which
must be before this fire and the seas giving up of her dead, implies this; the
glorified condition therefore of the Elect being begun, and the sentence having
passed, belike, on the wicked also, (Christ thereby continuing last on the
field as Conqueror and Victor) before this fire, the Elect are all without the
reach thereof: for, all the Elect that are then living, or formerly dead and
glorified, must be in one condition (the bodies of the one being on the earth
as the persons of the other are) and seeing it cannot be said of the glorified
elect that they suffer fire, or are to be purged; so neither can it be said of
the other.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 2. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem coming down from God out
of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

3. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain:
for the former things are passed away.

5. And he that sat upon the throne, said, Behold, I make all things new. And
he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faith^ull.

6. And he said unto me, It is done: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end, I will give unto him that is athirst, of the fountain of the water of
life freely.

7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son.

8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable and murderers, and
wh^remongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: which is the second
death.


THis is the first thing John saw, as an antecedent to the discourse following
of the glory of the Elect; for, if all the earth be new and glorious, much more
they. Now follows, more particularly, the change that is made on the Church
of the Elect, when they are gathered together, and the world now is new and
another thing than it was, so is the glorified Church new and an other thing
(as to her qualities and glory) than before. After I had seen the new earth
(says he) I saw also the new Church, exceeding beautiful, no city, no Bride
so adorned on her marriage-day as she is, she is so glorious, when He gets
but a little view of her. Concerning the glorious description we would premit,

1. That it is almost all one, whomsoever or whatsoever we understand as the
party described; 1. Whether it be heaven, the place of blessedness; or, 2. the
glorified Elect, who are blessed and adorned in this place: or, 3. the
happiness and blessedness of the enjoyment of God by these elect Saints in
this place of glory Certainly none of these can be excluded, this being clearly
the scope, to show the good condition of all those who are written in the Lambs
Book of life, opposite to the misery of those who are not written: all must be
taken in, both who are thus adorned, where and with what they are made thus
happy. We shall not therefore be curious to distinguish them, the scope being
to show, that the Elect are in a most happy condition.

2. That this happiness is figuratively set out, two ways, 1. By such things
as are most precious unto men, and of greatest value, as of gold, precious
stones, and excellent building, a bride, etc. though the things themselves
infinitely exceed any thing they can be represented by. 2. By these things that
are most precious, even to the people of God, as the tabernacle, outward
ordinances, Gods presence with them, etc. which being to them of more worth
than the former, do serve notably to illustrate and to commend this happiness
unto them.

3. That the manner also is figurative, holding forth these things, in such a
manner, and by such expressions, as may make them most intelligible unto men,
who here are strangers to these mysteries: and therefore we are to conceive of
the expressions as they conduce to this scope.

4. Hence it is not needful to enquire in every particular part of the
allegory or similitude, as if it did set forth some different thing: it is
enough they all concur to set out one general, to wit, the excellency of this
good condition: therefore are we not to understand one thing by this stone,
another thing by that; one thing by the City, another thing by the Bride
(though in a good sense it may be;) it is enough that they together show that
it is glorious, so, that this city comes down from heaven, that it has twelve
gates, and that the tree of life has twelve manner of fruits, etc. They are
but expressions accommodated to our uptaking of them, and so discovered to John
in the vision, that they may be known to be more than a common city, tree, etc.
that are here. They are heavenly, even as the taking of John to a great high
mountain, ( ver. 10.) is set down to make our the coherence of the allegory. It
is marked that the City came down, and he was taken up, whereby the more
conveniently he might see it, which yet is not locally done, but in vision.

Particularly there is here a City, 1. named; 2. described; 3. commended. John
puts to his name here, I John saw it, to confirm it by such a witness,
whose testimony is true, Ioh. 21. and to make it pass with credit; he feigned
it not, but saw it in vision, though far short of the thing it self.

1. The City is named* the new Jerusalem. That by Jerusalem is signified the
Church, is clear in Scripture, for the special privileges Jerusalem had in
her. There is a threefold Jerusalem in the Scripture, 1. Legal Jerusalem,
which long since in destroyed, and as to its ceremonies is in bondage, Gal. 4.
2. A Jerusalem that now in, ( i.e. the Gospel Church) called the mother of us
all, Gal. 4. 3. It is taken for the heavenly Jerusalem, or the glorified
triumphant Church, where God immediately dwe^^et^ with His people, whereof that
earthly Jerusalem was but a type, Heb. 12, 22. so we understand Jerusalem
there, as including heaven, where Angels and just men made perfect are, and the
Church militant as it is the first step to this, and by which we have right to
it through the Covenant of Grace in the Church. It takes in the Elect
glorified and militant; for, there is but one family, Ephesians. 3.15. This is called
Jerusalem, 1. Because typified by the first Jerusalem. 2. Because it is the
same Church glorified that was before, even as it is the same world now which
shall be then. Only it is called new Jerusalem, not only to distinguish it from
the Jewish Jerusalem, but even from the evangelick, which is called the holy
City before, Chap. 11. but not the new City. It is new Jerusalem, as the earth
is new, in the words before, that is, fully freed from all corruption, and by
its qualifications another thing than it was, though as to the persons the
same; yet now perfectly glorified and glorious, another sort of Church then,
nor now, though the same Church, yet now presented, without spot or wrinkle or
any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27.

The second part is its description, It is said to be coming down from heaven.
This supponeth no local mutation of the place described, but the excellent
nature and quality of it, (whether place or person) that such a City was never
on the earth, it was a thing that was of a heavenly original, therefore ( Heb.
12.22.) called heavenly ^ for, to be in this City, supponeth ascending, and is
all one with having Christ's new name written on them, which is heavenly glory,
as appears, Chap. 3. verse. 12. This coming down, is either generally to show
that it is heavenly, 1. It ^iseth not out of the earth, no not this new earth,
it has a more glorious rise. Or, 2, so it appears to John as descending,
that he may see it: yet, as would seem, it was still high, therefore needs he
to ascend ( ver. 10.) to see it. Both which, are but to clear this, how John
here saw the heaven, It descended and I ascended (would he say) to see it,
though it be in vision. 3. It may be said to descend, not as to have its abode
upon earth, but as looking to the Church in its first presenting before God at
that day, as it is, Ephesians. 5.27. he so expresses it as beholding all the Saints
and Glory in heaven descending, (it being otherwise impossible to conceive of
heavenly things) as it were, like a Bride on the great marriage-day; and
possibly, it may relate to Christ's coming with His Saints to judgment by a
local descension at the dissolution of this earth. But, as we said, the
expressions are not too much literally to be strained.

This descension, or coming down, is also chiefly for its commendation: That,
1. it (...) of Gods building and dressing, it comes from Him. 2. It is to be a
constant dwelling to men (as the first voice clears, ver. 3.) as if it did
descend to them, they shall have he^ven for earth; that shall be the exchange.

The third thing is the commendation of this City: it is, 1. called a holy
city* for (...) the spirits of just men are made perfect, and so are their
bodies; and no unclean thing enters here, but such as are holy. Jerusalem
also is ordinarily for Gods presence and worship in it, called the holy city;
much more may heaven be for that reason.

The commendation more particularly, is, that she is prepared as a bride
adorned for her husband: she is tight every way, and excellent in her glorious
apparel and new clothes, braver than any Bride that ever was (as having a more
excellent husband than any) yet that is not all. Before, she was a preparing,
now she is prepared and fully made ready: formerly there was calling to the
marriage-supper, but here the bride is brought to her husband. In a word, now
she is fitted in a stately manner, suitable to the bridegroom, who now is not
the wooer, but her husband. And all these adornings are heavenly, such as she
from heaven brings with her, and he has put on her. And there is nothing
wanting that may adorn her, and, as it were, her marriage-day being come, not a
wrong pin is in her. The general keeps the scope of the similitude fully, she
is (as Psalm. 45.) brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: which is
spoken of this same glory, when the bride, fully glorified, shall be made ready
to enter the Kings palace. And this new Church being distinguished from this
new world, and not the same (as it would be, if it were to be understood on
earth) but succeeding to that change, we may clearly see that it is not that
here, but that same, Chap. 3. ver. 12. which is more particularly afterward
insisted on.

This glorious state of the Elect, and the solace which they enjoy in this
happiness, being discovered in a little glance to John's view, Follows now a
further confirmation thereof by two voices to his ear. The first, is general,
out of heaven, from such as knew best; the second from God Himself or the Lamb,
ver. 5. etc.

The voice is first described, Then the matter spoken is set down, as of more
credit from such a voice. It is a voice for its distinctnesse and
intelligiblenesse: not confused like thunderings, or waters, but that which he
heard was plain to his ear, as that which he had seen was to the eye. It will
take up all senses to discern heaven rightly, and there is happiness there to
delight them all. Beside, one sense is more easily deluded than two; here
therefore both by seeing and hearing John bears witness. It is called a
great voice, 1. to show that it is a concerning matter that is expressed. 2. To
show that it is no ordinary Herald that cries it: and therefore men would be
stirred up to hear and believe what is spoken concerning heaven. 3. It is from
heaven, because only those are best acquainted with the glory thereof here
mentioned. Beside, if there be joy in heaven at the conversion of a sinner,
much more when the marriage is solemnized; it would seem to relate to that.

2. The matter begins with a Behold, for the former reasons. It is a
wonderful thing to be observed by all, that such a nearness should be betwixt
God and men. Hear, observe, believe, and wonder. The matter sets out the
happiness of the Saints, two ways, 1. In their positive happiness and good
condition. 2. In their freedom from all difficulties.

Their positive happiness, is set out under the most excellent similitudes and
promises of happiness that Israel had. Now, all these are fulfilled, because
heaven cannot be set out of it self, Therefore these two ways it is set out to
us, to bring us in love with it, 1. To our eye, it is represented under the
types and similitudes of earthly things that are most glorious and delightsom
to the eyes, as, gold, pearl, precious stones, cities, and what men of the
world are most taken up with. 2. To our ear and faith, or apprehensions and
conceptions, it is set out by the things that taste not to the men of the world,
but to Gods People and Church have been more excellent than any thing of the
world. So that as the former is not literally understood, so neither the
latter; but by these, as by steps, he elevateth us some way to conceive of
heaven, By the City, Tabernacle, Temple, Jerusalem and Promises, which were of
a more taking beauty to them than any thing else; And it shows that heaven is
not only above what worldly men can conceive, but even above the reach of these
who have faith and experience in spiritual things.

Answerable to these, their positive happiness is first set out by the type of
the tabernacle of God with men, that is, Gods presence shall be with them, as
His Tabernacle was a sign of that, and a privilege to Israel, which others had
not: So now what was signified by it, is here fully made out in truth. This,
secondly, is cleared, He will dwell with them: They shall not only have signs,
but as He dwelt in the Ark as the type, so shall He indeed dwell with men, not
as a stranger, now and then, as before, but constantly. 3. This is further
expressed, They shall be His People, and God Himself shall be with them, (and
not the tabernacle only) and He shall be their God: Which is not as if now God
did begin to be their God (which to His own, was true in all ages) But, 1. that
now God is manifestly known to be their God. 2. That now they reap fully the
enjoyments and advantages of their right to have Him their God. 3. They get now
the possession of Him, who in right and title was their portion before, they
know what it is to have God their God, when He becomes all in all to them, and
they are filled with His fullness, and see Him as He is. It says, that the
fruit and substance of that great Covenant-promise, I will be their God, and
they shall be my People, is never well known, nor taken up, till they be in
heaven, that being the place wherein the fullness of this promise streameth out
to Believers. It is a word that sets forth the height of happiness to be in
the enjoying of God, the promise whereof is the great substance of the Covenant
here, that is given to His People in these words, Lev. 26.10, 11. and Ezekiel. 37.
Genesis 17.2 Gor. 6.18.

There is more happiness in having God to be our God, than we can believe; yet
this in right may be here, and the right improving and use-making of this,
would in a great measure be heaven upon earth.

Verse. 4. The happiness of their estate (as it is free from all the contraries
and opposits of blessedness, is set forth, 1. generally, in wiping away all
tears. 2. More particularly, in removing the causes of these, as death, sorrow,
crying, etc. 3. In the proof of it; for, all former things are gone, therefore
these are done away and the face of the Church and her condition is now new.
Some of these expressions are ( Chap. 7.) borrowed from the Prophets, that
point at an excellent condition of the Church on earth, because the true beauty
of the Church on earth is of the same nature with that in heaven, (as the
former promises do clear) that beauty of heaven, is but that begun glory
completed and perfected, which is not at perfection here till it come there.
But the scope differs in this, that there the glory of the Gospel Church is
holden forth principally after Antichrists begun ruin; but here the perfecting
of the same Church in heaven after the final and full overturning of all
enemies, as is clear before.

The general freedom of this happy condition, is, That God shall wipe away all
tear; from their eyes: which is spoken not only comparatively with their former
estate, as it is used by Isa. 60. (and possibly, Chap. 7.) but here it is
simply to be understood. There shall not be in them or any of them then any
sorrow, or cause of sorrow, or weeping; but though there be tears on their
cheeks, all their journey over, (which is here supposed) yet when they come to
the gates of heaven, no tear shall enter with them, God Himself, (as it were,
with a napkin) by His tenderness to them and the fullness of His love, shall
put an end to their weeping: there shall never be any more a tear amongst them
all; and that it is God who wipeth, etc. adds to the consolation.

More particularly, their freedom is set down in four things, ordinarily
accompanying all living. 1. Death, there shall be no death there: which
alludeth unto, or rather is the fulfilling of that, Isa. 25. (which 1 Cor. 15.
the Apostle makes clearly a qualification of heaven, and to be fulfilled after
the Resurrection) There, and there only shall be immortallity and eternal life,
neither first nor second death enter there, but both are cast into the lake, as
Chap. 20. or are without this city, to which this does especially relate. 2.
There is no sorrow nor grief there: it is properly such a sorrow as is for the
loss of friends, or such a cross, when some good thing is taken away: there
is none such there, no Wife in heaven bewails her Husband, or Mother her Child.
Rachel will not weep for her children there, nor is friend separated from
friend there, Jonathan is not heavy to sunder with David there, nor any man
mourning for the loss of a Crown or Kingdom, or House or estate, or for any
loss whatsoever. 3. There is no crying there, there are no violent or hasty
surprizings (which takes in all crosses that bring hurt upon any) there is no
invading of Kingdoms, storming of Towns, killing or slaughter, or roaring of
violent enemies activly doing wrong, or of poor souls crying out under and
passivly suffering wrongs or oppressions: neither of these are in heaven. 4. In
that city there is no pai^, nor suffering, whether from external causes of
violence, or inward infirmities of body or challenges of the mind; the
inhabitants of that land will not say they are sick, Isa. 33. In a word, the
body is so freed from corruption, as there is no external cause to hurt it,
neither any internal tendency to any disease, but absolute freedom from all
effects of sin; no sickness is there more than death; no gout nor gravel, all
these are removed. And, for aggravation of this happiness, we are to
understand these expressions set down, 1. as taking-in all these things
conducing to happiness. 2. Not only is there a removing of these, but the
contrary privileges follow, to wit, quietness, life, comfort, joy, etc. 3.
That these are eminently there in heaven, and only there in this degree. 4.
That these enjoy this happiness and life eternally and unchangably; for now,
no more death or pain or any thing of that kind, is to trouble them.

The confirmation is added in a word, for the former things are passed away,
that is, all the former dispensations toward the Church, its crosses and
sufferings and the manner of its fighting or being militant, these now are
passed and changed: which must certainly be understood of the Churches final
and external change, 1. because so these things (called the former in
opposition to the Churches now glorified condition) are passed away as the old
heavens are; then this change being universal in all things, relates to the
full change on the world. 2. Because these former things of death, pain, etc.
are never away till the end: for if they were supposed contemporary with the
estate of the Church during these thousand years, then certainly Gog and Magog
are to follow that with death and crying, It must therefore be after all the
Churches trials, and so after Gog and Magog, who not long preceed the end of
the world. So this renewing of all, makes an excellent change to the Godly:
and no more can it be understood what the happiness of their lot is, than that
which eye never saw, nor ear heard, nor yet could enter into man's heart to
consider, This being every way new to men.

The second voice which comes in to confirm the same things, is, ver. 5. of
him that sat on the throne, that is, the Lamb, who was Judge, Chap. 20. styled
here by the name He takes to Himself, Chap. 1. to show His Godhead, I am
Alpha and Omega, and I will be his God, ver. 6. and 7. He is brought in
speaking, 1. to confirm what is said: it is God who undertaketh it, and
therefore it cannot miss; He may be believed. 2. To show the greatness of the
thing, and concernment of it, that God will Himself be, as it were, the
preacher of it. In this confirmation there are three several speeches to the
same end. The, 1. is, verse. 5. Behold I make all things new: wonder not at this
glorious change; for (says he) I that once made all things, now I make them
new, new heavens, new earth and Church, etc. as to their qualifications: which
all things, relate to the passing of the former things mentioned, verse. 1. and
4. and Chap. 20.11. and show that the omnipotency and faithfulness of Jesus
Christ is engaged for bringing this about for His Churches comfort, and
strengthening of their faith in this great point.

The second word, for the same end, is, Write, for these things are true and
faithful. The command is repeated, to show that there is a singular truth in
this point, he might record it, and though (it be employed) men ordinarily look
on these things as passing words, yet, says he, they are faithful and true.

The third word, is, verse. 6. The repeating this so often, He said unto me, is
for wakening attention, and to mind us who it is that speaks, and that every
word, as a diverse sentence, is to be weighed. It has two parts. The first is
absolute, bearing out the certainty of the accomplishment of that great change,
spoken of as if it were already done, It is done (says he) that is, old things
are passed, and all things are made new; what ever was before promised is
certain, as done. This looks to the end, as was cleared by the same word of
the seventh vial, Chap. 16. which shows the comtemporarinesse of these
events, as was then cleared.

The second part of it, is conditional, holding forth the parties (in their
qualifications) who may expect that glory, verse. 6. and 7. and these who have
no right to this happiness, verse. 8. which is as an use of the former grounds,
or is drawn (to stir up Hearers to be in love with heaven) from the offer of it
on this condition, and to scare men at hell, (in opposition to this) by
threatening particular sorts with it. And therefore this offer is not to be
looked o^ as to be made after this begun making of all things new, (as in order
of time) but as holding forth the way how to come to this happiness (presently
as to the offer, though the happiness be coming) and by the offer of it hereby
to engage folks into it. This offer, as it points out heaven as the result,
so it points out the way, means and motives leading and pressing to it at all
times, as the close of the seven Epistles, ( Chap. 2. and 3.) does. The offer*
begins with a description of Him that makes the offer, and beside that has
two parts. The first part, verse. 6. The second, verse. 7.

He describes Himself as often in the first, second and third Chapters, I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. This is to show, 1. who it is that
of^ereth, and that He may be trusted. 2. That He should not be slighted nor
refused, duty tyeth to respect what He says who now speaks from heaven. 3.
That as He is Alpha in the beginning, so now he appears Omega in the
perfecting what He promised. Every part of the offer has a promise of eternal
life upon a condition, or, to persons so and so qualified.

The thing promised, ve^. 6. is, I will give him of the fountain of the water
of life. This fountain is taken in Scripture sometimes for the graces of the
Spirit that leads unto life and begins it, Ioh. 4.10. and 7.39. Sometimes for
the enjoyment of God, who is our life, as Psalm 36.9. with thee is the fountain
of life: both come well in here, but the last as the scope and great part of
the promise, which has its perfection in heaven. This is water of life, and
that for the excellency and perpetuity of its refreshing: here is a perpetual
fountain, whereas not one drop is in hell.

The condition runs in the words, 1. I will give him: It is a free gift, so
is life eternal, Romans 6.23. 2. And it is given freely, that is, without any
price, and compensation, but it is obtained without money, and whatever
qualification be in the person thus freely begraced, it is no cause of this
gift. Yet, 3. this is qualified, It is to him that is athirst, that this gift
is given, as Isa. 55.1. Athirst is, 1. one that needs, 2. one that is
sensible of his need, 3. one that would fain have, as ever a thirsty man would
drink, as it were, pained for want of it. 4. It is one that will take and
welcome the offer on any terms, and think himself much obliged to him that
gives it. Hence under thirsting, ( Isa. 55.1. and Matthew. 5. Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst) is ordinarily holden forth peoples fitness to receive,
and willingness to consent to Jesus Christ, as Chap. 22.17. whosoever is
athirst, that is, (as after follows) who ever will, let him come, etc. by
which we may see. 1. The freeness and largeness of Christ's offer that cannot
be made broader and laid nearer folks than by faith it is done in this, If they
will receive and be willing, etc. they are welcome. 2. The fit and qualified
objects that the promise is made to, poor hungry, thirsty, that may not want,
and yet have nothing to buy, Come here, the market is free. 3. The consistency,
yea the necessary connection of grace freely giving, and the qualifications of
hunger and thirst in the receiver: for, 1. this qualification disposes them to
make use of grace. 2. To esteem of and prize grace, as sickness does of him
who is the Physician. This condition of faith, thirst, and willingness, etc.
imports no more, on the receivers side, any thing inconsistent with grace,
than that it is said he gives freely and without money on His side, This
importing but a free receiving, as that does a free giving.

The second promise is large, in two expressions, setting out this happiness,
he shall inherit all things; he shall want no good thing, and these all shall
be his possession, he shall have God, who (1 Cor. 15.28.) shall be all in all,
infinitely supplying and filling the room of all the riches, honor,
contentments and comforts that men can imagine; It shall be a greater
possession than if they enjoyed all things. For, 1. God equivalently makes up
all that nothing is missed. 2. Eminently and excellently He makes up all, that
what ever comfortable ^ff^ct would be expressed from inheriting all things, it
is much more excellently and eminently from God. This must be an excellent
inheritance that is set out by such an expression, yet does the thing enjoyed
in heaven exceed the expression, as far as the maker does H^s work, and that
which is infinite exceeds what is finite; for, expressions cannot be gotten,
adequat and suitable to the thing.

The second expression shows how this is made out, I will be his God, and he
shall be my son. This comprehends all: yea, it is added as an addition to all
things.^ It is more to be Gods son and to have Him our God, than to enjoy all
things beside to be His son, and so His heirs and joynt-heirs with Christ; Romans
8.17. What is that, or rather what is it not? Here now is a portion; who would
covet, let them covet this as the best thing: one day the truth of this will
appear, what great blessedness is here, when once His wrath is but a little
kindled, Psalm. 2. ult. O set your hearts on this, it is the short cut to
possess and inherit all things, Who in all the world ever reached to enjoy all
the earth? yet that is little amongst all things, but a Believer inheriteth
earth, heaven, God, Christ, glory, peace, his soul, even all things; for God is
his (and with Him all things, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.) and will He not give to Him all
things? Romans 8.32. yea, is He not Himself all things (as is said) so that in
heaven and earth the soul can wish no more, Psalm. 73.25. See on verse. 3.

The condition, is, overcoming: which implies, 1. a fight with a world of
enemies and corruption. 2. A serious fight and constant war, as for life. 3. A
difficult fight. Yet, 4. a victory and overcoming of all these enemies before
there can be an obtaining of all things. This says, folks will not slip nor
sleep into these excellent promises, and though fighting be not the meritorious
cause of these, yet it is the way to them and an antecedent going before them
necessarily, though not the causa sine qua non to our justification, yet it is
so to our glorification.

This thirsting imports engaging and covenanting, Isa. 55.3. Overcoming, a
being answerable to our engagements. Observe it then, and wrestle so as ye may
obtain, seeing so much depends on it; and happy is he that overcomes. He and
every one of them enjoys all things, and yet none of them enjoys another
portion to one another prejudice. But as men now enjoy the whole Sun and its
light, and wrongeth not others by it, so then all shall enjoy God fully, as to
their capacities, yet so as there is no want to others. That infinite ocean of
the Godhead being able to fill all the cups that come to it, or are casten in
^t, and being such that all may also swim in it when they are full, and that
Sun of righteousness being so clear as to shine on all, and to make shining
all the eyes that shall behold Him.

The qualifications (to say so) of these excluded on the other part, are set
down, ver. 8. and we conceive for these ends. 1. To press the receiving of the
former offer from the ill of missing it, which is the main scope. 2. To show
that every one overcomes not, and so comes not there. 3. To show who
overcomes not, to wit, these that ly under the practice of sinful lusts, as
here: By these sorts understand all other sinful wretches lying in sin, as if
they were expressed, the most abominable sorts whereof, are indeed named, yet
not at all to exclude others. By it we may see also, that this must be heaven;
for, these that get not these good promises, are cast into the lake and second
death. O what great odds is there between the end of sin and holiness! what
ever men now think, it will one day, yea in that day, appear in its native
colors.

These particular steps or sorts of sins (to wit eight) are mentioned, to show,
1. That there is but one way to Glory, but many sins whereby men pass to
destruction. 2. That by the setting down of these more particularly, the
happiness of heaven and the qualifications of these who enter it, may be the
more conspicuous, being put together.

The first sort of sinners that is excluded, is, the fearful, or coward,
opposite to the former fighter and overcomer. It is not these who are feared to
come short, Heb. 4.1. nor these that fear to sin and desire to prevent it, Heb.
11.7. nor such that fear that their faith be not good, or that they be
presuming, as the woman, Mark 5. and 33. But such as, 1. dare act nothing for
Christ, are cowards and not valiant for Him, though not directly against Him,
such as fearing them that can kill the body, Matthew 10. sway with every corrupt
time, as the beast, Magog, etc. and cannot fight against them to any hazard,
but forsake Christ. 2. Such as are feared to fight against lusts, and never
appear against them in the field; the weak heart ( Ezekiel. 16.) is evil, such a
fear as the evil servant had, Matthew. 25.25. which makes men lazy in holy
duties and trading for Christ, as if they were afraid of them; the sluggard
says there is a lion in the way, this is he who shifteth duty. 3. Such as dare
venture to suffer nothing for Christ, as the Worthies did, Heb. 11.

The second sort is unbelievers, not properly, or only infidels, much less
these who are of a weak or little faith, that is, mixed with doubting, and want
peace; but such as never received the free offer of Christ's Grace indeed,
whatever their profession was; that never did flee from the Covenant of Works,
to rest on Christ for salvation. These are ( Ioh. 3.36.) condemned already: and
this unbelief shall condemn as much as any breach of the Law, in that day it
will condem that ye believe not according to that command, 1 Ioh. 3.23. as to
be a murderer, to be a witch or a warloch. Quest. How differs it from weak
faith? Answ. Weak faith has a sure ground, but a weak grip of it; therefore it
is feared for it: But unbelief has a weak ground, but thinks its grip sure,
Therefore it is not troubled. 2. Weak faith has much fear of unbelief, Mark
9.24. and would be rid of it: this unbelief is willingly, and so wrestleth not
against unbelief, but against doubting and fear, lest its security be marred.
3. Weak faith is clear of its own need and Christ's fullness; but its weakness
is in its peace, or its gripping of Him, or byding by Him; and as to the fruits
of faith, it finds these weak, (to say so,) but unbelief is clearer of its
peace than of its need, etc. and whether we take unbelief as a failing on the
right hand by presumption, or on the left by despare, both are unbelief, and
opposite to faith in Christ, and are excluded here.

The third sort are abominable, who by sins against nature have made themselves
vile: now these are reckoned with: such were these in Sodom, and these, Romans
1.26, etc.

The fourth sort are murderers: which takes in all who wrong their neighbors
in thought word or deed, especially the persecuters of His people.

The fifth sort are whoremongers: whereby all who are given to any filthiness,
secret or open, of whatsoever sort, are understood, if it were but in a look.

The sixth sort are sorcerers, such as more directly renounce God, and take
them directly or indirecty to the making use of the devil in the place of God:
whereby we may see, that there is such a sin, as well as there is murder and
adultery.

The seventh sort are idolaters, whether against the first command, as
heathens; or the second, as false worshippers, or more subtly advancing
creatures, as do the covetous, They are in this roll.

The eighth sort are all liars, in their words or carriage counterfeiting in
hypocrisy toward God, as Psalm. 78.35. or deceiving or dissembling toward
man, Col. 3.10. all go together to the l^ke, spoken of, Chap. 20. that is their
lot in opposition to the lot of the Elect here described: under these sorts,
all are comprehended who live and die in sin: as, 1. Those sins of omissions in
falling or byding back, as the fearful. 2. Against the Gospel, as the
unbelievers. 3. Against nature, as the abominable. 4. Against the Law, as the
others, and that whether against the first or second Table, in deed or word.
Their lot is dreadful, They are casten in the lake, etc. Then, 1. Is there not
great odds between heaven and hell? Is it not good to be in heaven and ill to
be in hell? 2. Must not all of you be eternally in the one or in the other? 3.
Is it not also certain that folks must go to them severally according to these
qualifications of overcoming, or of lying under ^in, and that these are not
separated, but heaven and holiness, hell and sin go together? Then, what are
the most of you doing? Are not these the words of Him that sit^e^h on the
throne? why then make ye not for heaven, and so for more holiness as necessary
to be there? have ye resolved to dispense with the loss of heaven? Can ye
abide hell and the company of devils for ever? what, is there any choice here?
why halt ye between heaven and hell, as if there were any equality betwixt all
things and nothing (no, not a drop of water) betwixt God with all good, and the
devil and all sorrow, and that for ever? O the screechs and yels that will be
in hell, whereas there is no cry in heaven! Can ye go about doubting what to
choose here? Why then is there so little faith, so little wrestling and
holiness? Know ye not what depends on the event, and can ye abide to lose it,
yea, to hazard it, or to be secure while it is so? How can ye sleep and eat
your bread without sorrow? what promise can ye comfort your selves in? None
speaks good to you, what threatening can ye shift, while ye shift holiness?
do not all speak as pronouncing your external excommunication from God, while
ye abide under the curse as ye are? what example have ye of any that ever
hardened themselves and prospered, or lived and died under the dominion of sin
and was happy? Is not hell full of refutations of this untruth? Where are many,
like the rich glutton, Luke 16. that would suffer no application of hell to
them in their life, and now they are sure of it, and bid tell it to others,
knowing that men ordinarily believe it not? O secure atheist, proud sinner that
never thirsted for righteousness, nor felt the ill of sin, or thou lazy
negligent wrestler that art afraid to fight, what will come of thee? Do ye not
believe that a recko^ing is coming? do ye not see that holiness and happiness
go together, and sin and shame? do not ye your selves think it reasonable and
just that they should go linked together, and that none but the holy should go
to heaven? What will it turn to then? shall any other door be opened to heaven,
or other promises be made to you, than for others? Remember what certification
accompanies this offer. It is indeed free (so we offer it in His Name) Ho,
every one, come; etc. But here is the certification, if ye come not, and fight
not seriously so as to overcome, and if ye turn back or fight not for Christ,
but like a coward desert Him, here is your doom, we pronounce it, to be cast
into the lake of fire: for, who, in this respect, is not with Christ, is
against Him and all His enemies shall be slain before Him.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 9. And there came unto me one of the seven angels, which had the seven
vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither,
I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife.

10. And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and
showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from
God,

11. Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most
precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal,

12. And had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates
twelve Angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve
tribes of the children of Israel.

13. On the east three gates, on the north three gates, on the south three
gates, and on the west three gates.

14. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

15. And he that talked with me, had a golden reed to measure the city, and the
gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

16. And the city lies apiece, and the length is as large as the breadth:
and he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the length,
and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.

17. And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four cubits,
according to the measure of a man, that is, of the Angel*

18. And the building of the wall of it was of jasper, and the city was pure
gold, like unto clear glass.

19. And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner
of precious stones. The first foundation was of jasper, the second saphir, the
third a chalcedonie, the fourth an emerald,

20. The fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth
beryll, the ninth a topaz, the tenth a chrysophrasus, the eleventh a jacinct,
the twelfth an amethyst.

21. And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, every several gate was one pearl,
and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.

22. And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are
the temple of it*

23. And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it:
for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

24. And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the light of it:
and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it.

25. And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there shall be no
night there.

26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it.

27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: but they which are written in
the Lambs book of life.


WE have heard the more general description of the Saints eternal happiness:
Follows, to verse. 6. of Chap. 22. a particular description thereof to John by
vision. Wherein, 1. some preparatory circumstances are mentioned. Then, 2. in
it self it is described, to verse. 21. Then, 3. some aggravations or
commendations of that happiness, whereby it is illustrated, are set down.

The first preparatory circumstance, is, That one of the Angels came to John:
whereby the instrument revealing is set down. It is like that same mentioned,
Chap. 17.1. yet it follows not from this (as was said) that therefore it
belongs to the militant Church: for, an Angel generally is made use of, to
show this revelation to John, Chap. 1. and Chap. 22.6. and so the revealing of
this part of it, will but agree to that mediate manner of Christ's revealing to
John the state of the triumphant as of the militant Church, but no more. And if
it be the last of the Angels of the vials, it will but show that this glorified
state of the Church does succeed that, whereunto that last vial did make way.
The Angel comes: it is like (by Gods immediate speaking) there has been some
diversion in the former words, or otherwise.

The second circumstance is ver. 9. to wit, his call to John, to come see the
Bride, as he had made him see the whore, Chap. 17. Come hither, I will show
thee the bride, the Lambs wife. Here Bride ( Sponsa) and Wife ( Vxor*) are put
together ^ she being now brought as Queen together to the King, Psalm. 45.
whereas Chap. 19. ^he was but Bride: and though the word (...), both there and
here, be rendered Wise; yet here being contra-distinguished from Bride, it
necessarily is interpreted so, where^^ there, Chap. 19. it is spoken of as a
marriage to be but solemnized. John saw a glance, verse. 2. but here more
particularly he is called to it, to show that heaven* and happiness are not
seen at a short view, and that men would dwell on the sight of them. That she
is the Lambs wife, is not the least part of her commendation, when all the
Elect are gathered, th^^ is, the Queen, Psalm. 45. and the Church, Ioh. 3.29.
Ephesians. 5.^9. which really is so; for, it is more improperly that visible Churches
are called His Bride* seeing that the marriage is founded on an invisible
relation and tie of union with Christ.

The third circumstance is the manner how John saw, He carried me in the
Spirit, whereof we heard, Chap. ^.17. It is not really, but in ecstasie.

4. The place where he saw, is* on an high mountain* borrowed from this, that
men see more and further there than in valleys (but in vision it is not so) It
shows only this, that there needs an ascending, and that in the Spirit
before heaven can well be discerned or conceived.

A fifth is, that generally he showed him the great City, the holy Jerusalem,
descending out of heaven from God. There is some difference made between a city
and a town; urbs, a town, looks especially to the walls, buildings or
habitations; civitas respects the indwellers and their privileges in a
common way: we take in both here. The town, for that particular description, to
ver. 22. agrees well to this; the inhabitants also, for, by beholding this
town or city, John sees the Bride the Lambs wife who are the inhabitants: and
that both are comprehended (the one as the place, and the other as these that
dwell in it) it is clear from ver. 27. where they are distinguished: as also (
ver. 14. Chap. 22.) where the Elect are distinguished from the City wherein
they enter* and also from the happiness they enjoy in it, when entered.
Neither is that inconsistent, that one ty^^ should have a twofold or composed
meaning, especially tending to one scope, as Chap. 17. the seven heads signify
both Hills and Kings. This is a great City; for, 1. it has many inhabitants
and a large circuit, all the first born are in it. 2. For dignity, it is the
City of the great King. Again, it is called the holy Jerusalem, as different
from what it was before; its gloriousness and greatness is much in holiness.
Its descending is spoken of before: its like that in vision it was represented
as descending; for, Paul was taken up to see it, 2 Corinthians. 12. it is letten
down to John. It is clear from the following words, ver. 11* having the glory
of God: (I take it for a general commendation before he enter on particulars)
that is, it had most excellent glory, even glory whereof God is the author, He
having prepared this glory for His Bride, and provided this adorning for her:
by which the reason appears wherefore it is said to come down from Him.

In the particular description, we conceive it not so edifying to speak of the
nature and properties of these stones, or of the number of twelve, used for and
spoken of the gates, foundations and fruits of the tree, Chap. 22. (neither can
we reach any thing solid or certain from these mysteriously considered) we take
the scope to aim together to set out the glory of the Elect in heaven, which
under figurative terms is set out from many things, because no one thing does
reach the scope, and not as if one thing were understood by this stone, another
by that; but all together show, that it is most glorious and rich, as if made
up of the most costly rare stones, and that in the greatest abundance.

This happiness agreeing to this heavenly City, is set out several ways, with
all these things, in an eminent measure and manner, whereby men account a city
adorned: as, 1. for light, which is not that which enlighteneth her, or whereby
possibly she is enlightened, (for that is not the Sun, but God, etc. as
afterward appears) but her shining actively whereby she holds forth light,
(as Matthew. 5. Let your light shine, etc.) her splendour and beauty and the
glance of her glory, often compared to light, and agreeing well with that word,
the glory of God, going before; which ( Chap. 4.) was compared to this same
jasper. This expresses her general luster, as one newly entering a stately
town. First, the whole neatness and splendor of it, represents it self to
him, before he come particularly to take notice of the parts of it. That word,
clear as crystal, is added to show its nature; It is glorious and pure as
shining crystal, yet precious and firm as the jasper, which was a most
excellent gemme, and used in Aarons breast plate, Exodus 28. This splendor in
general resulteth from all the ornaments thereof put together.

In the more particular commendation, we may consider, 1. The principal parts
commended, which are usually most eminent in a stately city: as, 1. its walls,
2. its gates, 3. its foundations, 4. its streets, how they are paved. Consider,
2. the proportionable disposing of its parts in an excellent and suitable mould
and quantity. 3. Consider the several commendations which these parts get. Here
indeed eminently the walls are salvation, and the gates praise, Isa. 60.

^^ Verse. 12, 13. The first part commended, is the wall, great and high: Walls
are for security. Difference is put betwixt Murus an house-wall, and Maenia
fortifications. This by its greatness and height does set forth the last, to
wit, the strength and security of this city; no army nor enemy can make
incursion on it, so that the inhabitants may not only be ( securi) secure as
Laish was secure, but ( tuti) safe, (which two words in that respect do differ)
here enters no enemy, but all are friends. It is a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken.

2. There is the gates or ports, which are in number twelve, and have the names
of the tribes of Israel written on them: which is to signify, that though
there be no access over the walls to enemies, yet there are ports sufficient
to let-in all friends, such as only true Israelites are. Therefore they are
twelve, to show they are sufficient; And the writing of the names of the
tribes, says, they are appointed only for Israelites, and that for all
Israelites, which are ( ver. 27.) all that are written in the book of life, of
whatsoever stock; but no Iebusite nor Canaanite enters this strong hold. This*
^^rusalem (or, fight of peace) is only for the children of the promise, born to
Abraham's ^^lch, and partakers of his blessing: and for this end are twelve
Angels at the gates, as porters or guards, keeping watch, that none pass to
trouble these within. There is such excellent order and safety in heaven, there
is no garrison town like it: which (as other things) may be alluded unto here.

There are twelve gates (and three of them on each quarter:) which we conceive
belong to the proportionable mould of it, as it suiteth with the end, to let-in
all alike easily on all quarters (as the Tabernacle marched in the midst of the
Tribes on all quarters, so there is access unto heaven from all airths alike)
and we seek no further mystery in it; but it is proportionable, that such a
large city should have many gates, and that there should be three to each wind,
seeing it is foursquare. So it denotes the regular exactness and Architectory
of this city, whose builder and maker is God in a singular way.

Follows, ( ver. 14.) the foundations: more excellent than that of Solomon's
Temple of cedar-wood and stone. It has twelve foundations: this signifies the
durablnesse and eternity of that city, that no time can make it decay, more
than any enemy can storm it; it is well founded, not having one foundation
only, but twelve for its security.

A word is added to the foundations (as formerly to the gates) the names of the
Lambs twelve Apostles are written on them. By twelve, is understood all: in a
word, here their Doctrine which they preached is meaned, (as Ephesians. 2.20. where
the Church is built on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles) which Word
endures for ever, 1 Pet. 1.25. and so Gods faithfulness su^taineth heaven
that it is never moved, but endures to all eternity according to that Word and
Gospel which was preached through the world by all the Apostles: yea, the
Prophets and Ministers of Christ; But the Apostles, for honors sake, are
mentioned for all. And this is not inconsi^tent with heaven to have their names
on the foundation, seeing they are not the foundations themselves, but the
faithfulness of God in the preached Gospel shall be more manifest then nor
now; and His Ministers in that Jerusalem shall have a special dignity, as
founders or builders use to have their names graven on the walls for their
honor.

He descends more particularly, ( ver. 15.) to show the proportionablnesse
and exactness of this city which every way is exceeding regular, as the engine
of a most excellent Contriver or Plotter can invent or Artificer can form. 1.
The purpose of measuring the city, wall and gates is intimated. 2. The measurer
described, He that talked with him. 3. The instrument wherewith he measured, A
golden reed: all is borrowed in general from that type of Ezekiel. when he is
measuring out a Gospel Church, and from Gods care ( Chap. 11.) of His little
Church then. But here this exceeds these, It is a golden reed; for, all is
excellent here: It is but a simple reed in Ezekiel. and this city, when it is
measured, exceeds that far in quantity and quality, and so are not one way to
be applied.

What is found by measuring? The city (ver. 16.) lies foursquare, just always
alike (so proportionable and strong as forts royal use yet to be built) that
is, most fit to receive in on all quarters. 2. It is found that the city is
twelve thousand furlongs, either all square, as it seems by putting breadth
and length and height (that is, the height of its towers) in one certain
measure, which can be none other but that measuring immediately preceding. Or,
it is so much in circuit: however, it is a great city, and hereby its capacity
in bounds and multitude of inhabitants, is holden forth with its excellent
frame.

Verse. 17. The wall is found to be one hundred forty and four cubits, that is,
its height and breadth is even above that of old Babylon or Niniveh: the
particular cubit is set down, for there were diverse, one of the Sanctu^ry
which was large; one common, which is that of a man, from the elbow down, the
Angel appearing as a man, and so went about this with such a measure, or cubit,
as men use to make up a reckoning known to them, (and by this we may expound
the number of a man, Chap. 13.) It is as if John said, the Angel measured by
the same measure, and according to the same rule used among men. By all which,
that excellent skill in framing heaven, and that regularity and wisdom, which
was shown by God when He made it above any other piece of His work, is holden
forth, that though there be exactness in the Church here, much more there. In
a word, no fault can be found with any part of it, all is well ordered and
contrived, and can abide most exact trial. This is the scope and further we
descend not.

Follows thirdly from ver. 18. the particular commendations of these parts.
1. The wall ( i.e. the out-wall circuiting all) is of jasper, most precious and
beautiful. See Chap. 4. and all the city, that is, the town or walls within,
they are all of pure gold for stones; and not common gold, but clear as glass
for shining, and firm and solid as gold, and precious also. These are excellent
walls and houses that are not gilded, but of gold. This for outward and inward
buildings.

2. The foundations are commended: they are not common stones, but of precious
stones of all sorts in abundance. They are particularly reckoned to be twelve,
ver. 19, 20. We know not the nature of them, therefore cannot seek mysteries in
them: Only, by what is said of them in Scripture, and the adorning of Aarons
breast plate, Exodus 28. we may gather that they were most precious: All
Believers here in beauty exceed Solomon, yea, Aaron in his finest robes.

3. The gates were each of one pearl, ver. 21. a rare thing, a good merchant
may sell all for one of these, Mat. 13. and that each gate is but one pearl, is
more than if many gates were made up of more.

4. The streets ( ver. ^21.) or causeys were not dirted, but are as pure gold,
as transparent glass for clearness, such as the world has not, yet is it
short to set out the least thing that Saints have there to tread upon. This is
an excellent city, when gold, and such fine gold, is made use of to pave its
streets. There are no foul steps there, no foul prints sticking to Believers
heels that dwell there, which is the scope of it. This is a golden city, golden
walls, golden houses, golden streets, who love gold may be enriched here: yet
there are some aggravations added, the more to set out the glorious happiness
thereof: six or seven are in this chapter, and as many in the beginning of the
next, which are additionals to the happiness of that city, or of those who are
in it, and heightning their happiness.

The first, is, ver. 22. there is no temple there: which looks not only to
ceremonial worship which was under the Law, but to prefer it to the most
glorious estate of the militant Church, which, under the seventh trumpet, (
Chap. 11. ult.) consisted much in this, that the temple was opened, whereas it
is not so in this: for here is no temple, that is, no mediate serving of God,
or access to Him, or use of Ordinances, all these are done away, which is
clear by the opposition, The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb, are the temple of
it, that is, the immediate enjoying of God and Jesus Christ supplyeth all,
Saints now made perfect being admitted to a full satisfying sight of Him, as He
is, Chap. 22. ver. 4. which (1 Cor. 13.) is the happiness of heaven: for, God
himself is opposed here, not only to the ceremonial worship, but to all mediate
ways of seeing Him, or approaching to Him in Ordinances any manner of way. All
these, and whatsoever is not God himself, is laid by. Neither is there need of
these in that palace above.

The second aggreaging privilege, is, ver. 23. that there is no need of the
sun or moon there; no created light in it, the glory of God, etc. and the Lamb
is the light thereof. There is no created thing, no not the sun, but God
Himself (as the opposition shows) that is the comfort of heaven. These are
not needed nor missed, but God is all. This sets forth, 1. Whereas light is
a glorious creature, and so is the sun, yet that here there is no need of it:
for, there is a more glorious light that would darken the sun, as the sun does
now a petty candle. 2. That that light comes from the resplendent glory of God
in that higher house, which is far beyond what creatures can imagine, though
there be so many stones that are precious there, yea* so many Angels and Saints
whose countenance shall shine as that sun which we now see, yet that is not its
light, but the glory of God and the Lamb is the light thereof. If any ask, ^ow
God, that is a pure spirit, can be its light? We answer, It is not so to be
understood as if adequatly He were taken up by glorified creatures, they being
still finit. But, 1. that they have a true beholding of His infinite Essence in
their elevated capacities according to their measure: for, this light is merely
intellectual; whereof more, Chap. 22.4. 2. That there is a shining glory there
manifested (as it were a view of His back-parts, as was to Moses, Exodus 34.
that made him shine) which exceeds all the glory that can be imagined, that
being purposly letten out to make Him known, as in measure, beyond any glorious
appearance on earth. 3. The shining brightness of the Godhead indwelling in
our blessed Lord Jesus shall be in a super-eminent degree discernable, a little
glance whereof was in the transfiguration, Mat. 17. This shall take up and
satisfy all eyes in heaven, even the glory of that person who is God, it shall
be beyond and beside all, like the sun in the noonday beside the stars, when
they appear in daylight, which scarcely or not at all are then discernable:
And though the like phrase in a great part be used, Isa. 60.19, 20. yet it
differs much, not only in the scope, that being to set out the beauty of the
militant Church, which is spiritual, This is that which is eternal: But also,
1. there is night and day, here is no night; 2. There is a sun, but it goes
not down; here is none, nor need of one. 3. There is no word of the Lamb; here
there is: Yet these expressions whereby the Churches beauty is set out, are
alluded to here, as is said, to show not only that heaven is above gold,
pearls, etc. but above what the Church can here attain unto.

The third aggravation is that, ver. 24. It shall be the happiness of all that
shall be happy, therefore cannot be but glorious, for the nations of them that
are saved shall walk in that light. 1. There are many that shall partake of it.
2. They who are saved shall be admitted, and they shall account it happiness
to share of that light, and it must be an excellent City, which is allowed for
the walk and comfort of all that ever shall be saved; when they are saved they
are brought here, which proves it strongly to be heaven; yea, if they were
Kings that are saved, they shall bring their glory to it, that is, 1. forsake
all glory of Crowns and Kingdoms in comparison of it, it shall so far exceed
their glory. Or, 2. as if all Kings set themselves to make one place, or city,
glorious, and therefore should make all their glory to meet and further this
one design; so this shall be even exceeding all, having all in it, and wanting
nothing that can be for its glory, as if all things glorious had trysted in it.

4. Its gates are not shut by day, for there is no night there: that is, no
interruption of that happiness, no vicissitude of day and night, no fear to
make the gates to be shut, there is but one eternal day which shall never end,
ver. 25. there is no fear from Antichrist, nor Gog or Magog here.

A fifth aggravation, is, ver. 26. that not only what is glorious to Kings, but
what in all the world is glorious, shall be brought there, as if all glory and
riches made their rendevouze here, it shall be so glorious as if no glory at
all were out of it. B^side, it may well take in, that all the Saints, (which
only are the glory of Nations) are all brought in to it. In a word, it shall
exceed all, as it were, they will cast their caps at it.

The sixth is from its indwellers, who are expressed two ways, 1. negatively.
No unclean thing or what defiles, etc, shall enter, ver. 27. that is, no
wicked person, 2. no wicked thing or no wicked deed, 3. no filthy creature that
is loathsome, 4. no corruption in Believers, they are now without spot. In a
word, 1. no sin, 2. no curse, 3. no devil, tempter or tentation and no
corruption, for, all these defile, and this is more than that only no wicked
person should enter. Thus it is expressly distinguished from the militant
Church, that is hereby supponed to have in it what defiles, to wit, scandalous
persons and hypocrites, here expressed in these two, who work abomination and
make a lie: and it is said of all these, that in no ways they enter, by a
twofold negation in the Original (...), to show the absolute exclusion of all
these, and that in the least degree. Then positively it is told who enters,
None but th^se who are written in the Lambs book of life, i.e. true Elect, and
not appearing so only; yea regenerated, perfected Elect, as was cleared in the
scope of this Chapter, (otherwise the Elect have corruption that defiles, but
here now it is done away) for, 1. that phrase, writing in his book, through
this prophecy is never so understood, to wit, for these that appear so, but
for such who are so inde^d. 2. Seeming Elect, who yet are not so, do make a lie
and defile, therefore are here secluded. 3. These written are opposed ( ut
supra) to these not written, Chap. 20.15. and therefore it must be understood
of true Elect, seeing the others are really reprobates. 4. The Lambs book of
life is never opened till the last day, and this admission supponeth the
opening of it, as that which only gives the rule to make this difference,
supponing that till this Book be opened no such decerning should be pretended
unto, therefore it is not here-away. 5. He has kept that Book to Himself,
and has given it to none to rule their sentence by. 6. Do not some hypocrites
look liker Elect than some of them do? and shall this rule exclude the one and
take-in the other, and seeing the mentioning of the book of life here relates
to its opening, Chap. 20. whereby it is made known who was in it, and that is
at the last sentence, This must therefore be at the execution thereof, and
posterior to it.

These reasons do evince, that the book of life is to be taken properly for
Gods election in opposition to what was said, Chap. 20. ver. last, and
therefore these who enter now must be really and only Elect indeed, opposite to
the former; and no other interpretation, crossing that, can be admitted either
of secluding profane men, and such who are not Elect doctrinally from heaven it
self, or such who appear not so, from the Church: for, 1. thus to be written
here in the bok of life, is to be really elected, in opposition to the state of
the reprobate who are not written; for, all men are distributed in these two
written or not written, and a third there is not; but to expound this either of
the former ways, will not make it to speak of the real Elect and these only,
Therefore it cannot be admitted here. 2. Whatever this here intends, it is
something that both de jure and de facto is peculiar to this state of the
Church, that is, it is such a thing as neither ever was, in deed or event, nor
was ever called-for before this; for, this is a thing peculiarly differencing
this state of the Church from all that ever preceeded in this respect, and for
that end, as a peculiar property thereof, is subjoyned here; But, neither can
it be said, that the key of Doctrine, de jure, becomes straiter then nor now,
or that de facto it will ever be stricter than it was in the first Primitive
and Apostolic times, Nor can it be applied to any more strict exercise of
Discipline in reference to Church Membership: for then, 1. it would follow,
that there were a different rule for gathering of Churches then, which we have
not now, and that so much strictness were not required now, which some will
not find consonant to the purpose for which they allege this now. And, 2. it
would follow, that the Apostolic Church was not so exact in their practice, if
de facto that succeeding Church shall go beyond them; It must therefore belong
to the Church-triumphant, as is said.

LECTURE I.
CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. ANd he showed me a pure river of water of life clear as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb.

2, In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river, was
there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her
fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the
Nations.

3. And there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God and of the Lamb
shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him.

4. And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.

5. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light
of the sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever
and ever.


THis first part of the Chapter, to verse. 6. continues some further
aggravations of the happiness which the glorified in heaven enjoy. The first
is from the excellency of a river that runs through that city; rivers are
pleasant and profitable to run through cities. This city has an excellent
river: whereof we may say, as Psalm. 46. The streams thereof make glad the city
of God. It is commended, 1. that it is a river (not a brook) but such as may
convey commodities to it, and be useful for cleansing of it, which shows in
the scope, that this city is perfectly accommodated and cleansed exceedingly
beyond what any river can do to any city on earth. 2. It is a pure river, that
is, free from all muddinesse and corruption, every thing is excellent here, the
finest that can be imagined. 3. It is a river of water of life, not only as
from a living fountain, but as of a lively efficacy and virtue to all who drink
of it; life is in abundance here, where both the fountains and river are such.
4. It is clear as crystal, so pure and pleasant, no river here is like it. 5.
It proceeds from the throne of God, and the Lamb: that is its excellency, God
is the fountain thereof immediately; It is not from the Temple, as Ezekiel. 47.
which comes by Ordinances, but from the Throne, a streaming of consolation
from God and Jesus Christ. The consolations and effects of the Spirit in this
life are compared to waters and rivers of waters of life, Ioh. 7.38. which
makes some apply this to the holy Spirit, which proceeds from the Father and
the Son. The general is a truth (and suiteth with the scope here) that
Believers in heaven shall be well refreshed and satisfied, and that with such
consolations as proceed from Father, Son and Spirit, although we insist not in
the particular application; Christ the Lamb is still joined with God, because
the enjoying of the God-man is still looked on as a great part of our
happiness.

The second thing mentioned, is, the tree of life, verse. 2. which does
exceedingly adorn and enrich this city. It alludeth in general to Genesis 2.
where the tree of life was in Paradise, a Sacrament of immortality to Adam if
he had stood; but this is a tree of life, not only as confirming their
unchangeable state of happiness who are in heaven, but of its own efficacy
able to bring forth life eternal, and to continue it in these that eat of its
fruit; and so it differreth from all food (even Manna) that men eat of here;
This is an excellent tree. It is further set out from its place, it is in the
miast of the street of the city, a special ornament of the market place.
Heavenly happiness is meaned by this tree that grows in the midst of the
Paradise of God, Chap. 2.7. and Chap. 22.14. which makes that we need not be
anxious about particular application of the several parts. 2. It is commended,
that it grows on either side of the river; there is but one tree, yet, of
that proportion and extent, that its branches extend to both sides, and the
fruit is in every place to be found, which is a singular thing, here only
mentioned to show, that though there be a river in the city, yet by it none are
divided from the fruit of that tree, it furnishes alike easily all, who have
all alike access to it. 3. It bare twelve manner of fruits, that is, variety
of all sorts of consolation: though it be but one tree, yet it is an Orchard
for variety and satisfaction. 4. It yields fruit every month, it is so
fertile for abundance; it is ever harvest here, always there is fruit on this
tree. 5. Its leaves are medicinal, as the fruits are pleasant, They are for
the healing of the nations: there is neither need of gold nor water, nor fruit
in heaven, more than medicine; but all are mentioned, to set forth that
happiness, where there is neither mortality nor death, (the tree of life
preventeth these) nor sickness, there is so good medicine in these leaves,
that who live under its shadow, are perfectly whole by the efficacy thereof.
So all the scope is rather to show the effect that is there, to wit, perfect
health and happiness, than to pitch on any particular mean of applying or
bringing out these. Though if Christ Jesus be meaned here by this tree, as is
like it is not impertinently applied to Him, seeing He now, being in heaven,
has this efficacy on the Nations before they come there, He who heals the
Nations shall be enjoyed in heaven; so it commends heaven to us the more,
because Christ our Physician is there.

There are three aggravations added, verse. 3. The first is, there is no more
curse, that is, there is no effect of sin nor wrath, no cursed thing nor cursed
person, but all are fully happy; and whatever followed sin, is shut out there:
but the throne of God and the Lamb is there, the curse was especially in
separating from God, now by Gods constant dwelling in that city amongst these
blessed Saints, all the curse is taken away (for they are inconsistent
together) that is, His glorious presence, as on His throne in stately Majesty,
opposite to His manner of appearing on earth, which is Gods footstool, whereas
heaven is His throne. The third here, is, And his servants shall serve him: His
servants, (that it, their servants, i. e. to Him and the Lamb) and Him, are
here put in the singular number, to show the unity of the Father and the Son,
though it relates to both. The privilege here is, that these His servants,
Saints glorified shall have a place amongst these that stand by, Zechar. 3. It
supponeth, 1. an access to His company, such as Angels have, who are always
waiting on Him and behold His face, Matthew. 18. This is a privilege that
others, who are not servants, have not. 2. It supopseth a relation to Him, and
that an honorable relation; to be Gods servants, is more than to be Kings
servants; yea, Kings, so David and Moses style themselves, Psalm. 18. and 90.1.
3. It supposes an exactness and fitness in them to go about these duties of
servants cheerfully, These who here devoted themselves to Him and engaged
themselves to be His servants, though they performed little, yet there they
shall serve Him and perform it as becomes. It is the Saints prayer here,
Matthew. 6. that they may do Gods will on earth as in heaven; and what happiness
would they think it to be some length in that? Now, in heaven that is
perfected, and without declining or defect they go about it; and certainly if
it was a happiness to be Solomon's servant and a great honor, much more to
serve God and the Lamb. There is more happiness in active doing of holy
duties, than we are awar of.

We have heard of five aggravations of this heavenly happiness, other two do
follow, ver. 4. The first i^, They shall see his face. It is usual by this to
set out the happiness of heaven, as Matthew. 5.8. Heb. 12.14. 1 Cor. 13.1. Job.
3.2. His face, here is mentioned, to show that that enjoyment shall be most
immediate and intimate; and so it is opposite to what is attainable here, seeing,
at most, Moses got but a sight of His back parts. This is particularly marked,
to show wherein their happiness in heaven consists, it is in the immediate
enjoying of God, who then shall be all in all: The second, is, and his name
shall be in their foreheads, they shall look like Him (so we understand it)
that they shall be transformed into the same image perfectly, 1 Cor. 3. ult.
and 1 Job. 3.2. they shall partake of His likeness, as He prays, Job. 17.26.
and our vile bodies shall be made like His glorious body, Philip. 3. ult.
proportionably as becomes members to their Head. Then shall Believers bear His
name in their foreheads, and it shall be known to whom they belong by the
excellent privileges bestowed on them.

Their happiness is further set out, ver. 5. in four things, 1. that there
shall be no intermission of that happy day, No night is there, no vicissitude
or change, but an unchangeable day, they are above the ups and downs which all
the three principal prophesies are obnoxious unto. 2. They need no candle, no
borrowed or artificial light; darkness is removed, and that which was in
part, is done away, 1 Cor. 13. and that which is perfect is come, and knowledge
is at an height and perfection: so that though there be candles or Sun and Moon
here (and they are needful) yet not so there. 3. The Lord gives them light,
they have light and immediately from God Himself, without all interveening
means, then shall there be no mistake of God, but in that day we shall know
that the Father is in the Son and the Son in the Father. 4. They reign, and
that for ever and ever, not for a thousand years but eternally, in which
respect it is certainly opposed to the former, Chap. 20. And this of eternity
is added as of special use in their happiness; for, if it were wanting, all
their other happiness would be defective. O happy Kingdom and State: that
cannot be altered! there is no wavering to say that it is good to be here,
Kingdoms on earth have their periods, but this has none but endless eternity.

To be in heaven must be a great happiness, there is no life to that, with all
the properties of uncontroverted happiness.

2. To be Gods servants must be a great happiness, it is reckoned one in
heaven.

3. Be comforted, O Believers, in the hope of heaven, and holily long to be
there; there is no night nor corruption there, the heart is stayed there, His
servants serve Him without gadding or wearying; and be the more holily
submissive: for, that ends all complaints, and fully puts out the life of
the body of death.

We may answer two questions by assertions from these words, in short, which
will further clear them.

Quest. 1. Do the glorified behold God Himself? how can that be, seeing He is
invisible?

Answ. They see not His Essence by their bodily eyes; for, He is a Spirit.

2. By their understanding they see not His essence adequatly or perfectly as
it is; for, He is infinite, and they even then but finit, and therefore they
comprehend Him not.

Yet, 3. beside what evidences of His glory are seen by created light or
splendour about Him (as there is much of that) or what shines in the man Christ
Jesus, who is unconceivably glorious, there is a real immediate conceiving and
taking up of God, though not fully comprehensive of Him, or adequatly unto Him;
because seeing there, is opposite to faith and our manner of seeing here. And
these phrases, We shall see Him as He is, See His face, Know Him as we are
known of Him, etc. confirm it.

Beside, every thing else being but created, cannot satisfy the soul without
the up taking of God Himself, who only can stay the mind, and these created
excellencies as they point Him out, the knowledge of whom is the happiness of
Angels, who are also His creatures, yet neither see they Him bodily, nor do
they comprehend Him fully.

Quest. 2. Do then all see and enjoy Him alike and in an equality?

Answ. In this sight and happiness, consider, 1. the object seen and beholden,
2. the manner or capacity of seeing and beholding, 3. the effects of
satisfaction following thereupon. 1. The object of this happiness, is God and
His Son Jesus: there is one object to all. 2. The manner of up-taking is
different, for before men can conceive of God, there must be an elevating or
capacitating of them by heavenly qualifications for it, and a condescending on
Gods part to suit manifestations of Himself to their capacities, even when they
are enlarged: This in glory (as here in grace) may be different, some more
enlarged to conceive more of God, some less, yet all have the same object. The
third, to wit, the consolation which follows, may be called equal in some
respect: for, they are all satisfied and filled, and can desire no more; yet,
in the former respect, there is less or more according to their measure. God,
1. proportioning them (to speak so) in several sizes, then filling all; Even
as suppose many vessels of diverse quantities were cast into the sea, that
ocean can fill all, and it is the same ocean whereof they are all full; yet some
hold more, some less: or, suppose some looking to a lovely object, that are
more or less able to discern, though none be defective in their sight, All
behold the same object and discern it to their satisfaction, though some see it
more distinctly, yet all of them satisfyingly; So it is here in beholding Gods
face.

LECTURE II.
Verse. 6. And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true. And the
Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to show unto his servants the
things which must shortly be done.

7. Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the
prophecy of this book.

8. And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and seen,
I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel, which showed me these
things.

9. Then says he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servants, and
of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book:
worship God.

10. And he says unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book:
for the time is at hand.

11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let
him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and
he that is holy, let him be holy still.

12. And behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his work shall be.


THe body of this Book and Prophecy is now past: follows, to the end, the
conclusion, which serves to the confirming and commending of the whole
Prophecy, especially of the last vision. It has five parts, 1. The Angel
confirms and commends what is said, ver. 6, 7. 2. There is a mistake of
John's recorded, ver. 8. 3. The Angel, as being interrupted by that
superstitious humility of John, returns, after checking of him, to go on,
ver. 9, 10, 11. Then, 4. cometh-in the Master, our blessed Lord, to speak to
the same purpose, ver. 12. till ver. 20. Where, 5. John closes all with a wish
for Christ's coming and the Churches happiness, as Epistles use to be closed.

The Angel does, first, confirm this Prophecy ( ver. 6.) by two arguments. 1.
These sayings are faithful and true, the matter is sure; for, the sayings are
such, as upon them we may lay weight. They are faithful: such a commendation
the Gospel gets, 1 Timothy 1.15. and it is frequent in this Book. It is added
and repeated before the close, (especially with respect to the former vision)
because, 1. it is of concernment to give credit to it; 2. because what is
spoken of heaven, often amongst men passes as a tale that is told and gets
little credit; but however, says he, these sayings are worthy of it.

The second argument, is, That they are revealed by the Lord God of the holy
Prophets, (it is expressly said of Christ ( Chap. 1.) that He sent His Angel;
and here ( ver. 20.) that He testifies these things; which shows that He is
God) who has sent His Angel to show unto His servants the things which must
shortly be done: The force of it, is thus, They must be faithful sayings; for,
that same God who before revealed things to His People by His Prophets (of
which things never one failed) He has now sent to reveal them by His Angel,
Therefore they must also be faithful, as the former words were, seeing He is
still omniscient and faithful who reveals them. They are called holy
Prophets, 1. because God made use of holy men to be penmen of His Word, 1 P^t.
1.21. 2. because the things spoken, had effect and were not lies. God is called
their God, especially, 1. because of the peculiar service and commission He put
on them beside others, 2. because of His owning their message as well as
themselves.

Thirdly, The things are said to come to pass shortly, that is, they are not
long to be suspended, therefore every one is concerned in them, before long
they will be finished, but even from that time they were to begin in their
series.

Verse. 7. He commends this prophecy (being compared with verse. 6.) in two,
1. That it was sent, and that by an Angel to his servants for their behove; an
argument that should put them to search into it, seeing He sent it. A second,
from the happiness of these who shall make right use of it, both in reading
and keeping it, it being profitable for knowledge and practice, yea (compared
with ver. 3. Chap. 1.) it says that people read and know as much as they
practice, which saying does exceedingly commend the studying of this Book in
sobriety, blessedness being so often attributed to the right searchers thereof.

The word, Behold, I come quickly, is thrice in this Chapter repeated, and
prefixed here to be a spur to study and to keep the sayings of this Book: for
did men walk with the apprehension of Christ's coming quickly, there would be
more study to know His will, and more conscience to practice it. This would be
in all our thoughts, we may see why the things, prophesied-of here, are said
shortly to come to pass, that is, in the same sense that Christ comes
quickly, that so men may observe them the better and be the more watchful in
reference to them.

The second thing follows, verse. 8. which is John's second mistake, wherein
he had fallen before, Chap. 19.10. when he hears and sees these things, he
falls down to worship before the Angel that revealed them: whereby it is
clear, that hitherto it was an Angel that spoke to John, in the name of the
Lord; and it appears also, that John knew him to be an Angel; for so, ( ver.
6.) he had called himself, who was employed in this: It is like that as Chap.
19. the glorious sight and good news of the happy estate of the Church
militant, getting that commendation that they were the true sayings of God,
Chap. 19. ver. 9. overhwhelmed him some way there, to think more of this
revealer than he ought; it is like, the same being represented to him of the
Church triumphant (which to him is new, and which the glory of the militant
Church was not) he has been overwhelmed, as it were, with joy and again fallen
in too much admiration of the revealer (I mean the isntrumental revealer) of
such glad tidings. The words were opened, Chap. 19.10. There he called himself
one that had the testimony of Jesus Christ: here is added, he is a
fellow servants of these that keep the sayings of this book, to show, that not
only John, but all the Believers have one Master with Angels; and therefore on
this ground, the least of them ought no worship to Angels, but to the Master,
as the opposition clears. Where again, it is observable, 1. that it is a
special note of a Believer to keep the sayings of this Book. 2. That the more
John puts honor, which is not due, upon Angels, they debase themselves, as
it were, the more; not only John's fellow servants, but fellow servants to the
lowest, which was not so plain before. And if on this account Angels plead
against worship from John, so do they against worship from any in that relation
with him. 3. It appears here that men, even holy men, may relapse in the same
sin, and that they cannot abide much appearing glory in creatures, but they are
ready to give too much unto them. 4. Here is an example of a Godly man, his
falling again in the same sin after he was reproved by the Angel, and no
question repented of it, being of such a heavenly frame when he was reproved.
This, it is like, was Abraham's case in twice denying his Wife, Genesis 12. and
Chap. 20. And Iehoshaphat's with A^ab and Iehoram. 5. It appears that the
reason why the Angel calls himself ( Chap. 19.10.) one who had the testimony
of Jesus Christ, is, because (as ver. 6.) he is now employed for revealing
Jesus Christ's mind, as holy Prophets of old were in revealing His mind to His
Church.

From ver. 9. to 16. follows the third part. First, ( verse. 9.) the Angel
puts by and checketh John for this fault of his, as is said. Then ( ver.
10.) he returns to prosecute his purpose in several directions and reasons
including commendations of the duties directed unto.

The first direction is special to John, ver. 10. Seal not the sayings of the
prophecy of this book Seal not here, is not understood, as to its surenesse
(for, that is out of question) but as to hidnesse or secretnesse; let not,
says he, this bookly closed, as Isa. 29,11. and 8.16. that it be not useful
to the Church; for, more is imported than is expressed, as appears by the
reasons, the Lamb opened not the seals of this book, that they should again be
closed: that is not the end it is given for, but on the contrary, let it be
public, for their behoof, and the reason is, for the time is at hand. The
seals which are the first prophetical vision (properly) they are daily
fulfilling and the rest come on. It is an allusion unto Isa. 8. and 29. with
Dan. 12. where mention is made of sealing these prophesies, because they were
to be dark, and little useful to that generation, being for the time to c^^e,
for many days. See Dan. 8. and so on the contrary, no sealing must hold forth
their clearness, or Christ's mind that they should be so, seeing there was use
to be made of them.

This command of publishing this prophecy may be thought strange, and it may
be objected, men may wax worse and worse, and seeing, as Peter says of less
obscure Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3. They pervert them to their own destruction, much
more, it seems, it may be said of this, which is so dark; and so would the
objection conclude, better seal it than no seal it. This is prevented by an
answer, usual in the Prophets, keep it not up whatever come of it, like Ezekiel.
2.7. whether they will hear or forbear. And this is followed with a twofold
qualification, 1. If it be dark or an offense to any, it will be but to the
profane and vile or filthy, who abuse the best things; it will make none
profane, but filthy persons, who may from their corruption abuse it, as they do
the plain truths. But, 2. these who are single and sincere, it will not hinder,
but strengthen them in the way of holiness, and confirm them in the faith of
Christ; and so it will be to the one the favor of life unto life, and to the
other the favor of death unto death, a Corinth. 2.16. and that is no strange
thing, and cannot be attributed to the unsealing of this prophecy; for if it
were sealed, that would follow, as we see in Dan. 12.9, 10, etc. This is the
simple scope of this Verse, we may read it in the future time (as it is common
to the Hebrews, to which style John comes near here) and so it tells what
will be the effect, some (...) offend at it, some will get good of it; or, in
the imperative, let them be filthy still. It is no dispensation, but an holy
regardlesnesse that God has of such filthy persons as will not be made clean,
but makes a snare of their table, let it be so, says he, as Romans 11. and Hos.
4. Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone; he will not part with them, that
is his sin, and let it be his plague: so here.

If any should question the meaning of that, he that is just, let him be just
still; or, (it being the word in the Original that signifies justified) he
that is justified, let him be so still. Answ. The Word may, and we think does
keep its proper signification here, as it is distinguished from sanctification
and inherent holiness. The simple meaning, is, they who are in Christ, shall
not be shaken out of that estate, but shall still so continue whatever come of
others. Thus still signifies not an increase of degrees (which may also be in
this as to our sense, and that well agrees to the scope) but a continuance of
that estate, as the word (...) is sundry times rendered, supra, verse. 3. And
that it must be so, appears by this, that holiness or sanctification is
expressly distinguished from this of being just, as denotating a different
thing. Therefore Bellar, has no ground from this (which is the only place
alleged from the New Testament) to say, that (...) sometimes signifies to
make just by inherent holiness. This is a simple declaring of the effects that
should follow severally on hearers, some perverse spirits shall offend, but all
the godly, both as to their justification and sanctification shall be
preserved, Therefore there needs no scarring to bring forth this prophecy.

A second qualification, is, ver. 12. And behold, I come quickly, etc. that is,
be doing, (for that negative, seal not the sayings, ver. 10. includes the
contrary affirmative, reveal them) for, though it be abused for a time, I am
coming quickly, and will call every one to an account of their carriage, and
reward them accordingly, even in reference to their usemaking of this
prophecy. This is added to strengthen the former reason, One might think it
sad that men should so abuse Pearls and such a precious Word, it will not be
long so, (says the Lord) but I my self will come to execute justice on all,
which shall be suitable and proportionable to men's carriage, that is, vengeance
on these that continue filthy, and glory and honor to such as continue holy,
Romans 2.8. And this word is an advertisement to all to take heed how they live
under means, for so must they answer and be judged according to their works.
And the Lord comes in abruptly, as it were, to continue the same matter (for,
the title which He afterward assumeth, shows it to be Himself) thereby
declaring that it was His Word, and by His Authority which the messenger spoke
mediately, as when He speaks immediately Himself.

By occasion of this judgment, there is a word of great concernment set down,
till ver. 16. for we take this 13. ver. (which bears plainly out Christ's
name) to be His own words, coming in here to confirm what the Angel had said in
His name before; and, so ver. 14. and 15. are to be read in a Parenthesis as
the Angels words set down for advertisement; and ( verse. 16.) Christ is again
brought in proceeding in His speaking. The like may be seen in these words,
Chap. 16. ver. 15. Blessed is he that watches, etc. where the writer, upon the
occasion of judgment formerly mentioned, breaks forth into that
advertisement. However, though these words here, ver. 14. be the Angels words
(in that he says [ His] Commandments) yet the scope and matter is the same,
and it is certain, ver. 16. Jesus Christ Himself takes it on Him, and
therefore tells, it is He now and no Angel, but He who sends Angels that
speaks.

This saying of His, I come quickly, v. 12. is for confirming what He said of
the happiness of these that kept this word: and this name of His, verse. 13.
is repeated for confirming that of His coming quickly to reward every one,
because He is God, who as He gave a being to all for His own glory, so He will
exact an account thereof.

LECTURE III.
Verse. 13. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the
last.

14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.

15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel, to testify unto you these things in the
Churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning
star.

17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that hears, say,
Come. And let him that is athirst, come. And whosoever will, let him take the
water of life freely.

18. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of
this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are witten in this book:

19. And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the
holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.

20. He which testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen, Even
so, Come Lord Jesus.

21. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.


BEfore the Spirit close this Book, much is spent of that part which is the
Conclusion, on these two, 1. in confirming the truth of what is delivered in
the prophecy. 2. In the commending of the excellency of it. After ( ver. 10.)
He has given direction by the Angel not to seal these sayings, and having
removed an objection that stood in the way, ver. 11. He confirms and
commends these sayings, 1. By Christ's approaching coming to reckon with folks
how they made use of this Scripture and warning, ver. 12. 2. From the
soveraignity of Him who asserted it, it was not an Angel, but the eternal God,
ver. 13. 3. He commends it from the happiness of these that rightly makes
use of these words, ver. 14. which verse is answerable to ver. 3. of Chap. 1.
Then, 4. He commends this Scripture from the contrary misery that shall come
on all, who shall by their own fault be excluded from this happiness, ver. 15.
These are done by several witnesses, sometimes by John, sometimes by Jesus
Christ, sometimes by the Spirit, sometimes by the Angel.

He goes on to confirm the truth of what has been delivered, and the first
confirmation, is, ver. 13. (which as it relates to all the prophecy, so does
it especially to the former of Christ's coming quickly) I am Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end, the first and the last: I, that speak and have sent
this Book to my Church, am God, and will perform what I have spoken. The words
hold out Christ's eternity, not only as being before and after all things, but
as giving all things a being, and ordering all things to their ends, and to His
own glory as the great end of all, He is the beginning of the Creation of God,
Rev. 3.14.

This commendation is prosecuted, ver. 14. and 15. from the happiness of them
that so make right use of all the Word of God, and especially of the words
contained in this Book. The happiness and the persons to whom it belongs,
are first set down, ver. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments.
Blessedness is the most desirable thing that is looked for: and thus, blessed
are they that keep His Word and obey it. And though this general be true, yet
considering ver. 3. of Chap. 1, and ver. 7. of this Chapter, and the scope here
to be one with these (to commend this prophecy,) we take the commandments,
spoken of here, especially to look to the sayings of this prophecy. And so it
is, Blessed are they that keep the sayings of this Book, the Lord foreseeing
that this Book was to meet with more opposition than other Books of holy
Scripture: and there being a general reluctance in all to make use of it,
therefore though but six or seven times blessedness be spoken of in it, yet it
is thrice applied to them that keep the sayings of this prophecy, particularly
these which relate to the keeping of clean garments, from the corruptions of
Antichrist, and of the time, and to the putting of us in a posture of waiting
for His coming.

This blessedness is branched out several ways more particularly, 1. that
they may have right to the tree of life, that is, to the happiness the Saints
have in glory, and especially to Jesus Christ the objective and
fountain-happinesse of the Saints, as ver. 2. of this Chapter, and Chap. 2. The
meaning is, they shall have right to Jesus Christ, and glory in heaven with
Him: Not that doing of the commandments is the meritorious cause of this, or
that which gives Believers right to it. But for clearing it, consider Christ
two ways holden out in the Word, 1. As He is the ground and purchaser of
Salvation to Believers in Him, and so believing is that which gives right to
Him and all that is in Him, according to the offer which is the ground of our
faith. 2. Consider Him as the object, in whom Believers happiness consists,
and in the enjoying of whom there is life, as Col. 3.4. Christ being thus
looked on, as the object of their happiness, keeping of the commandments is
the way wherein we come to enjoy Him: and this agrees well with that word,
Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord. And hereby the necessity of holiness, and obedience to His
commandments, is holden forth, without which ( Col. 1.12.) we are not meet to
be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light: for, though holiness
and obedience be not the way unto, or causa sine qua non of, our justification,
or to Christ considered as the meritorious cause of it, who is thus to be
closed with by faith alone; yet are they to our glorification, and to the
immediate enjoying of Him in heaven.

The second branch of their happiness, is, They shall enter in through the
gates into the city, that is, into the new Jerusalem, and the glory that the
Saints have to look for in heaven, Chap. 21. and beginning of Chap. 22. their
holiness ends in happiness and glory; there is no coming to heaven but by
this door, no climbing over the walls; for, the Angels are porters. The meaning
is, the studier of holiness, shall have fair access into heaven, like a man
that has a pass and gets liberty to enter in the city, when the sentinel
keeps others back, and they are not admitted, 2 Pet. 1.11. So an entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord: whereby it is clear, that this city is heaven, and the way to it, is
holiness: and to hope to come to heaven and to live in profaneness, is as if
folks would think to climb over the walls, and not enter by the ports into it:
We may well say, that though holiness be not the cause of our entry, yet it is
our pass, by which it is known who are to be admitted or have right to enter,
and who not.

The third way how this happiness is set out, is by holding out the misery of
all that are profane, ver. 15. for without are dogs and sorcerers, etc. This is
given as a reason why they are happy that shall have access into the city,
because without are such and such vile persons; and as a reason why they are
blessed that are holy, because profane ones are shut out: under which we
comprehend all that are disobedient, and such as cast the Word and Commandments
of God. And it lets us see how God esteems of all that give not themselves
up to the obedience of the Truth. Of these sorts of sinners we spoke, Chap.
21.8. Only dogs are added here, that is, 1. Such as are profane in
conversation, and will not take reproofs, such as amend not, Matthew. 7.6. Give
not that which is holy to dogs. 2. These that are opposite to Truth, in
doctrine, and vent and spread what is unsound, as Philip. 3.2. Beware of dogs,
etc. speaking of these teachers that did mix the righteousness of the Law with
the righteousness of Christ in justification. These also are without, that is,
are in the second death, Chap. 21.8.

From Verse. 16. and forward, follows the Lord Jesus His own close, to the
same purpose, to confirm and commend the truth of the words of this Prophecy.
In the 16. verse it is commended from the fountain it comes from, I Jesus have
sent mine Angel to testify these things in the Churches. These are not John's
inventions, nor the sayings of an Angel out of his own head, but they are from
Me, I own them all, I Iesiu (taking His proper name to Himself) have sent mine
Angel in more than an ordinary way, to reveal these things to My servant John,
and by him to the Churches, to the end of the world. And that this may have the
more weight, He takes to Himself such styles as He took to Himself before,
Chap. 2, and 3. I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning
star, to bring souls in love with Him; He sets out Himself as the very
Messiah come of David, as Chap. 5.5. The Lion of the tribe of Judah, and the
root of David, and the offspring of David as man, because as man He came of
David, and so is the promised Messiah, as Isa. 11.1. There shall come a rod out
of the stem of Iesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots, etc. Or, take
the words differently, I am the ro^t of David, that is, David God, and David is
as a branch, and I gave him a being: And I am the offspring of David, that is,
as man I am a branch come of David. And thus he answers the question the
Pharisees could not understand, Matthew. 22.43. If David call Him Lord, how is He
then his son? He is David's Lord as God, and David's son as man, so is He his
root and offspring. 2. He calls Himself the bright and morningstar: He is
called a star by Balaam, Numb. 24.17. There shall a star come out of Jacob, and
this relates to that, but to show that He is not a common star but a singular
one: He is called the bright and morning star, or day star that brings the
light of the day with it, holding Himself out as the fountain of all light and
consolation, as Ioh. 1.9. He is that true light that lighteneth every one that
comes into the world. This is He that sends this message to the Churches,
and that now we read of, He that brought life and immortality to light, etc.
These titles are foolishly applied (to say no more) to the Virgin Marie, as
many others are by Bernardine de Busco, De denominationibus Mariae.

The second commendation is in a twofold Come, ver. 17. the Spirit and the
Bride say, Come. And let him that hears, say, Come. This is such a word, so
excellent and true a word, and so comfortable a saying, that all that have the
Spirit in them when they hear it, will say, Come, and wish a performance of it;
and the Bride the Lambs wife, all the Glorified in heaven, and all the
Regenerate on earth concur in it; And not only the Church universal for that
time, but all that shall hear this word, and have the faith of it in their
heart, shall say, Come. We conceive the scope is, 1. to commend this word from
the desirablenesse of it to all Believers, especially that word, verse. 12.
Behold, I come quickly. 2. To let the Church know that He is to send no more
new Scripture or Messages of this sort, and that they have no more to expect
but the coming of the Lord on the back of the fulfilling of this Prophecy. And
so as Malachy, in his last Chapter, closes the Canon of the old Testament with
a promise of Christ's first coming, and puts the People of God to the Law of
Moses and the Prophets till then, so Christ here closes the Canon of the New
Testament with a promise of His second coming, to which He knitteth the longing
desires of His Church.

The second Come, that commends the excellency of this Book, Let him that is
athirst, come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Is
there yet any body that is not clear in their interest, let them come and take
this word before Christ come; for, he will not get another word: as if He said,
I have made many fair and free offers, and now I close My last offer with a
good word, Who ever will take Christ, and life through Him freely, on the terms
of free grace, let him come, and take Him without money and without price, Isa.
55.1. This is our Lords farewell, that He may press the offer of the Gospel
and leave that impression, as it were, upon record amongst the last words of
the Scripture; and His scope is to commend this Book and the offers He has
made in it, as most free and on the terms of grace, wherein Christ aims much
to draw souls to accept it, And teaches us that all that would expect comfort
of His coming, and pray for it with a well-grounded confidence, they would
first come to Him, and close with Him, and make use of His offer. This makes a
comfortable meeting with Him, and who cannot say the first come to Christ, that
he may come, let themselves come to Him, and hear and answer His call to them,
that so they may turn over their request to Him.

The third way how He commends this word, is by putting a testimony to the
perfection of it, ver. 18. telling that nothing can be added to it, and nothing
can be diminished from it as superfluous, and both these are set down by way of
commination, and it is given as a reason why folks should expect no more
Scripture after this. 1. Let any man beware of adding to these things. Adding
may be considered formally as denoting the enjoining of any thing for
Scripture, or to be accounted as such, which is not contained in this Book, or
declared by God immediately to be such as this is. Or, 2. as adding upon the
matter, by putting or imposing a meaning on that which is written, that God
never intended, or which the words will not bear. Therefore deceivers and
wresters of the Word, are called Impostours, as imposing: the curse that is
threatened on them that add any of their ways, is, God shall add to him the
plagues that are written in this Book, that is, He shall bring upon him all the
curses threatened to come on the openly profane and secret hypocrites, or
Antichrists followers.

And that it may be known, that it is no less fault to diminish than to add,
he tells, ver. 19. If any shall take away from the words of this Prophecy,
that is, either by taking away something that is canonick, and derogating from
the authority of the Scripture, or by hyding or detracting from the meaning of
it (for, both these ways the Word is diminished, when the weight of Gods
authority in the truth is diminished, or when folks receive not the Truth and
walk not in the obedience of it.) The threatening that is added to this, God
shall take away his part out of the Book of life, etc. that is, that man shall
never come into glory; it shall be declared he was never written in the Book of
life, and he shall be shut out of heaven; for, never a promise of happiness,
in all the Word, belongs to that man. And so as Moses when he gave the Law,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. commands neither to add nor diminish. And Prove. 30.6.
Add thou not unto His words, lest He reprove thee. So also our Lord Jesus
seals the New Testament, but with a more severe threatening: and that word (
Deuteronomy. 4.2.) That ye may keep the Commandments of the Lord, shows that the
keeping he means of, consists not in the letter, but in the practice and
conversation, by making the Word our rule in our walk. In which words, as all
diminishing from Scripture, so all addition under whatsoever pretext, is
condemned: by which the bulk of Popish traditions is justly rejected.

If it be objected that this threatening is only in reference to this book, but
hinders not but that something by tradition may be added to others, or to the
Scripture in general. Answ. 1. Yet this book is looked on here as the close of
all Scripture, and therefore there can be no other reason given for adding this
certification, but to restrain men from looking for more, and that they may now
accept the Canon closed. 2. This is simply against man's adding to Gods Word,
and puts marches betwixt Gods word and man's of whatsoever nature; for, the
Scriptures are Gods Word, but traditions are man's: and either they are for
their matter grounded on the Word and so are contained in it, or not grounded
on it or contained in it. If they be of the first sort, they are no more Gods
Word, but as other consequents drawn from it. If of the second sort, then they
are manifest additions, and so in this opposed to the Word. 3. Adding must be
so understood, as diminishing or taking away must be; But taking away is so to
be understood as to make that no Scripture which God has appointed to be so,
whatever the matter of it be: and therefore to add, must be to account any
thing Scripture, or as Scripture, which God has not so appointed to be. Hence
as it were by this condemnable to suppress any book that were canonick,
because the matter of it were in an other Book; even so, on the contrary, must
it be here reproved, to add any book unto, or to equal it with Scripture in
Authority, which is not contained in the Canon, 4. Do not the same reasons that
condemn adding to this book in particular, condemn adding to the Word in
general, or to any other book thereof? so that as we cannot add some
prophesies to this book out of traditions, and call them, or account them, a
part of the revelation, or of equal authority with it; so neither may we from
tradition join any thing to any other book, or to the Word in general; for, the
reason is one, God will reserve this piece of Soveraignity to Himself to decide
what shall be accounted His revelation, and will have no other meddling with it,
so also with His Word in general. 2. He will keep men from encroaching on what
He has reserved to Himself: and indeed it seems by this commination, that He
esteems it highest arrogance and lese-majesty to alter in any thing His word,
which is the most sacred and sovereign thing which He has left with His
Church, and wherein His name and supremacy does especially consist.

The close of all, is Christ's speaking a word as His drawing to an end, ver.
20. He that testifies these things, says, Surely, I come quickly. It is He
that speaks, ver. 16.18. that testifies these things, and that which He
says is a promise, or prophecy of Christ's coming, and of the certainty and
suddenty of His coming to Judgment. 2. And the last words of the verse are an
hearty and warm welcome, that John in the name of all Believers, or the Bride
gives to this truth, promise, or prophecy of the coming of the Lord, Amen:
not only let it be so, but I wish, and long, and pray that it may be so, Even
so, or, So be it, Come, Lord Jesus, as Thou have promised.

There is here then a promise made, which John turns up to God in a most
fervent supplication not only for himself, but for the whole Church of Christ
also, upon the hearing and consideration of this, that Christ is to come again
and receive Believers to Himself, that where He is, there they may be also:
such ejaculations of the soul will often interrupt the thoughts and discourses
of these who are in the faith of being found of Him in peace at His appearance,
the lively apprehension of what they do expect at that day, when they shall see
Him as He is, produces such a sweet complacency in it, and stirring of heart
to be possessed of it, that there must needs follow such ardent desires after
it as will almost prevent all deliberation: for, excellent objects have such an
amiable aspect upon the soul, and attractive power over the heart, that it most
willingly yields up it self, and as if it were all composed of desires, it
breaths forth nothing but earnest wishes after a neernesse and inseparable
conjunction with that object. Now, what can be proposed to the immortal soul
like this, to hear Christ say Behold, I come quickly? truly the apprehension is
at a stand in unfolding that blessedness which is included in this one
sentence, it goes beyond the reach of a created understanding to search it out
unto perfection; for eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive what is here imported. And therefore no wonder to
see it draw such a holy heart forcibly out after it, breathing out all the way
such a desire, Even so, Come, Lord Jesus, Come quickly, as if his heart
intended by this wish to anticipat that day: But because he knew the Bride was
not yet made ready, and that there was a long tract of time to interveen
betwixt the giving of this promise and that day wherein the marriage of the
Lamb shall be solemnized, when He shall bring her unto the King, all glorious
within, in clothing of wrought gold and raiment of needle work, with the
virgins her companions that follow her, that they may enter the Kings Palace,
to be with Him there for ever; and because he knew, that before this there were
many sad emergents and searching dispensations to be met with, such winds to
blow as should overblow every one who was not ballasted with the grace of God,
such false Doctrines to be spread as would carry about every one whose heart
was not established by grace, such deceivers privily bringing in damnable
heresies, that if it were possible the very Elect should be deceived, so many
duties to be done, and so much affliction to be suffered as were impossible to
be performed and born without the assist^nce of special grace, Therefore as the
conclusion of the whole, verse last, he desires that the grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ may be with them all, as that which by its sensible presence or
supporting influence, would carry them through whatsoever they might meet with;
for, there is no difficulty so great which will not evanish and disappear
before His grace; and a gracious man is able to do and suffer all things
through Christ who strengthens him. This grace is indeed the one thing
necessary, to make a man carry creditably for the Gospel and comfortably to
himself in all cases that may be incident: he who is strengthened by the might
of His grace in the inner-man, will be sted^ast and immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord. And therefore it is no wonder, that one who
was seen in the concerning events which should fall out till the second coming
of Christ, did wrap up all his desires for the Saints with an Amen, in this one
wish, The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you all. The very pulse of a holy
soul beats still this way, his temper may be known by the ordinary
unconstrained and habitual desires of his heart: Let others wish to themselves
and their friends what they please, that which a holy man wishes to himself
and these whom he loves best, is this, that the grace of Jesus Christ may be
with them; he would have his own desires, with the desires and endeavors of
every man else, terminate upon this. If ye ask him, what he fears most? It is
this, lest he come short of the grace of God; Or, that his hopes are most upon?
It is for that grace which is to be brought unto him at the revelation of Jesus
Christ: this is the very character of a Christian in good case, that he is one
who is waiting for the appearance of Jesus Christ, and that grace which is to
be brought with Him; the expectation of this is the rest of his soul, he
feeds upon it constantly, when he is alone, the thoughts of it keep him
company, and he makes this his companion in whatsoever company he be: In a
word, he i^ content to be empty of all things beside, that out of His fullness
he may receive grace for grace; this to him is the one thing necessary, and
therefore he makes it his choice. Happy, yea, thrice happy is every one who
does so: for he has chosen that good part that shall never be taken from him.

The worthy and pious Author of this Treatise (whose communication was
habitually good for the use of edifying, and such as did minister grace to the
Hearers, being about to leave this world, to which he was dead when alive,
while all that were about him did see him panting for God, for the living God,
as the Heart does after the water brooks) a little before he fell asleep,
desired one of them who stood by, to write for a close to this Commentary,
these following words, (worthy to be graven with an iron pen and lead in the
rock for ever) And now, O my soul, when all says Come, and concu^^es in a
sweet harmony, seeing thou have heard, and do hear the Call of the Gospel, say
with the Bride and with the Spirit, Even so, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

FINIS.
A brief View of the Series of the whole Book of the REVELATION.
THis whole Book is formed by way of an Epistle.

Beside some general circumstances, Chap. 1.
the matter of the Book generally is divided ( Chap. 1.) in these two, 1. The
things that then were, or the present state of these Churches especially. 2.
The things that were to come on the Church in general, to the end of the world.

Chap. 2, Chap. 2, and 3.
and 3. contain the first part, the present condition of these seven Churches,
set out in seven several Epistles, showing their case, and reproving or
commending accordingly, as was requisite: and withal, adding directions,
warnings, threatenings and consolations suitable to their respective conditions,
which though expressly directed to these, yet are alike useful to all in such
cases to the end.

Chap. 4. Chap. 4. and 5.
and 5. contain the Preface introductory to the main and prophetical part of
this Book: where God the Creator, is set on His Throne, and His glory, as
absolute supreme Lord of all, is set down, having all events determined in His
Counsel, as in a Book that is sealed, in the which no creature can pry to
reveal them, except Jesus Christ, who, by the executing of His Office of
Mediatorship, is found worthy to be admitted on Gods eternal secrets concerning
the Church, Who therefore in that fifth Chapter receives these as in a book,
sealed with seven seals, which he opens distinctly (keeping the same
comparison) in the Chapters following, which contain three principal and other
three explicatory Prophesies; the three principal Prophesies of Seals, Trumpets
and Vials, deducing the events from that time to the end by several steps, and
the explicatory Prophesies, clearing what was more shortly or obscurely set
down in the other, and contemporating with them, or some part of them.

Chap. 6. Chap. 6.
We have the first principal Prophecy of the Seals, which sets forth the
state of the Church under its first period, to wit, of heathenish persecution.
In it the Church, is, first, discovered as flourishing in respect of the
Gospels thriving, Seal 1. Then as bloody in respect of persecution, Seal 2.
After that as decaying and losing much of its beauty, not only by the
persecution of enemies, but by the contests and failings that were in and
amongst her friends, Seal 3. After which, persecution came to a vehement
height, as if death had been loosed against the Church in the last part of the
ten persecutions, Seal 4. whereupon the souls cry to God, as being at an
uttermost strait, Seal 5. Upon which follows Gods judgment upon these
persecuters, Seal 6, at which the first period of the Churches condition, and
the first principal prophecy of Seals do end.

The Church having now gotten outward prosperity and peace, Chap. 7.
and not having made good use of it, there are ( Chap. 7.) other sorts of winds
ready to blow, and fearful heresies to set on her, especially that defection
of Antichrist: all which she is to be advertised of by the Trumpets; but
because that exercise would be more sifting and carry more of the visible Church
away than open persecution did, Therefore before the Trumpets sound, the Lord
gives a little view of the future state of the Church in reference to the two
following principal Prophesies. The first part is to ver. 9. showing Gods care
in guarding His Elect against that storm before it came: this belongs to the
Trumpets. The second shows the good outgate that the Church should have after
that storm, from ver. 9. to the end: and this gives a hint of the Vials.

The Lord Christ having thus provided against these evils by this consolation,
Chap. 7. and having first interposed by His intercession in the beginning of
this Chap. 8. Chap. 8.
Then He gives order to the Angels to sound their Trumpets. These do contain
the second principal Prophecy, and belong to the second period of the Church,
to wit, from the Churches begun peace, after heathenish persecution, till
Antichrist come up by his steps to his height. This is contained in the 8, 9,
10, and 11. Chapters. The first Angel foretells the rising of a violent
heresy, to wit, Arianism, whereby the beauty of the Church was exceedingly
defaced. The second foretells the great pride and contention that was to
follow among Churchmen, which should be no little stirring to many, and make
way for the working of the mystery of iniquity. The third forwarneth of the
corrupting of the principal doctrines and fountain-truths of Grace and the
Gospel. The fourth holds forth the more general decay of piety, purity and
simplicity in the Church, in the age before Antichrists revealing, though not
yet at its height; and when warning is given of three greater woes than any of
these, the eighth Chapter is closed.

Chap. 9.
In Chap. 9. two of the last great woes are set down: the first, or fifth,
Trumpet, describes Antichrists Kingdom, and by the description thereof, and
names given to him, the evil that comes thereby to the Church, is expressed.
The second great woe, or sixth Trumpet, sets out Gods severe judging of a
great part of the Christian world for that defection, by letting loose the
Turks upon it, which with great Armies destroyed many, and overcame a great
part of the Empire: yet these that were spared did not repent, nor forsake
their idolatry and superstitions for all that, but Popery grew in its
corruption, even as the Turks grew in their Dominion.

Chap. 10.11.
In Chap. 10. and 11. because these were sad evils, whereby the Church was
brought low, and were to be of longer continuance than any of the former,
lesser woes, therefore, before the seventh Angel sound, the Lord sets down a
twofold consolation, Chap. 10. and till ver. 15. of the 11. where the seventh
sounds, meeting with two objections: first, men might think shall enemies
then get their will, and the Church be thus still obscured, when the seventh
Trumpet comes, what will come of her? the Lord by an oath ( Chap. 10.)
assures His People, that it shall not be so; but that the Church shall be
revived, and that that seventh Trumpet shall bring judgment on her enemies and
quite turn the chase. And because it might be yet further doubted if there were
a Church during that time till the seventh did sound, it is shown ( Chap. 11.)
that there should be a Church, and some Ministers still adhering to the former
principles of the Gospel, whom all enemies, no not the beast Antichrist, should
be able to overcome, till they should be at the close of their testimony, and
God have others to take it off their hand. Then the seventh Angel sounds when
their testimony is finished, and a very great and most glorious change is
wrought, which is generally hinted at here, but more fully expressed by the
Vials, which are the third principal or typical Prophecy of this Book and
contain the last period of the militant Churches condition, to wit, Antichrists
decay, and her enlargement after she has been at her lowest, and he at his
height: a little view of it is given here before the seven Vials be explained,
because he is to interpose the explication of what was past, in the three
Chapters following.

But before he set down the vials upon the blowing of the seventh trumpet (as
he had set down the trumpets on the back of the seven seals,) the first
explicatory prophecy is interjected, Chap. 12, 13, and 14. and that in a
different style. This serves to clear the two principal prophesies past, and
makes way exceedingly for understanding what was coming; and in this, the same
troubles, and state of the Church, formerly prophesied of, are here again
touched in their several steps of her difficulties with their respective
outgates.

1. The Churches wrestling with heathen persecution, that was described by the
seals, is set out by the similitude of a traveling woman, pursued by a red
Dragon; Chap. 12.
her outgate is under the expression of delivery, when her birth is exalted,
verse. 5. of Chap. 12. which war is more fully prosecuted, with its outgate, to
verse. 13. by this the devil is dethroned from the public authority he had in
the world while Emperors were heathen, and authority is now on the Churches
side. The second step, is the Churches troubles that followed on the back of
that outgate: it is hinted, ver. 6. that she fled or began to flee, (to show
the connection of this decay with the former liberty) but is prosecuted, from
ver. 13. where the devils device to drown her, by spewing out of his mouth a
flood of filthy errors after her, is marked, whenas by violence or authority
he could not master her: the outgate from this, is verse. 16. the Lord provideth
a way to drain these errors that they should not drown her; the earth, that
is, the then declining visible Church, that continued still visible (called
earth, because of her declining from that heavenly simplicity she appeared in,
verse. 4. under heathen persecution, becoming now earthly-like in pomp, and so
distinguished from these that kept their former purity) did still keep the
Doctrine of the Godhead of the Father, Son and Spirit, pure; so that the pure
Church now fleeing (as it were) has these cruel blasts kept off her, and so
diverted from her, as the earths drinking-in of rain suffers not the floods
to increase.

This is contemporary with the first four trumpets or lesser woes, Chap. 8.
When this does not the devils business, ver. 17. he goes to his last refuge
of stirring up Antichrist and bringing of him to his height, which is the first
great woe, Chap. 9. And because this is the great design, to hold him forth, and
thereby to make way for clearing what was spoken, Chap. 11. and what follows
to the end.

Therefore, Chap. 13.
Chap. 13. he more fully insisteth in describing this enemy, 1. in his nature
by a double type of two several beasts: the first, showing what really he
should be, and what the Church should suffer by him; the second showing how he
should attain to that height, and by what means he should prosecute his designs
upon the world, and against the Saints. And then when he has described his
nature, rise, reign, practices, continuance and manner of proceeding, etc. he
comes to show the outgate, Chap. 14.
Chap. 14. which contemporareth with the last part of Chap. 11. and is again
insisted on by the vials.

Having put-by this explication, and given a key of all in this prophecy, he
returns to prosecute where he left, Chap. 11. and more fully to show the
events of the seventh trumpet in the seven vials, which is the third principal
and typical prophecy, prosecuting the story (to say so) from Antichrists
height and begun ruin to the end, which is the third period of the Church.
Therefore ( Chap. 15. Chap. 15.
) the preparation to it is set down (as the preparations to each of the former
principal prophesies, whereas, Chap. 4. and 5. to the seals, and Chap. 7. to
the trumpets) and is, upon the matter, the same with what is Chap. 11. verse.
16, etc. to show that it is the continuation of the same matter. This (I say)
is the third period of the Church.

Then ( Chap. 16. Chap. 16.
) follows the prophecy it self. The four first vials are lesser, and more
insensibly (as it were) carry on Antichrists ruin (as the four first trumpets
did more insensibly increase his rise:) the fifth vial overturneth Rome his
seat, as the fifth trumpet seated him there, and revealed him. The sixth
overturneth Turks, Popes, and the rest of that Kingdom, brings in the Jews,
and sets the Gospel at its full brightness. The seventh vial (sometime
after that) brings the end upon all enemies, Gog and Magog, and fully
overturneth the devils Kingdom in the world: as the three last trumpets are
greatest, so are the three last vials of longest continuance. And because these
events are notable, he proceeds to clear especially the last three vials in
two explicatory prophesies or visions, wherein he abstaineth the expression of
types and sevens which he had used in the principal prophesies, and in an
explicatory way, goes on, as in Chap. 12, etc. The first, is Chap. 17, 18, 19.
the other thence to the end.

Chap. 17.
He had described Antichrist himself, Chap. 13. Here ( Chap. 17.) he describes
his seat, his Kingdom and himself together, that he might show what is the
object of the vials, especially of the fifth: which is, in a word, Rome, then
the chief City of the earth. The more express explication whereof, is Chap.
18. Chap. 18.
showing what the seat is, that is destroyed by the fifth vial; and what
lamentation shall be over it, when Rome (called Babylon) shall be brought to
such desolation.

Chap. 19.
And having described this, he proceeds, ( Chap. 19.) to clear the events of
the sixth vial, and battle of Armageddon, which is notable from two singular
events, the one in the conversion of the Jews in the first part, the other in
the destruction of the beast and his helpers (probably the Turk) in the last
part thereof, whereby the beast having fled from Rome, is now wholly
over-turned, so that the name of Pope cease by this, as Rome his seat did by
the former.

Antichrist being destroyed, he comes to show the events of the seventh vial,
Chap. 20.
in the last vision, Chap. 20, 21, 22. and to make it the more clear and
comprehensive of the Churches victory over the devil, he shows ( Chap. 20.)
first, how the devil was again restrained after he had been loose, Chap. 12,
13. (and so ascends as high as the first vial) during which time the Church
formerly persecuted, had a most flourishing condition (in respect of what
formerly it was) and that for a long time, set out by a thousand years. 2. He
shows that after that, even when the beast is away by the sixth vial, yet a
new enemy arises, called Gog and Magog, which shall mar the Churches peace:
and because this event belongs to the seventh vial, it was necessary to
premit Satan's binding by the preceding vials, to it, that it might be the
better discerned what was intended by this his new loose. 3. The Churches
victory over this enemy is expressed, which we conceive is the proper event of
the seventh vial: whereupon follows the universal Resurrection, consummation
of all things, dissolution of heaven and earth, the last Judgment and final
sentence upon Reprobates and Elect: that which concerns Reprobates is set
down, verse last, what was their portion after this Judgment, and sentence
eternally, they were cast into the lake.

Chap. 21. and 22.
Then Chap. 21. he proceeds more fully to describe the happy estate of the
Elect in the beauty they should be glorified with, the place wherein, the
privileges which they should enjoy, and the persons admitted to it only, which
is to verse. 6. of Chap. 22.

And having put-by the prophetical part, he closes (as he began) with two
generals, commending this prophecy, and advertising of Christ's second coming,
on the back of all this, warning that His Word be not diminished from, nor any
thing added thereunto; withal inviting all to come, and promising Himself to
come, as His last farewell: whereupon the Church welcometh it with a new So be
it, knowing there is no more to be expected but His coming, which she heartily
longs for. After all, John closes the Epistle with a salutation, as he had
begun it with an inscription.

There are two men much accounted of for Learning, whose expositions and
applications I have never touched: Grotius, and Hammond.
not because I thought them not absurd, But, because, 1. Their whole strain is
to divert Readers (to say no more) from the true scope of this Book, and that
not in one vision or prophecy, but in an universal strain more oppositely to
orthodox Writers than any Papist that ever wrote of it; the following whereof
could not but prove nauseating to any Reader. And, 2. Because who will read
them, and soberly compare the Writings of others with the Text, may yet need
more direct Writing to evidence the dissonancy of these Commentations, I do
profess my self unable to satisfy them, I shall therefore but say these few
words,

1. That their application is dissonant from the scope of this Book, which is
cleared to be, 1. to show things to come, Chap. 1. ult. 2. Things belonging to
the Church and Christ's servants peculiarly, as the inscription, repetition of
blessedness to the Readers and Observers, with the several circumstances, will
clear. 3. To show especially the trials of the Church from inward enemies, as
the hiding of the Elect from the hurt thereof, the description of the enemies
and spiritual hurt and defection that is foretold to come on the Church,
especially that great defection of the great Antichrist, whereof the Scripture
speaks so much, confirms it. 4. The scope is to show the Churches condition
under these, to the end of the world: For, 1. it is still useful to his
servants as a prophecy, and useful to the end, and they are blessed that
shall make use of it as such, at the end, as well as now. 2. It closes with
the last Judgment and the Reprobates casting in hell, Chap. 20. and the Elects
glorification, Chap. 21.22. with many promises of His last coming; and the
prophecy preceding the day of Judgment is in a series knit with it, which
will not admit of many hundred years rent; and that that speaks of the day of
Judgment, the description of it, and the sentence upon all the Reprobate, who
are not written in the Lambs book, will clear it.

Now, these men in their Writings wholly enervat all these, 1. They say it
speaks of things but for a short time (from that word, Chap. 1. verse. 1.
shortly to come to pass, etc.) which is the ground of all their opinion, yet
it infers it no more than when He says, I come quickly.

2. They make it of things, for the most part, past, and that of civil things
in the Roman Empire, or what concerns the Jews, without great respect to the
Church.

3. Little or no mention is made of spiritual enemies and heretics, save that
they apply to Simon Magus what is spoken of the three years and an half: there
is not one word of Antichrist in it all, nor of the Pope or Church of Rome, as
if that were not of concernment to the Christian Church, whether we should
condemn him or approve him. This is the more strange, that although they draw
the thousand years from Constantine's time, they reckon the Church all the
while to have peace, and moves only an objection from Iuliey, as if to other
enemy had ever been to interrupt that peace.

2. We say it is inconsistent in respect of the matter they apply it to: for,
to what purpose is it to apply that of the two witnesses, Chap. 11. to the two
Bishops of Jews and Gentiles at Jerusalem, when there is no story for such a
thing at Jerusalem? or though it were, yet, what is that to such a concerning
event so often spoken of there? and what is that of Simon Magus in comparison of
the worlds wondering, that is Chap. 11, 12. and 13, etc? How will the
heathenish idolatrous high Priests be said to have horns like the Lamb, which
must be Christ in that place? Chap. 13 11. How impertinent is it that is said
of the seven Kings, whereof one was to come in John's time? Beside, that all
these were past before John wrote the prophecy, as hitherto has been received
from History?

3. We say it is inconsistent with all that ever have written, ancient and
modern; even Papists, who though, no question, they would gladly receive such
an interpretation to liberate their Pope, yet durst they never hazard on it
till these his new patrons stepped out.

4. It is also repugnant to themselves: for although much be builded on this,
that the effects are suddenly to be brought to pass, because of that word,
Chap. 1. ver. 1. shortly to come to pass; yet do they both expound Gog and
Magog ( Chap. 20.) of the Turks, which to them rises after the 1300 years, and
say that their destruction, as yet to come, is prophesied of there; yea, Chap.
21, and 22. are applied to a state of the Church on earth after the Turks
ruin. 2. They (especially the last) seem to offend at particular application
to men, yea, to Nations and times, alleging that these events are of more
universal concernment; yet, what is their application but a most strait,
particular and narrow one to such Armies and Commanders of the Romans, to Simon
Magus (who was of little note in the world in respect of some After-heresiarchs
that troubled the Church) to a particular Bishop or two Bishops of Jerusalem,
as if only they were the Witnesses? These being obvious, and many such, we
conceive it not needful to draw every thing into particular examination.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE of the chief things and words contained in this Book.
A
Page THree things to be considered in Actions. 120 There is a difference
between an Act materially good, and that which is gracious? ibid. What is
requisite besides the moral rectitude of the Act for making an Act to be
accounted gracious. 120, 121 Acts in the least degree so qualified, are
gracious. bid. No natural man can perform an Action so qualified. 122 That
then there is a difference between Actions in kind, and not in degree only; and
therefore a person in trying the sincerity of his grace, would not look only to
the degree, but to the kind also. 122, 123 That Acts of hypocrites and natural
men, may be sometimes more intense, than some Acts of saving grace; with some
cautions to prevent mistakes. 133, 134, 135 The saddest Affliction of the
Church, has its ensuing victory. 393 Alpha, what meant thereby, and why this
title of Alpha and Omega is so often repeated. 25, 33 Souls under the Altar,
what? 361 What is to be understood by Angel in the Epistles directed to the
seven Churches? 50 Why the Epistle is particularly directed to the Angel of the
Church? 66 That by Angel, Bishop and Presbyter, one thing is understood,
proven. 223, to 230 How Angels come to praise the Mediator, vid. Mediator. Why
Angels are brought-in standing about the Throne, praising God for the
prosperity of the Church: where, of their posture, the place where they stand,
their manner of worship, their song, the matter of it, the object and manner of
it. 395, 396 The Angel who stands at the Altar with a golden censer is
Christ. 406 Why the seven Angels did not sound at the first, when the trumpets
were given them? and what is in it for our imitatation? 416 The judgment
threatened by the sounding of the first Angel, the object, and effects thereof.
419, 420 The judgment threatened by the sounding of the second Angel with its
object and effect. 423, 424 The judgment threatened by the sounding of the
third Angel, and how it differs from the former judgments? and to what time
it relates? 429 The judgment threatened by the sounding of the fourth Angel,
with its object and effects. 431 Whether any person in particular be signified
by that Angel fleeing through the midst of heaven, crying, Woe, woe, etc. 432,
433 The judgment threatened by the fifth Angel, with the object and effects
thereof. 434 The discovery of Antichrist foretold by the sounding of the fifth
Angel. 434, 435 The judgment threatened by the sixth Angel, the nature of
these who execute the judgment, their number, and the place whence they come.
447, 448 The commission of these Angels, with the limitation thereof, both as
to the object and the time. 448, 449 A more particular description of these
Angels with the event of their execution, 449, 450 Who the Angel was, that
preaches the everlasting Gospel; to what time it relates, his posture, the
preaching it self, and to whom he is to preach. 578, 579, 580 How Angels speak?
678 Antichrist the Beast, vid. Beast. What are the characteristicall doctrines
that* serve to point out Antichrist? 568 The Danitish Antichrist, a Popish
faction: that he is already come, and that he is no professed enemy to Christ,
but a false and pretended friend, proven. 572, 573 Antichrists followers
threatened if they continue to worship him; with a description of a follower of
Antichrist, and what the judgment is wherewith they are threatened. 581, 582,
583 The execution of Gods judgment upon Antichrist under the similitude of a
harvest and vintage, and to what time this judgment does relate. 597, 598 The
person executing the judgment against Antichrist, the incitment he has to do
so, and the execution it self. 598, 599, 600 The last plagues upon Antichrist,
and the instruments by whom he is plagued. 601, 602 The Song of the people of
God at the overthrow of Antichrist; a description of the singers, the song it
self, and the matter thereof. Antichrists last expedition for his support, set
forth in the principal authors thereof, its special agents, their work, and
the success of all. 621.622, 623 That Antichrist is come, and that the Pope is
Antichrist, proven; and that he is not a single person, who is to continue
only three years and an half. 652, 653, 654 Bellarmin's arguments whereby he
endeavors to prove that the Pope is not yet come, answered. 654, 655
Concerning the continuing of Antichrist, or the defection of the Church under
him, and its close. 671, 672 That the antichristian defection is presently in
being, and that it is to be found in Rome, further cleared and proven. 674,
675, 676 That it was not Christ really in His humanity, who appeared to John in
vision, proven. 37 Directions to Ministers in applying their Doctrine. 260, to
266 Armageddon what it is, and why expressly set down in the Hebrew tongue. 623,
624 The preparations upon the Lambs side to the battle of Armageddon, the
Captain described, and the event of the battle. 700, 701, 702, The Arian
heresy held forth by the first trumpet. 420, 421, 422 That the Church under
heathen Magistrates had not a like authority in Civil things as Ecclesiastic.
91
B
BAbylons judgment denounced, what the judgment is, the manner of expressing
it, with the cause why she is judged. 58 Babylons judgment, the denouncer, the
denounciation it self, and the justice of this judgment. 677, 678, 679 What
Balaam's doctrine was, and how that of the Nicolaitans agreed with it? 155 What
is meaned by the four Beasts? Rev. 4. 275, 276 Why the Beast under the Dragon,
Chap. 12. has the crowns on his head, and on his horns, and that Beast, Chap.
13.1. has crowns on his horns not on his heads? 524 Who that Beast is which is
said to rise out of the sea, and whether one with the following Beast? 542,
543, 544, 545 What we are to understand by that image which is made to the
Beast? 546 Antichrist set out and described in his power, glory and cruelty, by
the Beast, and the several parts of that description. 546, 547 What is meaned
by wounding, and what by healing one of the heads of the Beast, by whom he was
wounded, by whom healed, the time of both with the effects which followed
thereupon. 548, 549, 550 What worship was given to the Beast, and the
description of his dominion in its continuance. 551, 552 The blasphemy,
persecution, and enlargement of the Beasts dominion. 553, 554 The Antichrist
described under the type of a Beast, with two horns like a lamb, and why he is
called another Beast, with the several parts of the description. 555, 556, 557
The power the Beast exercises who looks like a lamb. 558 What is meaned by
the image made to the Beast? and by its being made to live? 560 The mark of the
Beast, and who are marked. 561 The number of the Beast, how to be understood?
565 The mark and name of the Beast, or, the number of the Beast considered.
567, 568 The number of the Beasts name exponed, and the reasons of the
interpretation. 568, 569 Mahomet is not the Beast. 572 The Beast taken up in a
fourfold consideration; how the woman sits thereon? with a description of
the Beast. 632, 633 The Beast described particularly in a threefold respect.
635, 636, 637 How it is true, that the Beast is not, and yet is? ibid. Whom we
are to understand by the eighth Beast? 641 The ground and warrant that all have
to believe. 305 When men are called to believe, they are not called instantly
to believe that Christ died for them in particular. 306 Believers happiness in
heaven, set forth, and what use they are to make of it for the present. 401,
402 Bishop, Angel, and Presbyter, proven to be one in Scripture, and that there
is no difference between Bishop and Pastor, with the answer of Doctor Hammonds
Arguments to the contrary, that there were ordinary Pastors in the Apostles
days, proven. 223, 224, 225, 226, to 234 Saving blessings far otherwise the
effect of Christ's death, than any common mercy that follows thereupon to
Reprobates. 310 God has a fourfold Book figuratively attributed to Him 18^
What the Book of life is, and what the not blotting out of that Book means?
ibid. What is the Book with the seven seals? 243 That the little Book
mentioned, chap. 10.2. is the same with that spoken of, chap. 5. cleared and
confirmed. 465 What is understood by taking and eating this little Book? 468
What these Books are which are opened in the day of judgment, and how they are
said to be opened? 743 Why the Book of life is produced, and not Gods decree of
reprobation also? 744 The Book of life opened, and what we are to understand by
it? ibid. How Christ's feet are like unto Brass? 39
C
Concerning a call to the Ministry, and clearness therein. 52 A necessity of
clearness in a man's call to the Ministry, and how it may be cleared: where,
of the impulse of the Spirit, that may be in one to the work of the Ministry,
and how to try if it be of the Lord? 52, 53, 54, 55 Churches, why called
Candles^^^^^? 51 The nature of the judgment pointed at, by the Censers being
filled with fire, taken off the Altar. 414, 415 That they who pretend to
highest titles in the Church, even to that of Apostles, may lawfully be tried
and censured by the Church. 69 The censuring of such, most acceptable service.
70, 71 Censures have a threefold weight when they are rightly drawn forth. 163,
164 Considerations to be had in censuring. 165 That children are to be
baptized, proven, 515. Why Christ is called the faithful witness, why the
first begotten of the dead? and why the Prince of the Kings of the earth? 5 The
way of Christ's coming, set forth, and made use of. 24 The extent of the merit
of Christ's death. 299 How Christ's death is of an infinite value? ibid. Christ's
death not a satisfaction for all, but only for the chosen, proven. 299, 300,
301 Christ's death and suffering not intended as a price, to redeem any, but
such as were proposed to the Mediator in the Covenant of Redemption. 301 All
and every one no^ proposed to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption to be
redeemed. ibid. Whether Christ has redeemed all men conditionally? Neg. 312
Christ's Intercession and satisfaction, of equal extent. 315, 316 Christ has a
care of the Elect, to see to their safety in the greatest of judgment. 388 The
enlargement of Christ's Church a most beautiful thing. 394 The most righteous
persons have need of Christ's blood to make them white. 401 Fleeing to Christ
for refuge, the best way to escape trouble. ibid. Christ's Intercession, vid.
Intercession. Christ's sympathy with Believers, see Sympathy. Christ's marriage
with the Church, considered in a threefold respect. 691, 692 Of Christ's
personal reign upon earth, and the different opinions about it. 710, 711
Christ's personal reign upon earth, refuted, with the absurdities that follow
thereupon. 714, 715 These who reign with Christ on earth, are living Saints,
and neither Martyrs nor Saints departed. 716, 718 The word Church, three ways
taken in Scripture: why the Revelation is sent to particular Churches? why to
the Churches of Asia? and why they are termed seven? 20, 21 How Churches use to
be un-churched. 76 Why the Church of Ephesus is particularly threatened with
this? ibid. How un-churching is a punishment to the Minister? 77 If there can
be any particular Church without some sincere professors. 218 The sad
condition of the Church before Constantine's time, and the flourishing state
thereof which did immediately follow upon his Government. 374, 375, 376 What
time, and state of the Church, these winds, and that sealing, spoken of, chap.
7. do relate to. 381 The flourishing state of the Church, is one of the
greatest evidences of Gods glory in the world, and one of the greatest grounds
of praise. 397 The Church of Rome plagued under the sixth trumpet, and yet she
repents not, but continues in her idolatry, murders, etc. 450, 451 The
Church of Rome justly charged with these. 451, 452 Whether the Church of Rome
be guilty of idolatry? 454, 455, etc. The Church of Rome proven to be an
idolatrous Church, from her practice and Doctrine. 456, 457 To what state of
the Church is the measuring of the Temple of God, and of the altar, of them
that worship therein, to be referred. 476 The Church more generally and more
particularly considered. 477 Upon this, that there was a true Church under
Antichrists tyranny, it will neither follow, that the Church of Rome, was, or
is, the true Church, nor that we have our ordination from it. 510, 511 A
National Church does well suit with the time of Antichrists fall, and the
Gospels flourishing: the objections to the contrary are answered. 511, 512,
513, 514 What is sufficient for constituting a person a member of a true
Church, or, how true Churches are to be constitute? 516, 517, 518 The Churches
first war with the Dragon; a description of the parties with a narrative of the
success. 521, 522, 523 The series of the Churches condition, between her open
sufferings under the Dragon and heathen persecuters, and the manifest appearing
of the Beast, or Antichrist. 529, 530 The devil's design against the Church;
the means he uses to prosecute his design; the Churches safety and
preservation. 530, 531 The occasion of this new war against the Church, and how
it differs from the persecution raised against the man-child? 530 The end of
the Churches fleeing from the face of the Serpent, and what is to be understood
thereby, with the time to which it is applicable. 531, 532, 533 That there is a
Catholic visible Church in the days of the Gospel, and some considerations
for making out the unity thereof. 538, 539 that the Catholic Church is the
first Church, and fountain from which all particular Churches do ^low'^ and
some objections to the contrary answered. 540, 541 Church of Rome, vid. Rome.
What sort of separation is called-for from the Church of Rome? 680 The songs
which are in heaven for the enlargement of the Church, the parts of the song,
the grounds thereof, the party who exhorts to sing, and the persons who are
exhorted. 689, 690 We are not to understand any state of the Church militant by
the new heaven, and the new earth, which John saw, but the happiness of the
Church triumphant, with some objections to the contrary answered. 748, 749,
750, 751, 752 The comfortless grounds laid down in Popery for easeing a
troubled conscience. 446 Conditional Redemption, See Redemption. The Lords
tenderness of the consolation of His people, and whence their discouragement
arises. 469 The way of Gods Covenanting with a sinner, laid down. 234 Several
sorts of Covenants. 237 The condition of a Covenant is taken either more
largely or more strictly. ibid. A difference betwixt these privileges of a
Covenant, which flow from it as such, and these which are only conditionally
promised to the parties thus related. ibid. Faith and works in what respect the
condition of the Covenant, and in what not. 238 The Covenant of Grace, like a
Marriage Covenant, or like free Adoption, and not like that b^twixt Master and
Servant. ib. Covenanting preceedeth Justification. 239 What we are to
understand by the cry of the souls under the altar? 364
D
THat the first Day of the week is understood of the Lords Day, and why it is
so called, proven. 28, 29 That this Day is of Divine institution, prov^n, and
objections to the contrary answered. 30, 31 That it is lawful to call it
Sunday, and why? ibid. How this Day is to be sanctified? ibid. Why Christ is
called the first begotten from the dead. 5 Spiritual deadness twofold. 177
That total deadness may consist with a good name from others, and a good
conceit of a man's self. ibid. Christ's death was not only to confirm His
Doctrine, or give a copy of obedience, or purchase to Himself a power to
forgive sins, but it was truly, and properly, a satisfaction. 280 Who these
dead were, who lived not again till the thousand years were expired? and how
they are said to live again then? 732, 733 How hell, the sea, and grave give up
their dead. 747 What power the devil has over men? held forth in the extent of
it, from Scripture. Several conclusions also for clearing it, 149, 150 By what
means the devil uses to prevail in tempting? and how little weight is to be
laid on his testimony? 150, 151 Whether the devil was not cast into hells fire
first when he fell? 738 What it is to die in the Lord. 596 The difference
betwixt a moral specific d^fference and a physical, cleared. 141 Several
conclusions touching Discipline and the exercise of it, laid down. 99. Why John
was called the Divine? 2 The nature and usefulness of pure Doctrine, with the
evil of error, especially when it infecteth these who are Ministers in the
Church, or men of great gifts and blameless lives. 430 The principles of the
Popi^h Doctrine, do most natively lead to anxiety, and the reasons thereof.
439, 440 What is meant by Christ's setting an open door before a Minister, how
he may know it, and what way he should make use of it? 191, 192, 196, 197 The
Dragon who pursues the woman, with a description of him, his properties, and
effects which followed upon his being cast down from heaven to earth. 522, 527,
528 What is meant by the Dragons making war with the seed of the woman, and why
is it not said that he made war with the woman her self? 537, 538
E
WHat is meant by the Saints reigning upon earth? 292 By Earth is understood
the visible militant Church, and not always the unconverted world. 345, 346
Who are to be understood by the Earth, and them that dwell therein? 558 What is
the proper and immediate effect of Christ's purchase to the Redeemed? 307 What
we are to understand by the twenty four Elders, spoken of, Chap. 4. 273 What
the Elders question, and John's reply, and the Elders answer, do import, Chap.
7.13, 14. where, that innumerable multitude are described. 398, 399 Civil and
moral men, may be great enemies to the Church and Religion. 354 Why these
Epistles are directed to the Church-guides or Angels, see Angel. Wherein all
the Epistles agree; and direction how to make use of them. 66, 67 If any truly
Godly may be led away into Error. 166 That Satan aims mainly to seduce
Christ's servants unto Error, and why? 167 That it is a great aggravation of
Error when Christ's servants are seduced thereby, and why? ibid. 168 That
repentance for Error is very rare, and why? ibid. Some Errors inconsistent
together, and opposite one to another, wherewith the Church may be at once
assaulted. 383, 384
F
FAith necessary to Justification, vid. Justification. Different opinions about
the way of Faiths concurring thereto. 236 Some considerations and distinctions,
laid down for clearing the way how Faith concurreth. 237 Faith only the
condition of Justification, 238 A double peculiarity of Faith beyond any other
grace in the point of Justification; one, of being the condition of the
Covenant which flows from the Lords extrinsick appointment, another, of being
an instrumental cause which flows from its intrinsic aptitude, 240 That
Faith does peculiarly concur in the point of Justification, and that Works do
not concur therewith, cleared and proven, 240, 241 The main act of saving
Faith, 306 Whether Faith and other saving graces be the fruit of Christ's
purchase? 308 They who are sound in the Faith will be exceeding tenacious of
their testimony, 363 Marks of that fear which we should shun, 45 How Christ's
feet are like unto fine brass, vide Brass. How Christ's eyes are said to be
as a flame of fire, 38 There is a fire coming from the Altar which has
terrible effects, 416 Of the change made by fire at the great day, 756 What we
are to understand by those fountains and rivers, mentioned, chap. 8. ver. 10.
427, 428 The fountain of life, what? 762
G
A Gift for the Ministry, what it is, and what it includes? 199, 200 What we
are to understand by the sea of glass, and what by standing thereupon? 274,
275, 602, 603 Glory is the complete outgate of Believers trials, 393 That there
is but one God and three distinct persons in the Godhead; where, of the
expressions used in this mystery, 5, 6, 7, 8 Whether God intended the
salvation of all men conditionally, in giving Christ to die? 300 How can the
glorified behold God since He is invisible, and whether they all alike enjoy
Him? 773, 774 How great a God He is whom we worship, 397 There is nothing which
can be a ground of praise but it is in God, ibid. Gods people in their
difficulties would strengthen themselves in the faith of future glory, 400 What
enemies we are to understand by Gog and Magog, 737 Why is the Church compared
to Gold, since there is so much corruption in it? 51, 52 The Gospel, at its
first coming amongst a people, ordinarily prevails most, and why? 342, 343 A
flourishing state of the Gospel is not long free of errors and offenses
following it, 354, 355 Church- government opposed by Satan, and the reason
thereof, 82, 83, 84 That there is a Government in the Church, distinct and
independent from Civil-government, proven, and objections answered, 85, to 89
That it is not arbitrary for the Church to confederate for governing the
Church, but that which de jure ought to be done, 90 Absurdities wherewith a
Church- government, distinct from the Civil, is loaded, answered. 93, 94
Wherein the power of this government consists, and who is the proper subject
thereof, handled both negatively and positively, 97, 98, 99 How little reason
men have to be jealous of this government, 100, 101, 102, 103 Concerning the
nature and difference of common and saving grace, 120 How a man should try the
sincerity of his grace? 123 Baxter's opinion about the difference betwixt
common and saving grace, related, which does not really differ so far from the
common opinion, as at first it would seem to do, 125, 126 Two distinctions laid
down to clear the difference between common and saving grace and wherein the
difference lies. 127 That the habit of saving grace in the renewed, does
d^ffer from any thing which can be in the unrenewed. 129, 130 That there is a
difference also between the acts of a gracious man, and acts of any other,
proven by instances and arguments, 131, to 139 The trial of grace by its kind
is safest, and that which discovers hypocrisy best; this is Christ's way, the
contrary is attended with inconveniences, 133, 134 Grace is a necessary
qualification for a Minister, and in what respects; which is much to be
regarded, both in peoples calling him, and in Presbyteries admitting him;
neither is it impossible to take trial herein; and what length may be attained
and aimed at in this trial: which does not infer, but overturn the rigid way of
trying Church Members, 202, to 209 The grace of our Lord Jesus is that which a
gracious man wishes to himself and others, as that which is comprehensive of
all happiness, 781, 782
H
IT is not indifferent for persons to hear whom they will; and the evils that
attend it. 64 When new errors may be esteemed old heresy. 155 Heresy and
error wait ordinarily upon the Churches outwardly prosperous condition. 383
Heresy and error one of the greatest plagues whereby God in His holy justice
punishes those who receive not the truth in love, ibid. Heresy and error a
terrible judgment, and what the nature of it is? 422 The heresies of the
Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians, etc. when and how suppressed 536, 537 Who they
are whom Heretics seek mainly to seduce. 166 What an excellent condition it is
to be in Heaven. 394 Some beginning of Heaven here, and wherein it consists,
402 How we are to understand the passing away of the Heaven and the Earth, and
what this new Heaven is? 753, 754 Whether the Heavens and Earth which now are,
be substantially changed, ibid. Some things premitted to the glorious
description of Heaven. 757 Heavens happiness set forth and described. 759, 760
A more particular amplification of Heavens happiness, 761, to 772 Where Hell
is, and whether any material fire be there? 739 No coming to Heaven without
holiness, 763, 764 How we are to understand the number of ten horns. 648 The
type of the white horse explained, 340, 341 The type of the red horse, 344, 345
To what time these persecutions relate, which are prophesied of under the red
horse, 346 What the type of the black horse imports, 349, 350 What we are to
understand by the type of the pale horse, with the difference which is amongst
Interpreters in the application of this Prophecy to a particular time, 355,
356, 357 In what respects hypocrisy is worse than the want of profession, 212
The characters of hypocrisy, 219 How a hypocrite comes to have such high
thoughts of himself, 219, 220 If a hypocrite can discern his own hypocrisy,
ibid. How a Minister may discern a hypocrite, and how he should deal with him,
221, 222
I
What is meant by the new Jerusalem, 195 A threefold Jerusalem in Scripture,
and why Heaven is held forth under that name? 758 The description of the new
Jerusalem, and what is to be understood by its coming down from Heaven? ibid.
The conversion of the Jews, who are called the Kings of the East, foretold,
617, 618 Whether the Jews are to be restored to their former possessions after
their conversion to the faith? 619, 620 What Iezabel and her doctrine was, 162
The differences which are amongst the Popish Doctors about worshipping of
Images, 456, 457 The worshipping of Images, according to the grounds of Popery,
proven to be Idolatry, 458, 459 The Heathens and Jews had the same pretenses in
worshipping their Images, which are alleged by Papists, 459, 460 The
worshipping of Images, proven to be Idolatry from the second Command, 462 Image
of the Beast: See Beast. How to try an Impulse to the work of the Ministry,
whether it be from the Spirit or not? 55, 56, 57 Imputation of righteousness
an instantaneous act, 248 When a storm is to come upon the world, Christ
interceedeth for His People. 406 What Intercession imports, cleared from
Scripture, 407, 408 How Christ executes the office of an Intercessor now in
Heaven, ibid. What things Christ's Intercession does include, 408, 409 Whether
Christ before His incarnation did execute the office of an Intercessor? ibid.
The difference betwixt Christ's Intercession before and after His incarnation,
409, 410 How the consolation flowing from Christ's Intercession is to be
improven by Believers, 410, 411 Whom we are to understand by the children of
Israel, mentioned, Chap. 7. verse. 4. and what is meant by the particular
distribution of them in so many Tribes, and so many thousands of every Tribe,
386, 387 The scope of the distribution of Israel in Tribes, and why some Tribes
are omitted in this distribution, is further cleared, 389 Believers under the
New Testament are Gods Israel, 390 How the rigid execution of Justice upon the
damned may stand with the mercy of God, 584 The last Judgment described, the
preparation to it, the parties judged, the manner of procedure, and the
sentence it self, 740, 741, 742 What young ones have to be judged for. 742
Christ's Righteousness, the meritorious cause of our Justification: Faith is
necessary thereto, and the only condition thereof, with which works do not
concur. 235, 236, to 248 Justification not a continued act. 242, 243 That a man
is truly justified though his sins after Justification be not pardoned, while
committed and mourned for. 259 A short view of the Popish way of Justification,
with the absurdities which follow upon that way. 586, to 593
K
What is meant by the Key of David given to Christ. 191 What we are to
understand by giving the keys of the bottomless pit to the fallen star. 437
What is signified by the Kingdoms of the world, and how they become the Lords,
and his Christ's? 507 That by Kingdoms and Nations, is meant the generality and
body of such Kingdoms and Nations; and by their becoming the Lords, is
understood a special Church State and relation, proven. 511, 512, 513 Why
Believers are called Kings, and what that name obliegeth them to? 22, 23 Who
the Kings of the east are, what it is to prepare their way, and how it is done?
617, 618 What kind of Government we are to understand by Kings? 641 What is
meant by the seventh Kings continuing a short space? 642 A description of the
ten Kings, who are held forth by the ten horns. 648* 649 The war of the ten
Kings with the Lamb, His victory over them, with a description of His
followers. 649, 650 Whether the prophecy of the coming of the ten Kings be yet
fulfilled? the affirmative proven by several Arguments. 650, 651
L
HOw death and hell are said to be cast into the lake? 747, 748 Why Christ is
called a Lamb? 286 Who this Bride the Lambs wife is, that is made ready; what
this readiness is, and how she is made ready? 693, 694 What it is to be called
to the Marriage-supper of the Lamb? 694 Learning necessary for a Minister so
far as it implies acquaintance with the things of God, that it is to be
attained in the way of studying, and that it is lawful to do so. 200, 201, 202
That these Locusts which came out of the smoke, Chap. 9. verse. 3. were
Churchmen, is cleared, and why they are compared to Locusts, with a description
of them. 438, 439 A particular description of these Locusts, with the
explication of the several parts of that description. 440, 441 The Government
of these Locusts described, and their King. ibid. The object plagued by these
Locusts. 442 Lord's Day, See Day.
M
OF the rise of Mahomet. 453 Magistrates not the subject of Church power, with
several considerations set before them in reference thereto. 97, to 103
Magistrates should not tolerate corrupt Teachers. 164 Manna, what is imported
thereby, and why called hidden? 159 What a Martyr is? and that it is not every
suffering which will denominate a man so. 361, 362 Whether the Martyrs who
shall reign one thousand years, be such as suffered under heathen persecution?
or these who suffered under the beasts tyranny? or such as suffered under both?
720 How the Angels come in to praise the Mediator? 293, 294 Every one not
proposed by JEHOVAH to the Mediator, to be redeemed by Him. 300 The method how
the benefits purchased by Christ's death are applied to the Redeemed. 307, 308
How Michael and the Dragon fight? who their Angels were? with a narration of
the event of the war; and the song of triumph following the victory, with the
parts thereof. 526, 527, 528 How a Minister may be clear as to the discharge of
the Ministry in such and such a place, as also in carrying such a message. 56,
60 A Minister of the Gospel stands under a threefold relation. 104 That the
relation of every Minister is to the Church universal, before this or that
particular Congregation. 105 That the last is not perpetual to a Minister.
ibid. What it is that makes a particular relation between a Minister and a
particular flock, ibid. Several conclusions laid down to clear the nature of a
Ministers ty, to a particular Congregation, 106, 107 That a Minister may exerce
ministerial acts, without the bounds of his own Congregation, and that
authoritatively, cleared and proven; and the absurdities which follow on the
contrary, 109, 110, 111 That a Minister may, have an eminent name while yet he
is but dead, and how it comes? 177, 178, 179 Reasons why a Minister may be
cryed-up for gifts, and have a name, and please himself with these, when faulty
before God. 180 What things are requisite to make a Ministers work perfect
before God. 182 That an unsound hypocritical man may be a Minister of Christ,
cleared, and continued, 187 That gifts may be in exercise with a Minister,
where there is little or no Grace, 187, 188 That such a Ministers gifts may
have some fruit, and yet but some, and often very little. ibid. That the
Ordinances dispensed by such Ministers, are not polluted to the person,
notwithstanding of their unsoundnesse, 189 How a Minister may discern his own
deadness, even when things seem to go well with him in public, ibid. What a
dead Minister would do for recovering of himself out of that condition, 189,
190 How a Minister may know if an effectual door be opened to him, and what
way he would improve that? 196, 197 Three things required to qualify a person
for the Ministry, 199 A ministerial gift, what it is? and what it includes?
199, 200 Some rules to be observed by Ministers in their choice of Texts and
Doctrines, 472, 473 Whether a Minister may lawfully preach over and over the
same Doctrine, with some rules about it, 475, 476 Why faithful Ministers are a
torment to the men of the world? and why a profane people would be glad to be
rid of an honest Minister, and yet well pleased with an hirel^ng, 488, 489 The
reasons why sometimes the Lord suffers His Ministers to be trod upon at the
very entry to their witnessing, and Reformation to get a sorer dash, than if
the establishment thereof had never been intended? 489, 490 What is understood
by Mountains in Scripture, 423 The Mountains on which the woman sits,
described, 639, 640 What we are to understand by finishing the mystery of God.
467
N
NIcolaitans, what they hold, how their doctrine did agree with the doctrine of
Balaam? what the hatred of their deeds was, and what is meant by Christ's
fighting against them by the sword of His mouth? 79, 80, 157 What it is to
count the number of the Beast, 566 How the number of a man is to be taken,
ibid. How the particular number of 666. is to be understood, ibid. Some
general considerations for understanding this number. 567 Why the particular
number of 666. is mentioned? and why we are commanded rather to reckon his
number than his mark or name? 570, 571
O
OMega, what is imported thereby, 25 Why Christ so often designed by it, vid.
Alpha. Whether ordination in the Church of Rome makes a man no Minister of
Christ? 483 The faith of an outgate, the best way to bear a trial. 393
P
Whom we are to understand by that innumerable company who stand before the
Throne with Palms in their hands, to what state of the Church it relates, and
if to the state of the Church-militant; wherefore is it that this condition is
set down under expressions, seemingly only suitable to the Church-triumphant?
391, 392 That Papacy is the seventh and last government of Rome, proven, and
some objections to the contrary answered, 645, 646 A view of the rise,
progress and nature of the Papal Kingdom, and the time about which it began
to appear, 442, 443 444 A Papist, as such, living and dying according to the
complex principles of the doctrine and worship followed in Popery, cannot be
saved. 585 The grounds that render the salvation of such a Papist impossible,
ibid. The way laid down by Papists for justifying a sinner before God, 586,
587, 588 The first Period of the militant Church which begins with the
seals, is to be fixed at the close of the persecution by heathens; with a
caution added concerning this, 331 The Period between the trumpets and the
vials, is to be fixed at the Lords beginning to pursue Antichrist, 331 The
remarkablnesse of Gods judgment upon persecuters, 376 Persecuters often
punished in this life, 377 The terriblnesse and inevitablnesse of Gods wrath
against persecuters, 377, 378 How it comes to pass that persecution so
ordinarily follows the Gospel, 347 The principal occasion upon which the
primitive persecutions were raised, ibid. The persecution of the Church is
particularly ordered and bounded by God, 348 The sin of persecution shall be
most certainly punished, 367, 368 Gods people may continue long under
persecution 368 That there are three Persons in the Godhead, 6 The several
steps how the Pope rose to his temporal greatness under the pretext of
Religion, 558, 559 The Pope, the image of the beast under a civil notion, 561
Of the Popes civil power, 563, 564 That the power assumed by the Pope and given
to him, is contrary to the Word of God, 662, 663, 664 Of the Popes succession
to Peter, 664, 665 Peace with God not attainable by the Popish justification,
proven. 590, 591, 592 The way of Popery sinful in it self. 585 According to
the principles of Popery, a sinner can never have his sins removed nor be at
peace with God. 586 Whether all these who lived under Popery be excluded from
salvation? A fourfold distinction. 593, 594 The great variety of
Interpretations which is amongst Popish Doctors, of this City, Whore, Beast and
Kings for saving the Pope from being Antichrist, and the Church of Rome from
being the whore, 667, 668, 669 Rules for differencing what was ordinary from
what was extraordinary in the Practice of Christ and the Apostles. 116, 117
What is to be thought of that form of Prayer, O Mediator, plead for me. 15, 16
The Prayer of the souls under the altar, and the return that is given, with the
reason of Gods delaying to execute present judgment on persecuters. 364, 365,
366 Gods people may Pray for vengeance on persecuters. 368 The Prayers of the
People of God, and His peremptory decrees, not inconsistent even when the
decree aims at one thing, and the prayer at another, upon the matter
inconsistent with that. 369 There is no efficacy in the Prayers of the Saints
without Christ's Intercession. 406 A time of trouble, is a special time of
Praying. ibid. Christ perfumeth all the Saints Prayers; What an encouragement
that is to pray, as also it directs us how to Pray. 407 Judgments, even
spiritual judgments, of Error, Schism, Division, etc. may follow a Praying
frame of Gods people, and how that comes to pass? 415 Directions concerning
Preaching. 260 to 266 No gift can warrant one to take on the office of an
authoritative Preacher, though in some particulars Gods mind should be
extraordinarily revealed unto him. 471 As God may furnish some with gifts in
more than an ordinary way for Preaching, so may He, and uses He to thurst them
out in a mixed way, to exercise these gifts for the edification of His Church.
472 Presbyter, Bishop, and Angel, all one in Scripture, vid. Angel. That there
were ordinary Presbyters in the Apostles days. 231, 232, 233 What an evil
Pride is amongst Churchmen, to whom it is specially incident, and how it
hurts the Church? 426, 427 Why Believers are called Priests. 22 What sort of
Professors these are, described by earth, sea and trees, chap. 7. 382, 383
Prophecy two ways taken. 4 That part of the Revelation which is properly
Prophetical, begins at the sixth Chapter; where, of the scope and object of
the prophecy, with the series of the story. 326 Some things in the general
observable concerning the three principal Prophesies in this Book, to wit, of
Seals, chap. 6. of Trumpets, chap. 8, 9. of Vials, chap. 16. 328 Some reasons
proving the principal Prophesies not to be so contemporary with one another,
as if each of them did hold forth a view of the Gospel Church, from the
beginning to the end of the world, with some cautions about this. 328, 229, 330
The Prophecy of the Seals and Trumpets, hold forth the trouble of the Church;
and that of the Vials, the ruin of her enemies. ibid. The explicatory
Prophesies shown to be contemporary with, and comprehended under the three
principal Prophesies, 331, 332 There is now no gift of Prophecy either for
bringing forth any truth not formerly revealed; nor can one be warranted by any
revelation now to do a thing simply condemned in the Word. 470 Prophecy taken
for an immediate revealing of Gospel Truths and mysteries, is now ceased, so
that there is neither such a gift, nor such an office. 470 In what sense
Prophecy may be said to continue in the Church. 471 No gift of Prophecy now
can warrant one to set down his light authoritatively, although it be truth, as
Canonick Scripture. ibid. The explicatory Prophecy of the Revelation and some
things premitted for understanding thereof. 627
R
WHat is meant by the Rainbow round about Gods Throne. 271 That it is not
indifferent for men to read what Books they will, and some directions in this.
64, 65 What is imported in Christ's redeeming. 290. 297 Whether the Doctrine of
universal or special Redemption be more comfortable. 305 The absurdities
which follow upon conditional Redemption. 318, 319 Arguments pleading for a
conditional Redemption of all, answered. 320, 321 The mould of conditional
Redemption does not remove the difficulties which are alleged to follow upon
the contrary, proven by several Arguments. 322, 323, 324, 325 By the way of
conditional Redemption Ministers are not warranted to make the offer of the
Gospel more large than the contrary gives them ground to do. 324 Christ's
personal reign, See Christ. What it is to reign with Christ. 732 Remission of
sins not from eternity. 250 Giving space to repent will neither prove any
ability to repent, nor any purpose in God that such shall be saved, and yet it
makes men more inexcusable. 169, 170 Repentance three ways considered, 249
That Repentance is simply necessary in order to the pardon of sin, 250 How
Repentance does not concur for obtaining pardon of sin, cleared, 251, 252 And
how it does concur. 253 That though Repentance taken in a large sense may be
called the condition of the Covenant, yet it is not so properly, 254, 255, 256
That Repentance is necessary for a justified person's obtaining of pardon of
sins committed after Justification, 257 What measure of Repentance is
necessary, ibid. Several distinctions of Repentance laid down. 258, 259 If
Reprobates do enjoy any benefit of Christ's purchase? 309 The first Resurrection
how taken. 733, 734 The qualifications and privileges of those who shall be
partakers in the first Resurrection, 734, 735 The Lord may now reveal Himself
to some, in giving them the gift of foretelling some events before they come to
pass, 470 Reasons for undertaking the Exposition of the Revelation, the
division of the Book, the authority of it, John the Apostle the penman
thereof, why this Book is called the Revelation? and why a prophecy? 1, 2, 3,
4 Why the Revelation is directed particularly to the seven Churches of Asia, 20
Some considerations for clearing the prophetical part of the Revelation, 267
The matter contained in the Revelation divided into two parts. 327 The whole
Revelation as prophetical contained in that Book sealed with seven Seals.
ibid. The Righteousness of Christ the immediate meritorious cause of our
Justification, and that it is immediately imputed, 235 That our Legal and
Evangelical Righteousness do not differ, Christ being both, 245 What is meant
by giving of white Robes to the souls under the altar. 366 The grounds upon
which Rome challenged precedence. 425 Rome recovereth and preserves Dominion
and grandour only by the Popes means, 561, 562 Rome designed by the City upon
seven hills, with some objections to the contrary answered, 640 That Rome has
been under seven sorts of Government whereof Papacy is the last, 643, 644 That
Papacy is the seventh Government of Rome, proven. 644, 645 That Rome under the
Pope, is the whorish Church. ibid. That the Church of Rome is the whorish
Church and Antichrists seat, and that the Pope is the Antichrist, with some
objections to the contrary, cleared, 660, 661, 662, 663, 664 The authors in the
destruction of Rome is not the Antichrist 670 The defection whereof Rome is
found guilty, is the same with Antichrists, and that this defection whereof
Antichrist and Rome are guilty, is not a total falling from Christianity in
the profession of it, but a corrupting the principal truths of Christianity.
670, 671 That defection has already seized on the Church of Rome, proven, 672,
673 If any of Gods people be de facto in Rome before its destruction, 680 The
necessity and warrant for separating from the Church of Rome, 681 May not one
abide in Rome now and not be partaker of her plagues? 681 It is no schism to
quit fellowship with Rome, 682 The lamentation which is amongst Romes friends
for her fall. 684 Why Kings so much lament Romes overthrow, 684, 685 The
lamentation of the Merchants and Shipmen for Romes ruin, and who these
Merchants and Ship-men are, 685, 686 The greatness of Romes ruin, held forth
by the great joy of the people of God at her fall, ibid. The amplification of
Romes destruction, and the causes thereof, 686, 687 The sins for which Rome is
destroyed, are neither the sins of Rome as heathen, nor as under that fancied
Antichrist to come, but the sins of Rome as Popish, 687, 688 Much of the Romish
pomp derived from the heathens, in imitation of their high Priests, 563
S
THe Saints happy condition set out in several circumstances, 399, 400 What the
reign of the Saints does import, 709 That this reign of the Saints is to be
spiritually understood, though not only. 709, 710 More particularly wherein
this good condition of the Saints does consist, 711, 712 Some caveats about the
thousand years reign of the Saints, ibid. Three considerations more added for
understanding this good condition of the Saints 713, 714 Whether all the Saints
partake of this good condition, or, if it be a special privilege of Martyrs
and sufferers? 718 Whether these living Saints who are raised to reign, be the
same individual persons who did suffer; or, if it be to be understood of Saints
in their succession? The latter is cleared and proven, 718, 719 Whether bruit
and senseless creatures shall be partakers of the good condition of the Saints,
720, 721 The good condition of the Saints after Satan is bound, described at
length, and the continuance thereof, 731 Some things premitted for
understanding of Satan's being bound, 703 A fourfold dominion or reigning of
Satan mentioned in the Word, 705, 706 Satan's restraint, mentioned here, is not
to be understood absolutely and simply in all respects, but it is to be taken
for the most eminent restraint from Christ's birth till His second coming, 706,
707 The description of the party that binds Satan, the execution of his
errand, and the reason why Satan is bound for a set time, 728, 729 Satan's
deceiving no more, is not to be understood simply, 729 How we are to understand
Satan's being loosed out of prison, the time thereof, the event of his gathering
his followers together to battle, 736, 737, 738 What is employed when Christ's
death is called a satisfaction. 296 That it is truly and properly a
satisfaction, proven, 297, 298 What is understood by Sea in the Scripture, 424
The Sea of Glass, See Glass.
What is meant by these words, There was no more Sea, 754 What is requisite for
understanding the Seals and types in them, 338, 339, 340 The scope of the fifth
Seal, 360 By the opening of the sixth Seal there is a dreadful judgment
foretold: where, some things are premitted for understanding thereof, 370, 371,
372 That the judgment held forth by the sixth Seal, is a judgment upon the
Roman Empire and its heathen and persecuting Emperors, cleared; and some
considerations added for confirmation, 373 What is to be understood by that
sealing, spoken of, chap. 7, 380 Why those who are sealed are called the
servants of God; where, of a twofold seal, 388 Sealing against error no common
privilege, 390 The sentence pronounced at the last day, just, 744 The sentence
pronounced in behalf of the Godly, a just sentence, yet exclusive of all merit.
745, 746 Wherefore works are mentioned in the passing of the sentence, and not
faith ibid. Separation from a Church unlawful for the faults of particular
members, though not censured by the Church-guides, 172, 173 Separation from the
Church of Rome, See Church of Rome. Some considerations whereby the meaning of
these words, thrust in the sickle, is cleared. 597, 598, 599 The song of the
Church for her delivery from Antichrist, the matter of the song, the
description of the singers, their several properties. 574, 575, 576 What we are
to understand by the seven Spirits; why called seven? and why they are said to
be before the throne? 4 The Spirit may be expressly prayed unto. 10 What it is
to be in the Spirit. 29 If there be such a thing as the haunting of evil
spirits in desolate places? 679 Why Ministers are called stars? 50, 51, 176,
177 Why Christ is called the morning- star? 174, 175 What judgment is it which
is threatened by the falling of that great star, called wormwood? and whether it
be any particular heresy; and if a particular one, to what heresy it is most
probably applicable? 429 What that star is, chap. 9.1. and what is employed in
its falling from Heaven to Earth? 436 The power given to the fallen star, with
the exercise of that power, and the effects that followed thereupon. 437, 438
What we are to understand by the white stone. 159 Why the Word is compared to
a sword, 40 What is meant by Christ's fighting against the Nicolaitans with the
sword of His mouth, 157 In what respects Christ's countenance is as the shining
Sun? 40, 41 What is meant by the darkening of the Sun? 437 The Supremacy of
the Roman Bishop was not pleaded at first from divine institution, 426 A human
sympathy in the Man-Christ with Believers, and the properties of that
sympathy, 411, 412 A particular consideration of Mede his Sy^chronisms,
showing wherein the Author does agree with him in fixing of periods, and
wherein he differs from him, 333, 334, and seq.
T
WHat we are to understand by the Temple of God being opened in Heaven? 509,
605 What is meant by Gods Throne, and why the seven spirits are said to be
before the Throne? and what by the Rainbows being round about it? 4, 5, 270,
271 Toleration not approven of Christ, 156 How it comes that some zealous men
are ready to tolerate Error, though zealous against Scandals, 156, 157 Why
Christ is so much displeased at Ministers for tolerating corrupt teachers, and
that it is a thing reprovable in Magistrates also to tolerate them, 164, 165 No
Minister has power to transport himself from his particular charge; yet that
the Church may do it for her own greater good, proven, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116
That transportation is to be with great singleness and caution, with some
rules about it, 119 That there are three distinct Persons in the Trinity, and
that this is a fundamental Truth, 5, 6, 7, 8 What is imported by the voice of
a Trumpet as used by Christ, 32, 33 Though both the Seals and Trumpets hold
forth trouble to the Church, yet do they hold forth different troubles in time
and nature, and from different enemies, 330 The second general Prophecy of the
Book of the Revelation, comprehended under the first six Trumpets, 403 Some
things touching the connection of the Prophesies under the Trumpets with the
sixth Seal, 403, 404 Some circumstances preparatory to the sounding of the
seven Trumpets, 404, 405 Some considerations premitted for understanding the
Prophecy of the Trumpets, 416, 417 The Trumpets denote the state of the
Church: where, of their series and order, 418, 419 The Arian heresy and what
followed from it, and followed upon it, is especially holden forth by the first
Trumpet, 420, 421, 422 The second Trumpet holds forth the corruption of the
Government and Governors of the Church, 424, 425 To what time the sounding of
the third Trumpet belongs, 429 To what Century the fourth Trumpet does
belong, 431 The judgment threatened by the fifth Trumpet, 434, 435 The
judgment threatened by the blowing of the sixth Trumpet, the rise of that
plague and the executioners thereof, 447 The consolation given to the People of
God to comfort them in these sad times under the fifth and sixth Trumpets, with
a description of the publisher of these glad tidings, 464, 465 The blowing of
the seventh Trumpet, and the identity thereof with the seven Vials: where, some
objections to the contrary are answered, 504, 505, 506 The event of this
Trumpet is a song of thanksgiving for the deliverance of the Church; where, the
singers their posture, the matter of their song, and the ground of their praise
is set forth, 507, 508 The dominion of the Turks is to be understood as the
judgment threatened by the sixth Trumpet; the reasons why it is applied to the
Turks, with an answer to some objections made against this, 448, to 454 The
overthrow of the Turks prophesied of under the sixth Vial, with answers to some
objections on the contrary, 620 That there is an indefinit time understood by
these forty and two months, Chap. 11.2. is cleared, and some exceptions
considered, 479, 480 Why the same time is changed from days to months, and
from months to years, 482
V
THe preparation to the prophecy of the seven Vials; where, the judgment is
set forth in its rise, the instruments are described, their furniture and
concomitants, with the execution of the judgment is set down, 605, 606 Some
general considerations premitted for understanding of the Vials, 607, 608 The
object plagued by these Vials and the effect following thereupon, 608, 609 The
pouring-forth of the first Vial, with the effects thereof, ibid. The second
Vial, with its object, to wit, the sea, and what is signified thereby, and the
effects thereof, 610, 611 The third Vial, with its object, to wit, the rivers
and fountains, and what we are to unstand by these, with the effects thereof,
and the congratulations that followed thereupon, 611, 612 Why these
congratulations are marked at the pouring-forth of the third Vial, ibid. The
pouring-forth of the fourth Vial, the object thereof, to wit, the Sun, and what
we are to understand by it, together with the effects of the same, 613, 614 The
fifth Vial poured-forth, with its object and effects, 614, 615 Some helps for
understanding the sixth Vial, the object upon which it is poured-forth, and the
effect which follow, 615, 616 Whether the last Vial brings judgment on the
Beast alone; or, the last plagues on the world, including the last judgment:
what is the object thereof, and the effects which follow, 625, 626 The event of
the sixth Vial more fully explained, Chap. 19. and that this does belong to the
sixth Vial, cleared, 688, 689 What is meant by that, he that is unjust, let him
be unjust still? 766
W
OF the Waldenses, and what the Popish writers charged them with, 501, 502, 503
What is meant by the Waters being turned into blood, 424 Some things observed
concerning the Whore; where, it is cleared that by the Whore, Rome is
understood, 628, 629 The judgment of the Whore, and some of her properties,
also what the name Whore does import. 630, 631 What is understood by winds in
scripture, 379 What is particularly to be understood by these Winds, mentioned,
Chap. 7. 380 The object and the instruments of these judgments signified by
the four Winds, 381, 382 The consolation which the Lord gives to strengthen
and guard His people against that storm and judgment held forth by these four
Winds: the instrument of this consolation, the place whence he comes, the
manner of executing his office, the matter of his cry, the objects about which
he takes care, together with the effects of the execution of his commission,
385, 386 This consolation against these winds set forth more particularly in
several circumstances, 392, 393 Why Christ is called the faithful Witness? 5
What the two Witnesses denote? where, of their work, number and the power that
is given them, 481, 482 The prophecy of the two witnesses groundlesly applied
by Papists to Enoch and Elias, and no less absurdly by Grotius to two Bishops
in Jerusalem, ibid. Who these two Witnesses were whom the Lord acknowledges
for His Prophets, or how they could be so accounted of, having one common call
with Antichrists followers, 483 Why the two Witnesses are not only called the
two Olives, but the two Candlesticks also, 484 Where Christ has a politic
body of a Church, there He has still Witnesses in it. ibid. Of the killing of
the two Witnesses, by whom it is done, and how the beast is said to make war
against them now, 485, 486 How the Witnesses testimony is said to be finished,
when Ministers testifying is a continual work, and how the beast can be said
to prevail more against the witnesses, at the beginning of his fall than in the
time of his reign, 485, 486 The place described where the witnesses are to be
slain, with the properties thereof which are to be understood mystically, the
satisfaction that men had at the death of these witnesses, and the continuance
thereof, 487, 488 The resurrection of the witnesses, and what is signified
thereby, with the circumstances thereof, and the glorious condition of the
Church which followed thereupon, set forth by several concomitants that waited
upon this resurrection, 491, 492, 493 If the killing of the Witnesses be past,
or if these 1260. days of the Gentiles treading underfoot the outter Court,
and the Prophets prophesying in sackcloth be expired? and if so, how this
prophecy is fulfilled; where, some objections moved against the affirmative,
are considered, and the time for the beginning and end of these days is more
particularly fixed, 494, 495, 496, 497 That there were ever some Witnesses and
a Church kept pure from Antichrists abominations until the time of
Reformation, and that about the time when it began, the witnesses were very few
and in a low condition, proven, 498, 499 Some application of the witnesses
being killed, and of their resurrection afterward to the time when it was done,
500, 501 How Christ's head and hair are said to be like wool, 38 Some general
observations for clearing that vision of the woman's appearing in heaven, etc.
519, 520 What we are to understand by the Dragons watching the woman, and the
child, and who this woman and the child were, 520, 521 The woman described
and the event of her war with the Dragon, 521, 522 What is to be understood by
the woman's fleeing into the wilderness. 523 The woman that sits upon the
beast described more generally and more particularly. 633, 634, 657, 658 Why
the devil seeks to engage Women, and put them upon the top of sinful designs,
162 Christ's commendation of the whole Word of God in general, and particularly
of this Book, together with a severe commination incase of making any addition
to it, or taking any thing away from it, 779, 780, 781 Worthiness how many
ways considered. 184, 185 How to apprehend of God in the Trinity of Persons
rightly, when we worship him with some rules to direct us therein, 9 God the
only object of divine worship, 11 In what respect Christ as Mediator is the
object of worship, and in what not, 12, 13 And how prayers may be formed
expressly to Him, 14, 15, 16 What may encourage us to make use of Him in our
worship, 17, 18, 19 The several sorts of idolatrous Worship, and the way how to
try it, 455 Worship does imply three things, and the kinds of lawful worship
mentioned in the Scriptures, 695 Whether John sinned in Worshipping the Angel?
what kind of sin it was? how he fell into it? with the judgment of some Popish
Doctors about this matter, 695, 696 Of the Popish Worshipping of Angels and
Saints, and what is to be thought of that mid- worship between civil and
religious invented by them, 697, 698 That none are to Write without a clear
call thereto, and what is sufficient, what nor, to clear a man's call to Write?
61, 62, 63
Y
Whether by the thousand years of the Saints reign we are to understand a
definit or indefinit time, 722 Whether these ^ears be wholly past or wholly to
come, or now current, with the diversity of opinions in this matter, 723 What
is to be determined concerning the beginning and close of these 1000. years,
ibid. If the beginning of these 1000. years be to be reckoned from the
beginning of the vials, or is it to be restricted to the seventh vial. 725 The
beginning of the thousand years falls to be about the year 1560. where, some
objections to the contrary, are answered, 727
Z
ZEal often less against error than scandalous practices. 156, 157
FINIS.

