The ASSURANCE OF THE FAITHFUL: OR, The Glorious Estate Of the Saints in
Heaven, DESCRIBED: And the certainty of their future Happiness manifested by
REASON and Scripture. By M. D. Bachelor of Divinity.

Parva non sunt contemnenda fine quibus magna constare non possunt. Seneca.
Ratio fide praecedente plurimum valet. Aug. Epist. 222. Ratio subsequatur fidem
ut intelligat fidelis quid credat. Ambros. de fide contra Arrianos. LONDON.
Printed by J. R. for Edward Man, at the Sign of the Swan in the Strand, near
York-house. 1670.

To the Right Honorable Lady ELIZABETH, Countess Dowager of Northumberland, etc.
MADAM,
I Was afraid to venture these Meditations from the Pulpit to the Press,
through a mixed multitude alone without a Protection; for although they have
had the happiness to be well received in a famous Audience, especially from the
Persons of Quality who have persuaded me to suffer them to appear in public: I
knew not but that they might meet with some morose and ill-natured Zoilus,
whose common practice is to bespatter the best approved Writings of our age;
but since your Honor favors them with your acceptance, I have been delivered
from all apprehension: I fear no more the mistakes of the ignorant, and the
malice of our sensual Wits, because I am certain that every one will have some
esteem and respect for those Labors, that are honored with the Approbation
and Allowance of a person of that singular Wisdom and Piety; And not only my
private benefit has obliged me to this Dedication, but also that of my Friends
unto whom I do not only discover the unspeakable Excellencies of Heaven, but
besides I reveal unto them the means of attaining unto that blessed End. The
former they shall find in the Sermon, and the latter they may meet with in the
Preface, in your Honor, and in your most Exemplary life; A life that makes you
appear an Ornament amongst our English Nobility, and especially to the most
noble Families that are related unto your Honor, The most noble Family of the
Howards.
One of them God has blessed with a numerous increase of Persons of the greatest
worth: A Life worthy of our admiration, in that it shows us Piety, Virtue,
Wisdom, Goodness, and Honor, as so many Celestial Lights shining together in
the same Sphere; A Miracle in Grace as well as Nature! A Blessing it is to our
Nation in this unhappy Age, that we have some such Noble Souls, that seem to be
Angels Incarnate, sent amongst us by the Divine Appointment on purpose to
maintain the Honor of Religion against the encroachings of Schism and
Profaness. It is unto such Heavenly Spirits, Madam, that Christ promises a
Crown of Life; not only to encourage them in a faithful management of his, and
their Spiritual concerns, but also to oblige them to a total Resignation of
themselves and interests to the disposition of his Providence, and to enable
them to bear worldly misfortunes, and present affliction with less pain. I do
therefore offer the description of that extraordinary felicity unto your
Honor, as a seasonable meditation, where your Piety, Madam, may meet with
Antidotes able to preserve your Noble Mind from the sense of all evil events:
And as the Original shall one day be worthy your acceptance, be pleased now to
look favorably upon this Representation, which will afford your Honor a sight
of those precious Jewels that enrich the Heavenly Crown. Here is also the
Assurance that Faith and Reason do give of that Glorious Estate unto the
Faithful: God preserve your Honor in much health and prosperity, with all your
Noble Relations; It is the hearty desire, and shall always be the Prayer of

Your Honors most Faithful and devoted Servant M. D'Assigny.

The Assurance of the Faithful: OR, Heavens Glory made manifest. In a Sermon
upon these words of the 2d Chapter of the Revelations, the latter part of the
10th verse.
I will give thee a Crown of life.
WHen a Glorious Victory is assured, what faint-hearted Soldier will shun the
encounter? When the price of a Race is inestimable, who will not run to obtain
it? or when Rewards are promised, whose acquisition will procure unto us
immortal satisfactions, who will delay the performance of the Task? who will
not be encouraged to labor after the purchase? Such is the nature of the
Victory over our Spiritual enemies of the price of Virtues race, and of those
Celestial Rewards that invite as to the accomplishment of our great Task of
obedience to the supreme Authority. They are such as becomes an Infinite bounty
to bestow: such as have required both an Infinite power to create, and blood of
an infinite value to redeem. They are such as are carefully laid up in those
heavenly mansions where all things are suitable unto that Majesty, that
discovers it self there invested with an incomprehensible Glory. It seems
Christ the eternal Son of God, who is very well acquainted with these
supernatural Excellencies, had no mean esteem of their value and power, seeing
that he judges them sufficient to recompense, and able to encourage the Martyrs
in violent persecutions. He judges them worth their labors and sufferings.
Therefore in his letters to his seven beloved Churches of Asia minor, that were
threatened with the furious assaults of the enemies of the truth, he annexes to
his reproofs and exhortations a blessed declaration of the greatness of Heavens
glory, as the assured Reward of their faithfulness, that these future hopes
might fill them with the contempt of the present difficulties, raise their
spirits in the midst of temporal afflictions with the joyful expectation of
that inestimable happiness, and oblige them to encounter all opposition with an
inflexible courage and patience. These advantages promised to their
perseverance are many and glorious, yet he sums them up in such different
Titles as had some relation either to the present estate of those
Congregations, or unto those things that were most in esteem in those Regions
where they were situated. Unto the Ephesians, he presents them under the notion
of the fruits of the Tree of Life, either because the soils did yield most
excellent fruittrees, and especially one called by the Naturalists Arbor vitae,
whose fruit is of an extraordinary virtue, or because that Church was in a
decaying condition: Christ promises therefore Heaven as a Sovereign Remedy to
all the evils that did torment them, borrowing an expression from that
wonderful Tree that was appointed to preserve man in the estate of Innocence in
his perfection from all those weaknesses. Unto them of Pergamus Christ calls
the rewards of Heaven, a white Stone, because that City being a place of
Judicature, and the Residence of a Proconsul, they were acquainted with the
manner of absolving the accused, which was by casting a white stone into a Pot;
Christ thereby intimating the joys of the Saints in Heaven much like unto
those of a Criminal, when he received from his Judge a white stone of
absolution instead of a black one of condemnation which he had deserved. Thus
unto the Church of Smyrna for other reasons which we shall examine, he calls
the glories of Heaven, a Grown of life. This last name signifies more than
appears at the first aspect: you may perceive the superficial part of the
blessedness and glories of Heaven. It will be worth your while to know their
extraordinary value, that they may be also unto you an encouragement to Duty.
Both our Saviors goodness that holds them out unto us, and offers them to our
contemplation here, and to our fruition hereafter; and their own excellencies
do invite us to enquire into them, that we may know what we have to expect from
Gods liberality, and that accordingly we may order our endeavors. To the end
you may meet with satisfaction in this inquisition, we shall labor to
represent unto you the glorious estate of the Elect in Heaven with the same
Colors that it appears in my Text: And first we shall see what is this Crown
of life, and wherefore it is so called. Secondly, the Assurance that the Text
gives of this Estate unto the faithful, which we shall prove as well by Reason,
as the Authority of Scripture. But before we proceed, we shall make some few
observations.

It were no ordinary Presumption to engage in a perfect description of this
Crown of Life; when our weak capacities that are confined by our senses to this
lower sphere, cannot at present ascend to a full contemplation of celestial
bodies that enrich the Firmament, much less can we attain unto a clear
apprehension of higher and more divine objects. Their superlative excellency
frees them from the profanation and acquaintance of Judgments that converse
only amongst the meanest beings. An ancient Crecian petitioned the Heathen
gods, that he might be admitted to behold the Sun at a near distance. Fide non
caepitur, spe non attingitur, charitate non apprehenditur; acquiri potest,
estimari non potest vita eterna. Szeged.
It would be in vain to entertain the same curiosity in this case, and to
desire to come now to a perfect knowledge of this supernatural condition,
because whiles ignorance and prejudice do possess our Understandings, and
vanity our Wills, we are neither worthy nor capable to receive such sublime
notions. St. Paul's modesty therefore becomes us who are not favored with
unspeakable Visions; He dares not venture to describe those mysteries that were
reserved for his experience and sense: That eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, and that are not entered into the heart of man. Yet we must not so far
mistake the Apostles Practice, and our own Duty, as to make his discretion the
cause of our negligence, and to forbid all meditations of Heaven as unlawful,
because he recommends unto us sobriety in our inquiries, and as impossible
because of its distance from our climate. This respectful ignorance is
unseasonable in this unbelieving age: a friend unto Sensuality and Atheism,
and an enemy of those comforts which such considerations do yield to sweeten
the bitterness of our earthly sorrows. Besides, this were to condemn Christ's
intention, and to frustrate his design. Wherefore does he offer them to the
contemplation of his Churches, and proposes them as the assured recompense of
the labors of the faithful? Wherefore do the sacred Writers mention unto us so
often the advantages of the other life? but that we should know, admire, and
expect these Riches of Gods goodness; that we should endeavor to attain unto
them, and that the hopes of immortal Bliss might make us bear temporal
misfortunes, and the present unhappiness of the world with less repugnancy.
Heb. 12.2.
It is the design of St. Paul's Exhortation, Let us run, says he, the race that
is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith: who
for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross, despising the shame, and
is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. That we may follow this
glorious example of our Savior, and arrive at last at the same felicities,
they are showed unto us afar off: the distance as of all other objects that
present themselves to our senses, lessens their greatness, and our present
esteem of their worth; and those things that interpose between them and us,
occasions this ingenuous Confession of the Apostle, Now we see through a glass
darkly, we know in part, and we profess in part.

This imperfection proceeds partly from the weakness of Man's judgment, and
partly from the sublimity and excellency of the possessions of Heaven; which
are represented unto us by those earthly things that have but a faint
resemblance with their qualities and nature. Besides these advantages of the
life to come are as many as glorious, and therefore it is impossible to find a
perfect Relation, a perfect Image of the several parcels of Heavens Glory in
any one excellency of the World. When they should meet all in one Center, and
join their dispersed beams and powers, they would not be able to represent one
of the Rays of eternal felicity; and when such a significant word might be
invented that could comprehend all the comforts, the blessedness, and all the
pomp of the World; it would not be sufficient to show us the least part of the
happiness of this life. Diverse names are therefore borrowed from these earthly
vanities to shadow those realities, because of some weak relation that they
have with this blessed condition: Its Joys are expressed by a Marriage, its
Glory by the Sun and Stars, its Independency and Power by a Royalty, our
Holiness by the Priesthood, our abode by a City fenced with Rubies and
Diamonds, paved with Crystal and Saphyrs, and enriched with Gold and the most
precious Stones. Amongst the several Descriptions employed to give us a sight
of Heavenly Bliss, I find none of so large an extent, and of such an universal
Comprehension as that in my text, I will give thee a Crown of life. In which
words the sweetness and pleasures of that estate, the Glory, the Splendour, the
Majesty, and pomp of it do jointly appear together; for it is a life, a true
life, full of all innocent delights that will render it both real and pleasant,
and that will free us from all Syncopes that do now frequently interrupt our
life. Besides it shall be a Crown of life, the glories will be answerable to
the pleasures of it: it shall be a living Crown, Hebraisme.
as some will have the words rendted: Those excellent enjoyments that we shall
possess, and that supreme degree of honor unto which we shall be promoted
signified by this Crown, shall continue with us for all eternity in the same
unchangeable condition, therefore St. 1 Pet. 5.4.
Peter calls it a Crown of Glory that fades not away. 1 Cor. 9.25. (...).
And St. Paul (...). The Hebrew word used in such like occasions, to express
the sublimest felicity of Christ, and of his Saints, signifies as well the
plenty as the eternity of their advantages. He encompassed about. Psalm. 21.3.
We may hereby understand that this Crown of life shall entitle them to
innumerable and immortal satisfactions: it shall therefore be a true life. How
wrongfully do we abuse this pleasant Title in bestowing it upon the present
unworthy subsistency of the soul and body? O miserable estate! how vainly do we
flatter our beings with this grateful conceit? Can that ever be a life, that
drags us continually to our Grave, that causes us to die as soon as we begin
to breathe, and that is joined unto death by the inward Principles of our
existence? Can that be a life that carries death in its bosom, that makes us
sensible of a thousand deaths before we breathe forth the last gasp, and that
is interrupted by sleep, idleness, and sickness, (as by so many deaths) which
deprive us of the benefits of life, by which it is to be esteemed rather than
by the continuance of the soul with the body, at least in the judgment of a
wise Moralist, who hearing of a wicked man that was lately expired in a very
old age; Diu fuit, said he, sed non diu vixit. At this rate how unworthy is our
present subsistence of the pleasing and glorious title of life. This therefore
is promised in my text in opposition to that which we now lead to express the
excellency and reality of that Heavenly Life, free from those miseries which
now do attend us: Tolerantia transitoria Corona aeterna, pugna modica merces
immensa, poena levis gloria inestimabilis, dabo tibi post morzem pro morte
vitae aeternitatem Aug. de civit. Dei.
As if our Savior should thus compare them together for the encouragement of
the faithful. What if my interest does expose you to your enemies cruelty? what
if you are forced to lay down your lives in the maintenance of my cause? what
reason have you to prize so inconsiderable a loss? when the Exchange brings
unto you Returns of a more unspeakable value. Grudg not to part with this
shadow of life; Grieve not to surrender it: Refuse it not when I shall require
it: I have another life in reserve for you, whose advantages do as highly excel
those of this present being, as the Crown does the other enjoyments of the
body; a life both glorious and pleasant, Erit status omnium bonorum
aggregatione perfectus. Boethius de consol.
where nothing shall be wanting to increase your satisfactions, but cares,
trouble, and pain, which now do cause us to relish the sweetness of our earthly
pleasures. I will give thee, etc. This expression presents us with the greatest
variety of Excellencies. That they may better appear unto you, take a view of
them, and of that supernatural estate of Heaven in these following propositions.

1. It shall be an unseparable union of the soul and body for all eternity. We
shall live no more upon condition to die. The fear of death that does usually
torment us more than the sense, shall then cease with the cause: Men shall
never be disquieted with those importune Apprehensions that disturb us, as they
did Belshazzar in the midst of his carousing Cups, and that cause us to be
weary of life as that Roman was, who being pursued by the cruelty of the
Triumvirat, offered himself freely to his Enemies pleasure to be delivered by
death of the daily fear of dying.

But then we shall be secure both from the sense and apprehension of death, and
of all approaching evils; and we shall rest in that blessed Tranquillity that
shall never have cause to dread an alteration; there shall be no more divorce
made between the soul and body, it shall not be possible to separate that most
loving couple. Gods Wisdom and Power shall join them together in such a manner,
that neither Time nor any Accident shall be able to cause a separation. For
God, upon whose pleasure all his Creatures do depend, shall remove all deadly
principles, and grant us an eternal continuance; which shall proceed not only
from his immutable Decree, and immediate influence, but also from the nature
and manner of the union of the two parties, that shall no longer be entertained
by the assistance of the Creatures, and a supply from the Elements; but only
by a greater correspondency, by more spiritual and more suitable Embraces. At
present although the soul has a natural tendency to enliven, to move and
inform the body between them, there is a vast difference that can never consent
unto any conjunction without the mediation of the vital spirits extracted from
the more subtle and purer substance of the meats refined by their successive
concoctions. But then our Bodies shall depose, and cast off that gross and
earthly matter, and become more convenient companions of the soul by a nearer
assimilation to that Celestial being; For this mortal must put on immortality,
and this corruptible must put on incorruption, as St. Paul teaches at large in
the 1 Cor. 15 Chap. where he further declares the Mystery of the Resurrection,
and of the estate of our bodies, in the 42, 43, 44. Verses. The body is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised
in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural
body, it is raised a spiritual body. From hence we may discover the future
substance of our Bodies, which shall be almost as subtle as those earthly
Spirits raised by the ordinary systole and diastole, Market. lib. 1. par. 4.
clas. 4. quast. 120.
the two motions of the heart, which Spirits have the nearest access to the
soul of man, and by which it is tied to its present residence; for this blessed
life and its eternity is established upon a resemblance and nearer relation
between the soul and body, whose beings must be rendered more conformable before
they can be secured from a dissolution, or from the sense of violence; because
that only this conformity is able to render the communion unseparable, and to
free it by that means from the insults and affronts of all enemies. It is
therefore most certain that it shall not be in the power of any beings to put
us to the sufferance of pain; for as the pain which proceeds from the body is
derived from an apprehension or a possibility of separation from that being
upon which it depends, or from that which tends unto it: As the pain of the
soul does from a seeming or a real separation from God the fountain of all
good, or from that which stands us in some manner instead of God: It cannot be
imagined how they shall be able to suffer who are adorned with the qualities of
immortality, whose beings are free from alteration, and not subject to the
least weakness, and whose senses shall never receive any contrary impressions,
nor convey unto the appetite any evil apprehensions: Our bodies shall be no
more marked with wounds and scars, nor feel the effects of the enemies cruelty
and malice. What a glorious advantage is this? we shall be armed against the
assaults of all casualties: we shall be secure from all attempts: we shall no
more tremble at the sight of a danger: neither corruption within, nor injuries
from without shall be able to alter that perfect and happy constitution of our
beings: In one word, nothing shall ever interrupt or disturb us in the sweet
enjoyment of heavenly Bliss; For God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes,
Heb. 4.9.
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor shall there
be any more pain: for the former things shall be passed away: as is expressly
promised in Revel. 21.4. For that reason this glorious Estate is called a Rest,
because it shall free us from all inconveniences that now do increase our
labors: it shall not consist in a shameful cessation from all action, bur
rather from those troublesome and ungrateful operations, unto which our mortal
condition do now condemn us. Therefore it was typified under the Law by Moses
Sabbath, in which none were to be employed in servile work but were commanded
to consecrate that day in the service of God: it was also signified by the
structure of the Tabernacle, in which some learned Rabbis do take notice, that
Iron that is the emblem of War, affliction and trouble was not used, that being
the visible Type of this glorious Tabernacle of Heaven, where Gods presence
shall for ever dwell with his people: It intimates, that in this Immortal
Sanctuary not made with hands, In gloria coelesti mira serenitas perfecta
securitas aeterna foelicitas. Bernard. sup. cant. Sermon. 2.12.
no Iron shall be mingled with the Gold and Jewels that enrich and adorn Gods
Palace; no sorrow, no sickness, no disturbance, nor displeasure shall ever come
near us; but as a Father very well expresses himself: In Heaven there shall be
a wonderful tranquillity, a perfect security, and an eternal felicity.

So I pass to the next advantage of this Heavenly life, and that is, A perfect
Independency, and a freedom from the Creature; a freedom from all those wants
that do oblige us to crave assistance from inferior beings; a freedom from the
Elements, and their Authority, and from all obligations to mean subsistances;
for this blessed life shall advance us to that perfection that we shall not
stand in need of those things that we do now enjoy; we shall be enabled with
those glorious qualities that shall make us be content in the enjoyment of our
selves; and when something should be wanting to the accomplishment of our
happiness which we shall not possess in our selves, as we shall be promoted to
the fruition of God; we shall there find it in him; we shall there meet with
all that sweetness and variety of Excellencies of which we see but the shadows
in the Creature. Psalm. 36.8.
There we shall be abundantly filled with the fatness of his house: And we
shall drink out of the rivers of his pleasures. It is impossible that any thing
should be ever wanting to them that shall be admitted to a perfect communion
with God the Author and Creator of all things, to them who shall live under the
daily expressions of his mercy and goodness: His Almighty Power inclinable to
render them happy, shall continually supply and entertain them with immortal
enjoyments, and furnish them with those things that are not to be expressed by
the creature: 1 Cor. 12.4.
The Greatness of Gods liberality does make us conceive his Royal favors
somewhat proportionable to his Infinite Being. Alexander could not give so
little a sum to Pericles as 10 Talents: God will be no less noble to the
Children of his bosom, to those that he is obliged to raise to the highest
felicity. But those things that shall serve to increase our satisfactions shall
not be like those that we now possess: they shall not put us to any expense to
obtain them, nor to any trouble to preserve them; they shall not weary and
torment us as earthly riches do, nor oblige us to abase our selves; besides
they shall have this other advantage, they shall proceed immediately from God:
It is far more pleasant to drink of the Fountain, than to sup of the stream; it
is a greater satisfaction to behold the Sun, than to feel some indirect
reflections of the beams: O how pleasant, and what an Angelical satisfaction
will it be to continue for ever in the loving embraces of that gracious God
from whom all good is derived? What advantage will it be that we shall there
relish true pleasures without the least mixture of evil? for they shall
immediately flow unto us from Gods Essence, from an eternal contemplation of
his face, and an immediate enjoyment of his favor: we shall receive from Gods
hand what he conveys unto us by other beings, and that in a greater abundance,
and with far more satisfaction: for our blessngs are not so natural when they
come from the fruitfulness of the Earth, and the influences of the Heavens, as
when they proceed from a divine Bounty without any mediation. How sweet
therefore will our Heavenly comforts appear unto us, when God out of the
tenderness of his Love shall freely bestow them? when in this Celestial Court
every one shall have an equal access to the supreme Authority, and depend only
upon God both for our subsistence, and for those ineffable things that will
contribute to our happiness; A blessed Society, a glorious Abode, Holy and
pleasant Employs, the benefits of an eternal Peace, with inestimable Riches,
shall be appurtenances of this Crown of life, but the satisfaction that will
flow from thence, shall be swallowed up in that Ocean of Joy which Gods
immediate presence and glory will create in our souls, that will become so many
Heavens, where the invisible Being will manifest himself in an extraordinary
manner. Therefore St. John promises, Rev. 21.3.
God will dwell with us, and we shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with us, and be our God. And elsewhere, He that overcomes shall inherit all
things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. Besides I find this
other advantage in an immediate supply of our wants from God, That we shall
thereby be freed from that slavery that increases at present our discontents:
It is no small disgrace to the Nobility of our Nature, that we should so
impatiently pursue after, and so covetously embrace the vanities of the world,
and things meaner than our selves; it gives also no little occasion of
disturbance to be obliged to labor after the possession of that which can
furnish us no real content, and that rewards our expectation and desires with
disappointment. But then as we shall immediately receive from Gods overflowing
abundance, innumerable satisfactions, we shall no longer discredit our selves
by mean complacencies, and by the discovery of our natural weakness and
necessities; we shall no longer weary our selves in the pursuance of things
unable to satisfy us with content: Upon God we shall depend, in his favor we
shall be satisfied, and by his happiness we shall be happy; not as we are at
present, for the happiness of the world is increased as much by our wants, as
by our enjoyments; but then as the constitution of our beings, and our estates
shall be altered, we shall no longer know pleasure and felicity by their
contraries: in God we shall meet with the true and genuine taste of all
Excellencies without the least mixture of evil. Unto this glorious dependency
upon God, which St. Paul styles, Romans 8.21.
A freedom from the bondage of corruption, and the liberty of the Saints. God
labors at present to bring and train us up, by weaning our affections from the
world, and by inspiring nobler desires, that are not to be concerned for the
possessions of this life. 1. Cor. 7.30.
It is the drift of St. Paul's Exhortation, who wills us To be indifferent in
the use of the creatures, and not to abuse our selves, or them by any fond
Embraces, or impatient wishes for that which is to subsist but for a moment. It
is the concern of us all that aspire to this independency, not to fix our
hearts, nor our happiness upon the world, but to be always ready to part with
that which is but an impediment to our perfection and felicity; for that reason
God exercises us with wants and afflictions, and prepares us for a Crown, as
Philip of Macedo did Alexander his son, by actions and employments suitable to
the Majesty that we are one day to represent, and to the Excellency of that
estate unto which we shall be promoted.

3. This glorious dependency upon God, that shall free us from all dependency
upon the creature, shall proceed from an inward and perfect communion and
unspeakable union with this supreme Being; we shall be united unto him by our
affections; Gods love shall be no more clouded with judgments and trials; it
shall shine upon us without interruption; our love in requital shall return him
continual expressions of thankfulness; our desires shall rest in his
sufficiency: all the motions of our soul shall tend to his Glory: We shall also
be united unto God as the members are united unto the Head, by an inward and
continual infusion of his divine Spirit in our souls, and by an humble
submission to the motions of divine Wisdom that shall govern us; or as the
subjects are one with their Prince, so God shall be one with us; 1 Cor. 15.2.
he shall reassume the supreme Authority which he exercises at present by a
Mediator, and shall appear as our sovereign Lord, whose glory will be our
interest; we shall also be united unto God by such a manner as is not to be
expressed. Joh. 17.24. Admirald de vita aeterna.
Such will be this union as shall promote us to an inward sight of God, to a
perfect resemblance with him, and to an eternal familiarity with God the
Father; such will be this union, that we shall enjoy with the Incomprehensible
Being the same felicity, Rev. 21.9.
and be swallowed up in the immensity of his glory, Rev. 21.11. This union is
signified unto us by a marriage, because Christ considered there not only as a
Mediator, but as God, shall enter into a stricter alliance with men, and shall
become one with them in an unspeakable manner. Therefore St. Paul styles it a
great mystery. Ephesians. 5.32.
At present we are united unto God by the Holy Ghost, that is called the Spirit
of Christ, by the reception of his benefits in the Sacraments, and by Prayer
that causes a continual intercourse and correspondency to be entertained
between God and our souls: But then these imperfect unions shall cease, and
give place to a more perfect and glorious, Ephesians. 3.19.
to a limited participation of all the divine Attributes that are communicable,
to such a union, as shall raise us above all natural capacities, our divine
Estate unto which God designs us! By the present we may judge of the future:
(...). Vide colos. 1. 19. de Christo.
What means our gracious God to bestow that cost, to employ those glorious
Agents in our present satisfaction, if he intended not to bring us to a
condition suitable to these hopeful beginnings? What means the Father to
sacrifice his only begotten Son, to expose him to all the affronts that nature
is able to receive? What means he to send the Holy Spirit to enrich us with his
most precious and divine Graces? Is it only to restore our natures to their
Primitive Integrity, that needed not the concurrency of such a Savior, nor the
expressions of so great a Love? or is it only to fit us for an entrance into
the Angelical Hierarchies? I hey would not have been so inquisitive into that
estate which they would have then understood; and the Sacred Trinity had never
been employed in such a manner in man's Redemption, nor had never honored him
with those unspeakable testimonies of divine love, if God had not intended him
for an estate near unto himself. The holy Angels had never been ministering
Spirits unto us, unless we had been the adopted sons of God, and unless there
had been something in us that is to be worthy of their services and labors
which God designs for his eternal enjoyment: Wherefore is it also that our
nature is advanced to an Hypostatical union with the divine Word? is it only
to enable Christ for the office of a Mediator? or is it not also to declare
unto what honor God would promote the rest of mankind, were they as he is,
free from error and vice? Wherefore do we labor to bring our lives and
affections to a conformity with Christ, but that we that are his brethren might
enjoy in some measure that advantage which he possesses before us, and be
united unto God, if not in the same unseparable manner, yet in such as may have
some relation with that; witness Christ's Words in his Prayer to God at the eve
of his Passion, John 7.21, 22, 23.
I pray for them that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in
thee, that they also may be one in us. And the glory which thou gave me I
have given them, that they may be one even as we are one, I in them, and thou
in me, that they may be made perfect in one. Unity is the perfection, as well
as foundation of number; all things have a natural tendency to it in the world:
Therefore the Church of Christ of several Nations, being called to a
participation of the rules of his goodness; 1 Cor. 15.28.
they must first as the Rivers that run into the Ocean unite with God the ocean
of all good, before they can come to the enjoyment of those endless joys and
pleasures that are only there to be found. Other Reasons and passages of
Scripture may be alleged for this Truth, which makes St. Paul fly out into an
Admiration, and St. John breathe forth nothing but wishes; all the holy Martyrs
embrace and hug the Flames that did convey them into this estate. Was it not
sufficient, O blessed God, that thou should deliver man from his deserved
punishment? was it not sufficient that thou should render him capable of thy
favors? But must such a favor be granted? must thou admit him to a
participation of the divine Nature by this unspeakable Union? St. Peter.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and goodness of our God! You know
not mortal men what God has reserved for them that fear him! What may we not
expect from his love when we shall come to this estate? If there be any good at
Gods disposal, any sweetness, any pleasure and benefit in heaven or in earth,
it shall be theirs, and in their possession, Romans 8.32.
unto whom he has at present given his Son and Spirit, and will also give
himself, as St. Paul tells us.

Besides, this Union shall cause an interrupted Communion between God and our
souls. God shall pour his blessings upon us in abundance, and we shall render
unto him unfeigned testimonies of thankfulness; We shall spend Eternity in his
praises, and he shall spend his Treasuries upon us; we shall think of nothing
but how to glorify him, and he shall strive to satisfy us: we shall contend
in mutual offices of Love and Friendship. O happy contention! O blessed
communion! unto which our present Piety and Religion intends to bring us. We
have now a communion with God in holy duties, and by his divine Spirit, for no
other end but that we might thereby be prepared for his eternal communion in
Heaven.

In this Union and Communion with God, consists the chief happiness of the
creature; for besides that they shall remove from us whatsoever looks like an
evil, they shall procure unto us advantages suitable unto that supernatural
honor and estate, Isa. 64.4.
Which eye has not seen, etc. Our present knowledge shall be changed into
sight; our hope into fruition; our love to God into endless transports; our
desires shall be satisfied, our Prayers granted and turned into eternal
Allelujahs; our understandings shall be no more darkened with ignorance; our
wills no more corrupted with vice; a blessed perfection shall reign within us:
And this shall proceed from an immediate infusion of divine Knowledge, and a
communication of spiritual qualities; that shall fit us for the vision of God,
for we shall see his Face, and his Name shall be in our foreheads. Revel. 22.
We know, says St. John, when God shall appear, we shall be like him: For we
shall see him as he is; not only with our corporal eyes we may see that
inacessible light which always accompanies the visible declaration of his Glory
and Power; but also with the eyes of our souls we shall behold as much of the
essence of God as the creature can perceive he will expose himself to our view:
And therefore we shall be transformed into his resemblance; we shall be as so
many Images of the Godhead, so many living Pictures of his Infinite Being,
representing his glorious perfections as a clear fountain does the body of the
Sun, or rather as Moses face did the brightness of the beams with which the
Divine Majesty was clothed upon the Mount Sina; God will imprint in us the
noble Characters and lineaments of his Essence: therefore well might David
promise to himself, As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall
be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. So that this blessed life shall
not so much consist in the union of the soul and body, as in the union of both
soul and body with God our Creator.

In the next place, in this life there shall be an excellent order and
subordination in our souls; all the passions and affections shall be ruled by
the command of our Reason: These inward motions shall not cease, but they shall
be bound to their good behavior; they shall no more offer to raise a rebellion
within us to disturb our tranquillity; they shall not be capable of evil
impressions, Isa. 32.18.
nor bear the marks of corrupted nature: There shall be a beautiful symmetry
between the parts of our soul and body, insomuch that perfection and integrity
shall appear within and without. How happy shall that life be when we shall
perfectly enjoy our selves! when all our affections shall endeavor to
accomplish our felicity! These are our present enemies; they procure all the
inconveniences that happen unto us, whether in our bodies or estates, by
persuading us to embrace that seeming good, which proves our deadly poison. But
then they shall be no more corrupted by the sight of apparent advantages, nor
tempted to betray our interest for a vain enjoyment: they shall always carry us
to the performance of Duty, and to that real good which shall fully satisfy us
with content. Unless they be thus reformed, it is not possible for man to taste
happiness in the most blessed Estate: For what are Honors, Riches, and the
greatest Blessings, to one tormented with the desire of an increase, or to a
peevish discontented soul that apprehends a change, or sees a happiness afar
off which it prefers to the present, or to one whose passions gaul him: The
least pain is sufficient to qualify the greatest pleasures: therefore in this
happy life unruly passions shall cease with outward inconveniences: they shall
suffer us to relish the sweetness of our possessions; they shall rather awaken
our senses, and give them a fuller and a quicker apprehension of the excellency
of the heavenly delights: and although our happiness shall not be confined to
those pleasures that are furnished by our senses, for they are not sufficient
inlets to receive as much as the soul requires to accomplish her felicity;
besides, it is not proper that the Bliss of so excellent a part should depend
upon its correspondency with the baser, or that it should borrow its
satisfaction from its union with the body; Caro spiritualis effectae per omnes
sensus suos multimodis exuberabit delitiis. Laur.
yet it is most certain, that they shall not want a share of those pleasures in
which the soul shall so freely swim; they shall not be brutish, or such as
Mahomet promises to his Mufulmans, but they shall be suitable unto the
spiritual body of the Righteous, and far excelling the base and rotten
pleasures of this miserable life, in quality, for they shall be without the
least mixture of bitterness in the quantity; for they shall be proportioned to
our capacities, and in the durance; for they shall be continual without
interruption, and eternal, as David informs us, Psalm. 16.11.
speaking unto God. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand
are pleasures for evermore.

5. This life shall be a life of Holiness and Righteousness; a life of Piety
and Justice, and of sobriety, a life of integrity; for then we shall be arrived
to the supreme degree of perfection, as well as of happiness; we shall come to
that perfect stature of regeneration which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: The
works of the Devil shall then be utterly destroyed, and that great disorder
which his Apostasy has caused shall then be reformed. In Heaven no impure
thing shall enter, Rev. 21. Heb. 12.14.
For without holiness none shall see God. The glorified shall never be able to
offend their God, for the inward motions of the soul being rightly disposed,
according to his Will, and our affections perfectly reformed, the outward
actions of the body must needs be conformable. When there should be another
Serpent to tempt us, and another Eve to assist him, they could never prevail
upon us, because we shall be no more in a possibility of sinning, for our
understandings shall be no more capable of mistakes, nor our wills corrupted
with importune desires, nor our actions forced from us against our election;
And besides this blessed disposition from whence shall proceed a constant
practice of the Commandments of God, he will also by his continual influence to
strengthen our resolutions, and determine our wills, that they shall abhor
whatever might displease him; the sight of his holiness shall convey the same
disposition into our minds, as St. John tells us: and his infinite power shall
be engaged (...) ^^eserve them whom his love has espoused, and for whom he
has been at so vast an expense to raise them to that estate; Therefore God we
shall for ever adore with all the powers of the soul and body; his service we
shall attend with delight, our brethren we shall love without dissimulation.
How pleasant will this life be when there shall be a continual Emulation
between God and his creatures, and between themselves, who shall exceed in love
and affection? when all the glorified in Heaven shall interchange daily
expressions of kindness; when there shall be a perfect agreement, a living
correspondency, a sweet fellowship, a delightful conversation, without envy or
malice, without care or tediousness. This is sufficient to render us most
happy, when all other things should be wanting, for happiness consists rather
in a perfect disposition of the mind, than in a plentiful enjoyment of outward
advantages. But besides, our bodies shall be adorned with heavenly qualities;
the present shall see a most happy change with the visible substance,
Conveniens est us sicut damnati habent extremas tenebras ita beati habeant
extremam lucem. Basil. lib. Hexa. Caro sine moln and pondera sine deformitate
ita ut sit animae ornamentum non tormentum Aug. Sermon. 139. de tempor. c. 3.
and other qualities shall be added with which we are not at present
acquainted: It is therefore needless to question whether we shall know one
another, seeing we shall scarce know our selves, the change will be so great:
It is certain that we shall move without trouble, we shall ascend without help;
our strength shall be increased; our deformities removed; our infirmities
deposed; our appearance shall be full of majesty and glory: as Daniel informs
us; They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever, In which words
you may further observe a difference in the glories of Heaven suitable to their
inclinations and employments on earth; for the one shall shine as the
Firmament, the other as the Stars: a sensible distinction shall be both in the
nature, and the greatness of their Rewards; for according to the several
dispositions of men, and their several capacities; God will accordingly bestow
upon them his riches, and his glory: Therefore a Father advises us to enlarge
our perfections, and the faculties of the soul by a continual exercise in
humane sciences, that they may be then more capable to receive and contain the
mysteries of Gods Wisdom, and better able to bring forth glorious actions for
this eternal Sabbath is an estate where all our abilities shall be in the
highest perfection; where we shall act and move without the least
inconveniency: Occasions we may have to exercise our Virtues, not such as will
cause us to suffer, but such as without that strength of nature we should find
a default in our happiness. It is therefore our wisdom now to accustom our
selves to that which shall be our employment for ever, and upon which shall
depend our satisfaction and glory; which shall be revealed in us, as St. Romans
18.18.
Paul informs us; In our souls by a perfect enjoyment of supernatural
excellencies; in our bodies, that shall be free from all weakness, and
beautified with glorious qualities. Therefore this estate is called a Crown of
Life; for as the Crown is of a round and a perfect figure, it is most proper to
express the infiniteness and perfection of those heavenly delights that shall
accompany that life: besides, the Crown is the sacred emblem of joy and honor;
this expression therefore presents us with the notion of the most pleasant, and
the most honorable estate together; for there is nothing more acceptable than
life, nor more glorious than a Crown: and that we may better understand
wherefore Christ promises Heaven under this notion, we must take notice that
chiefly four sorts of persons were dignified with a Crown amongst the Ancients:
Kings to express their Authority and supreme Command: A new married couple at
the nuptial Feasts therefore by the Greeks they were called (...) and (...).
The Priest in the solemn Sacrifices, to render the offering more acceptable,
and the devotion more glorious, or rather to show what qualification was
anciently required in one that presented to the Divinity the Homages of the
people; Another sort were crowned, they who had given open testimony of their
valor and cunning, either in private Disputes, and Plays allowed by authority,
or in a public War, in the maintenance of the general interest: To these
several sorts of Crowns were given, which were in value and esteem according to
the nature of the virtuous action. Now the faithful in Heaven shall be Kings,
enjoying a supreme command over the infernal Spirits and damned Souls. They
shall be Priests, Rev. 2.26.
sending up unto God the perfume of their praises, They shall be married unto
Christ in love and affection. In these several respects this Crown may become
them. But our Savior in this promise has more especially an eye to the Crowns
that were the rewards of a generous Perseverance; that had obtained the
Victory; for he mentions the difficulties that were to be overcome; A death to
be endured; and adds this encouragement, I will give thee O faithful soul, a
Crown of Life.

It was the ancient custom to crown the Temples of the dead Bodies when their
lives had been exemplary: Plin.
by this ceremony the Heathens did express a Reward that was due to a virtuous
life, and the Honor which a righteous Soul has purchased to himself: What
they performed to the Body, Christ promises to do unto both Soul and Body: I
will give thee, etc.

You have seen the Picture of this Crown with many Jewels of the greater bulk;
an infinite number of the lesser sort of Pearls and Flowers we shall never know
but by experience: And so I proceed to a brief consideration of the Assurance
that my Text gives of this Estate unto the faithful: I will give thee, etc.

It is no wonder to see Julian the Apostate a professed enemy of Christ, a
promoter of Gentilism, upbraid Christians with the easiness of their belief,
and scoff at this persuasion, That there is a Crown of Glory to reward the
Righteous. It is no marvel if amongst the Heathens, men nursed up with
prejudices against the Truth, ignorant of the power and goodness of our God,
should call in question the Articles of the Resurrection of the dead, and of
the happiness of another life; but that in the bosom of Christianity, under the
most visible expressions of Gods Omnipotency, Justice and Mercy; there should
be some of that dull apprehension as not to understand, and of those strange
principles, as to oppose these sacred and beneficial Truths, it may seem at
first very strange. But see what manner of men are capable of this folly
amongst us, and you will cease from admiring; they are the Disciples of
Diagoras and Epicurus rather than of Christ, men that are degenerated into
beasts by their condescension to brutish pleasures, whose souls are sunk into
their senses, and have lost both the use and knowledge of the noblest
functions; they are those that defy Heaven by their crimes, whose lives are a
scandal, and their persons a reproach to the society: And do you wonder
wherefore they are enemies to these truths, that are no friends to the
peaceable enjoyment of their lusts, that lay before their eyes the punishments
that are reserved for them? do you wonder if these graceless wits cannot
comprehend an estate so far above their capacities, and contrary to the
present: let their natural abilities be never so great; such know no other life
but that of the senses, no other felicity but the carnal, nor other delights
but of the body; 1 Cor. 2.14.
and how is it possible that such should have the least apprehension of that
supernatural condition that shall raise man and all his faculties to the
highest perfection of activity. It is a mystery but only to them whose minds
are enlightened by the Spirit of God; they also have no clear insight into this
estate: Therefore Christ in my Text pities the weakness of our capacities, and
adds to his promise of heavens glories sufficient reasons to convince us of the
reality of these Rewards: They are contained in these Particulars. 1. In the
Qualities of the person that promises, and his engagement; 2. In the nature of
the Recompense, or in that excellent relation between the estate of the
faithful on earth, and that in Heaven: other reasons shall be added, drawn from
the rules observed in the disposition of the Creatures. The person that
promises this Crown of Life, is described in the 8th verse of this Chapter;
The first and the last, which was dead, and is alive. By which words is
intimated his sufficiency for the performance: for thereby are signified his
Divinity and Humanity, his death, by which he purchased this celestial Diadem
for us; his Almighty Power, and his Truth, that are engaged to see us in the
possession of it.

1. Christ's Death has given us an unquestionable Right to this Crown, and to
all its dependencies: Before in the estate of Innocence we had a natural claim
to Heaven, In coelumque redire animas coelumque venire. Manil. lib. 4.
by reason of our soul that is an immaterial substance conformable to the
celestial Beings: so that by this law of Nature established in the Creation,
which assigns unto every thing a final residence where first it had its
derivation: if man had continued in his integrity, he had always continued in
that glorious Right, and might have called for an entrance into that Seat of
Glory and happiness: But this natural Privilege has been forfeited by
Rebellion. The soul by sin has lost together the Title to demand, and the
Power to deserve an admission; and has seen it self banished out of Heaven by
the procurement of its two great adversaries Guilt and Corruption. But Christ
by his death has overcome them, and all impediments; by his Blood he has
satisfied an offended Justice, Heb. 9.12, 14
and obtained for us an eternal redemption. Therefore he is said to be a
propitiation for us, and our peace, Romans 3.25. Ephesians. 2.
by whom we have an access to the Father. And in 10 Heb. 19, 20. St. Paul
teaches, We have boldness to enter in to the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by
a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us through the vail, that
is to say, his flesh. But the Infinite merits of our Redeemer have not only
re-established us in our former Right, but purchased for us a degree of
Perfection and Honor, Aug. lib. 12. de Civit.
far above that unto which we might have ascended by the strength of Nature in
the estate of Innocence, according to the judgment of the Fathers, and of St.
Paul, who in Romans 5. therefore mentions many advantages which we have received
by Christ, for one lost by Adam, and tells us, that the blood of the former is
far more effectual and beneficial unto us than the transgression of the latter
has been hurtful: So that by this means, Gods eternal Justice is engaged to
bring us to this estate which has been lawfully purchased for us: Heb. 9.24.
In order thereunto Christ has transported our nature, and introduced it into
the highest heavens, that it might take possession in our names of Immortality
and Bliss. Ephesians. 2.6.


2. But the goodness of our Title to Heaven, into which Christ is entered, had
not been sufficient to secure us the fruition, unless he had been enabled with
a power suitable to so great an undertaking: therefore we are informed, That all
power is given to him in heaven and in earth. That God has put all things
under his feet; That he sits at the right hand of God with the Scepter of an
Almighty power in his hand. This is signified in the former description, by
being alive from the dead, Romans 1.4.
an infallible testimony of the Divinity of our Savior. As many difficulties,
I confess, will strive to hinder our entrance into Heaven, as there were
nations that did oppose the Israelites passage into the promised Land; our
selves and Affections are not the least. But what cannot he overcome, by whom
all things were created in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible, Dan.
4.35.
etc. who does according to his will in the Army of Heaven, and amongst the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand, or say unto him what do
thou. What difficulties will be able to frustrate his design, unto whom the
Elements, the dumb Creatures, the Devils, and all things do yield obedience,
who has conquered Death in its own Territories; who has an Infinite Wisdom,
as well as Power, to bring to pass his intentions: So that what Christ
promises, he is fully able to perform.

3. Christ is Truth it self; he is not subject to change, nor able to deceive
us: He is not as Xerxes was, he crowned his Steers man in the morning, and
beheaded him in the evening. He is not thus unconstant in his Affections and
Promises. The heaven and the earth shall pass, Matthew. 5.
but one jot of his word shall not pass until all be fulfilled. Seeing
therefore that he has promised to bestow this Crown of life upon every
faithful soul, he will preserve them here by his spirit, he will convey and
guard them at their separation from the Body, by the ministry of his Angels,
and will at last receive them unto this glorious estate. Here are sufficient
securities for this Immortal Reward; Gods almighty Power, his eternal Justice,
his Infinite Goodness and Love, and his unchangeable Truth, are all engaged to
see the faithful crowned with Glory; so that it is as impossible that they
should fail of their expectation, as it is impossible that God should deny
himself. St. Paul's Persuasion, Jobs Confidence, and the Assurance of the holy
men, were grounded upon this infallible foundation. Were we possessed with the
same spirit, we should not need to seek for any other confirmation of this
Truth than the authority of Scripture, that often repeats the promise of this
Crown unto the faithful. But this sensual age will scarce do God that justice,
to give credit to his Word, as if he could have a design to deceive us, whose
glory is our happiness and perfection; as if he were an enemy to our good, who
gives us whatever we enjoy; as if there were danger to expect the Rewards of
Honesty and Virtue, and to yield obedience when both Duty and Interest do
require it: Consider the folly of our Modern Wits; extraordinary advantages
are promised unto men to oblige them to actions full of honor and
satisfaction, when there should be no such future advantages; it is their
present concern to entertain this persuasion, because it is a friend to Piety,
and it tends to strengthen their resolutions, to appease their discontents, and
to fill our souls with a glorious expectation: As that Athenian, that in his
greatest poverty, did feel the contentments of the wealthiest Citizens; Men
should labor to comfort themselves in their present miseries, with the
assurance of a more blessed estate, and suffer their hopes to frustrate the
design of worldly misfortunes. It seems therefore strange, that Rational Beings
should be so great enemies of their good, as to discredit this beneficial
persuasion, and willingly to deprive themselves of an Antidote able to fortify
their souls against the venom of evil. The excellency of that estate, the
vileness of ours, and our natural unworthiness, may justly fill us with wonder
and admiration. But we are not to question this Truth, when not only Scipture
but Reason also is able to convince us that it is certain, according to the
natural course of things, that he that is faithful unto Christ, must needs
attain unto the greatest happiness. I understand the word faithful in the
largest acception for a virtuous man; faithful in the management of the several
interests with which God has entrusted him; for one whose life and profession
is conformable to Christianity; who labors to reduce his Passions to reason;
his desires to content, his wants to sufficiency, and that endeavors to
strengthen himself with all the natural and revealed persuasions that are
intended to assist our Virtue against the inconveniences that assault us. Such
a one has a degree of happiness begun in him, and if he continues, exercise
will bring him to that perfect disposition of the mind, and to that noble
temper as may brave all the attempts of evil. The Stoics, by the strength of
nature, did attain unto a seeming insensibility, witness the resolution of
Possidonius, in the midst of the tortures of the Gout, he could never be forced
to confess it to be a pain: witness Anaximander, pounded in a mortar, he
laughed at the folly and cruelty of the Tyrant. How much more power shall man
have over himself, when his resolution is backed by such strong persuasions as
Christianity teaches, when such divine helps do assist him, as the graces of
the holy Ghost, an invincible hope, and a well-grounded faith, that makes him
rejoice in tribulation. It is therefore plain, that he that practices the Rules
of Christianity, must needs be happy, not only in regard of himself, that he
renders thereby capable of happiness, but also in regard of those with whom we
have a communication, that are invited by an amiable correspondency, and good
offices to the same returns and behavior; and in respect of God, who cannot
but vouchsafe his blessings and his favor to that Being that is inspired with
so noble an ambition, and that in obedience to his holy Laws labors to arrive
to perfection and holiness. But besides this reason which only proves a
natural happiness attainable by a virtuous Christian in this life, we may meet
with others in that great proportion or relation between the estates of the
faithful on earth and of the Saints in heaven. Cast your eyes upon both, and
tell me, what hinders a soul washed in the blood of Christ, adopted amongst the
sons of God, united unto him by his divine Spirit; what hinders a soul full of
heavenly affections, a soul that bears the Image of God, from an immediate
fruition of his presence and favor? If therefore that be granted that may be
proved by the experience of the faithful as well as by the authority of
Scripture; that they do really enjoy a present correspondency with their
Creator, and that they do not in vain flatter themselves with the conceits of
an extraordidinary possession, of the graces of the divine Spirit, because they
feel the inward operation of this spirit in their souls, Unius Sp. Sancti opus
est regeneratio. Ambros. de Sacr.
and see a notable change in their dispositions and affections wrought in them
by his power alone, that fashions us in the womb; if this be granted with the
other privileges of the Elect, we shall find no difficulty to believe the
happy consequences that do naturally flow from thence; that God that favors
them with such powerful helps, in order to their perfection, must needs design
them for a greater happiness than their present mortality and weakness are
capable of: That he would never be at such vast expense and care as to provide
us with such divine qualities only for this transitory Being, were our souls
to be smothered in our graves; that this blessed change that appears in our
souls and bodies, and that raises us to a capacity of being happy, and to a
resemblance with God, tends to prepare us for a more worthy communion with him;
and that otherwise he would never have honored us with such special tokens of
his Love, nor given us by them an expectation of greater advantages. This
proceeding were not consistent with the Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Veracity and
Immutability of God, to receive us into his intimate acquaintance, to bestow
upon us the unspeakable mercies that are suitable to it to make us expect
future happiness, and the eternal fruition of his presence in Glory, and then
to suffer us to be cut off by death without hopes of life; so that besides that
the condition of the Elect on Earth, and their present sanctification have a
necessary tendency to glorification, God would never have undertaken to render
us happy, did he not really resolve to make us so.

But set aside these considerations, and look upon a true Christian as he
appears to the eyes of the world: You shall find his description given by a
Heathen Philosopher to a Roman Emperor to this purpose; He despises the World
and all its enjoyments, he sticks close to his Profession, maugre all his
enemies; he rejoices in Wants and Persecutions, and sings merrily in the
flames; his soul is full of hopes, and they strengthen him against all present
evils. What is therefore able to disturb the happiness of such a soul that is
ravished with its own enjoyments, and that contemns now all things else? Justi
afflictionem requiem putant. Lact. lib. 8. mor.
what hinders the same power that has freed the faithful from the slavery of
sin and the world, and made us able to contemn the miseries of our present
condition, to free also the body from all subjection to the Elements? When
therefore I see a Christian so far advanced in the Race of Perfection as to
leave in a little time the rest of the world at such a vast distance behind, I
must needs conclude that he will make a considerable progress if he continues
his course: Or when I behold a Painter chalk out to the life a fair face, I do
easily judge that his pencil will be able to add many graces, and complete it.
Thus when I see the first Essays of a Christian to be so glorious in this
life, I am forced to conclude that the end of his work will be far more in the
other. If Paul and Silas, in their Chains, can sing for joy; St. Peter sleep
secure with pleasure at the Eve of the day intended for his Execution, and all
the holy men meet with happiness and content in the most sensible Penury, and
the sharpest Afflictions; How much more happy and content shall they be in that
Life, that shall not be subject to want, to disgrace and inconveniency; in that
Life where all things shall be as perfect and glorious as themselves; when
therefore Christ should never have promised this estate unto the faithful, he
that is sensible of their present condition, and of the honor and perfection
unto which they have been advanced, he may justly conceive that they will
arrive to an estate suitable to these promising beginnings. In the next place,
if we cast an eye upon the natural order which is observed in the disposition
of the Creatures, we shall find sufficient Reasons to be persuaded of this
Truth.

All the Beings in the world do generally attain unto those Ends unto which
their Creation did design them. And shall man only be excepted? Shall not he
arrive to his glorious end, to happiness? for which he was created, as may
appear by his endeavors and desires to obtain it, and by the constitution of
his Being? Shall not he attain unto this estate when the union of the soul and
body seems to promise it to him, in case he renders not himself incapable of
it? Shall not he come to the fruition of God in whom only his happiness
dwells? Is it possible that the power and wisdom that appears so wonderful in
his composition, and that declares a particular esteem of him by an overruling
Providence, should only design him for a world of misery, and then tumble him
in the dust, without any further care of this Masterpiece of the Creation? Or
is it possible, that God should suffer such a considerable species of Creatures
to be cast away for ever, and to miss of their blessed End, and none of them to
attain unto felicity, unto which it appears that he intended them at their
Creation, by granting unto them noble faculties, capable of Bliss?

We see that all visible things were made with an intent to turn to the benefit
of some Beings more Perfect. And for whom was Man created? The more he excels
the rest in Perfections, the more honorable conceit we may justly have for him
for whose Glory he came into the world: And from the nature of man, and the
place of honor that he maintains amongst the Creatures, we may conclude, that
this Prince of the lower World was created only for the enjoyment of the
Prince of the superior, and that he unto whom all visible things do render
Homage, owes his Respects and Being only unto the Creator. Our nature therefore
designs us for the immediate fruition of God, and those inward suggestions that
persuade us to make our frequent addresses unto him, especially at the sight of
imminent dangers, do proceed from this design, and do tend as well to prepare
us for a more immediate correspondency, as to supply our present necessities:
And how is it possible to be advanced to that honor without a disposition, and
without inward and outward qualities suitable to that estate. From hence we may
confirm the promise of this Crown of Life, and show how every part is
consistent with the condition of a glorified Creature, and absolutely required
for the accomplishment of our happiness.

Examine also, I beseech you, wherefore Man only of all creatures enjoyes a
being between the spiritual and the sensitive? wherefore does he participate of
both? Not that he might fall down to a greater conformity with Beasts, for that
is against the order of Nature, that teaches all things to aspire to
perfection, but rather that he might endeavor to ascend to a higher degree;
for no other intent man was made with a possibility of elevation, with
capacious faculties, and with noble and aspiring affections, but that they
might raise him above that rank in which he was first placed and nearer his
Creator. Beatitudo in excelso est sed volenti penotrabilis. Sen. Epist. 65.
Therefore mankind was intended for a glorious and a happy End; whoever employs
all his endeavors to attain unto it, can never miss of his purpose; and if so
many do never come to that perfect Estate, they may thank their unworthy
behavior, and vicious disposition. But Christ that promises this Crown unto
the faithful, removes the grand impediments of Salvation, Guilt and Corruption,
and brings them to that estate. So that besides the helps of nature, they only
have an Almighty Power, and an Infinite goodness for their assistants.

We may therefore conclude from the former reasons, That there is such an
Estate as happiness: That man was designed for it: that it is possible for him
to arrive unto it: that whoever is faithful to Christ, and labors to follow
the rules prescribed by him, must needs according to the natural course of
things become happy, which cannot be in a perfect manner, but by an union and
communion with his God. That this happiness is not attainable in this life, I
need not spend my labors in vain to prove, therefore it must be in another.

Now this Crown is called a Gift: I will give thee, etc. It is freely bestowed
notwithstanding our undeservings; it is recovered for us by the blood of
Christ, and enriched with more precious Jewels, because of his Infinite merits;
and the means by which we are raised to this Estate, is procured unto us by our
Saviors sufferings and Ascension. So that what Nature had intended, and was
not able to perform, because of our Apostasy and revolt from a dependency upon
God, grace does fully accomplish in the faithful.

In the last place, I might bring to confirm this truth the common Reasons upon
which the Heathens did build the hopes of a future happiness, and of another
life: Of the Justice of God, that will render unto every one according to his
deeds: Of the Goodness of God, that cannot be forgetful of those that mind the
advance of his Glory on Earth; and of the Power of God, able to reward them
that lead a just and a religious life. From hence Zoroastes, that learned
Genius and great Prince taught his Disciples, That the chief care of man should
be so to behave himself now, that he might come to happiness hereafter: Many
other reasons may be brought to confirm this important truth, but I cannot
include them all in so narrow a compass as a Sermon. Some, I know, stumble at
the difficulties of the Resurrection of our bodies, when it is proved to them
by their experience that it is possible: Si ergo potent est Deus facere quod
non fuit nonne potest reparare quod fuit? Aug. lib. de catech. Sermon. 1. Secret
don't oncomprent que quoy que le corpse meure. Les forms font pourtant aux
cendres leur demeure.
Consider I beseech you, if a lesser power be not required, to restore what was
than to create, or to make what was not: Where was this world before its
Creation? and if that be doubed, where was this age 200 years ago? not so much
as in appearance, yet now it subsists. Why shall not therefore that same
intelligent Being, who created the World, and who only is able to have formed
us in the womb, with all our members so well proportioned, be able to restore
us to our subsistence again, seeing there is as great a disposition in the
essential parts of the body reduced to ashes, to return to their former shapes,
as there is in the original substance to dilate it self, and form the several
members of a man. I might here allege the natural experiments which some have
tried with success: That have given occasion to believe, that the forms of
things do remain in their ashes: The herb called by the Greeks It signifies not
only a Palm, but another herb mentioned by Dioscor. lib. 4. cap. 151. and by
Coel. Rodigin. Resurrectio non est contra naturam. Aug. in Sent. suis.
(...) does rise again out of the dust, when it has been consumed to ashes:
This causes the Fable of the Phaenix. I could also bring Nature and Providence
to attest this truth; both are full of sacred emblems of the Resurrection: they
are as incredible, did they not daily appear before our eyes. The faithful
therefore may brave this and all other difficulties in the language of St.
Paul, I am persuaded that neither death nor life, etc. shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day. I will give thee a crown, etc.

Cast your eyes Cristians once more upon this Crown of Life; View the
Blessedness; the Riches, the Glory and Honor of this Estate; and tell me
whether this deserves not our obedience, and a perseverance in Duty: It shall
be free from all weakness, pain, fear, and inconveniency; it shall be
accompanied with unspeakble joys and pleasures; with the fruition of all good;
with the Vision of God, and with an eternal communion and union with him; It
shall be adorned with all perfections, holiness and content. O rich and
glorious Crown! O Immortal Reward! How long shall we be at such a distance from
thee? Earthly Crowns are troublesome, and the more glorious they are, the more
heavy; insomuch that Dioclesian having exchanged one for a Spade, and the
Empire for a Garden; when some were sent to persuade him to return to his
former State, he told them they would never have undertaken that message unto
him, if they had but seen the Ranks of Trees, and the Muskmelons that he had
planted, with the pleasure that he did feel in that retired condition. But this
Crown is of another nature; the glories and honors are sweetened with
unspeakable delights, and there is no such wait as should make us weary of the
carriage: Let therefore this consideration encourage us to encounter Death
without fear, seeing it is a passage into this immortal Bliss, and to prepare
our selves for its enjoyment by a behavior worthy of a Crown. Be faithful unto
the interest of Christ, and his Religion; maintain his honor in the management
of your several employes; follow his sacred footsteps; shake off all vicious
inclinations and customs: make it your business to reform your lives and
affections; labor to relish the true pleasures of the soul, and wean your
selves from all worldly enjoyments, that they may not hinder your entrance into
this estate. Into which God of his mercy receive us, for the sake of his dear
Son, and our Savior, Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.

